section 105 . section 105 of title 5 of the united states code defines the term "executive agency" as an "executive department , a government corporation , and an independent establishment. the same chapter of the united states code defines each of those terms , in turn . in other words , an entity within the scope of sections 101 , 103 , or 104 is an executive agency for the purposes of section 105 . the definition appears to exclude agencies located in the judicial branch . first , section 101 defines "executive departments" as the cabinet level departments . courts have interpreted this particular provision to not include independent establishments like the atomic energy commission , the federal reserve banks , and the postal service , or entities within an executive department , like the internal revenue service , which is located inside the treasury department . section 103 defines a government corporation as "a corporation owned or controlled by the government of the united states. for example , the pension benefit guaranty corporation , a government - controlled corporation within the department of labor , and the federal prison industry , a government - owned corporation created to provide work for federal inmates , are both government corporations and are , therefore , considered an "executive agency" for the purposes of 5 u.s.c . section 105 . section 104 defines "independent establishment" as an "establishment in the executive branch ( other than the united states postal service or the postal rate commission ) which is not an executive department , military department , government corporation , or part thereof , or part of an independent establishment ; and ... [the] government accountability office. some courts have interpreted this provision to mean that if an entity is contained within an "executive department," then section 104 does not apply to it . one practical result of this distinction is that some statutes regulating the civil service will not be enforceable , at least in some jurisdictions , against the immediate "agency" employing a claimant . for example , under 5 u.s.c . section 7114 ( a ) ( 2 ) , which entitles federal employees to the presence of a union representative when being questioned on disciplinary matters , one court ruled that because the statute's definition of agency incorporated 5 u.s.c . section 105 , the relevant defendant was not the defense logistics agency , but the department of defense as a whole . similarly , under the federal labor - management relations act , one court ruled that the appropriate defendant is the department of justice , rather than the department's office of inspector general . congress enacted the paperwork reduction act to reduce the paperwork burden for individuals and businesses resulting from the collection of information by or for the federal government . whenever an agency requests information from 10 or more nonfederal persons , an agency must get approval from oira before putting out the request for information . the paperwork reduction act defines the terms "agency" and "independent regulatory agency. other statutes and executive orders define "agency" or "independent regulatory agency" by referencing the definitions provided in the paperwork reduction act . postal service .