among other provisions , the bill would have done the following . 2767 ) , which was ordered to be reported in the house . 1145 and s. 1376 only address fha , the path act includes fha provisions as part of a broader bill to reform the housing finance system . the path act is also the most far - reaching of these bills , and includes a number of provisions that are aimed at more narrowly targeting fha insurance to certain populations and bringing more purely private capital into the mortgage market . this section briefly describes some of the major provisions included in these fha reform bills introduced in the 113 th congress . finally , the bill would have required the government accountability office ( gao ) to submit a report on fha's safety and soundness . the bill would also have raised the maximum annual premium that fha is allowed to charge to 2.05% ( 2% for mortgages with loan - to - value ratios at or below 95% ) from 1.55% ( 1.50% for mortgages with loan - to - value ratios at or below 95% ) . under current law , fha is required to maintain a capital ratio of 2% . ( the capital ratio is defined as the economic value of the mmi fund — that is , the fund's current capital resources plus the expected net present value of the future cash flows on the mortgages that it currently insures — divided by the total dollar amount of mortgages that fha is currently insuring. ) the capital ratio has been below this 2% threshold for several years . fha is also required to contract with an independent actuary each year to perform an actuarial review of the mmi fund . 1145 would have required fha to provide more frequent actuarial reviews of the mmi fund when its capital ratio falls below 2% . it would also have required fha to submit an emergency capital plan describing actions it would take to restore the capital ratio when the ratio fell below the required threshold . the bill would have expanded fha's ability to seek indemnification for certain mortgages while requiring fha to establish an appeals process for lenders to appeal indemnification decisions . it would also have increased fha's ability to terminate a lender's approval to originate fha - insured loans under certain circumstances . additional provisions included , among others , a requirement that hud submit a report examining opportunities for streamlining fha programs . the path act was a broader bill to reform the housing finance system that was ordered to be reported out of the house financial services committee . title ii of the bill included extensive provisions related to fha . some of these included versions of provisions that had also been included in other bills in some form , including a number of changes to lender oversight , premiums , and capital requirements . other provisions would have made additional , more far - reaching changes to fha , including making it an independent agency , taking steps to more narrowly target fha insurance , and reducing the amount of fha's insurance coverage and increasing the role of private capital .