appendix a . definition of lawfully present under the aca "lawfully present" was first defined for the purposes of eligibility for the high risk pools for uninsured people with pre - existing conditions . since then , all regulations regarding the aca have referenced that definition . for the provisions of the aca , "lawfully present" means 1 . a qualified alien as defined in section 431 of the personal responsibility and work opportunity act ( prwora ) ; 2 . an alien in nonimmigrant status who has not violated the terms of the status under which he or she was admitted or to which he or she has changed after admission ; 3 . an alien who has been paroled into the united states under ina section 212 ( d ) ( 5 ) for less than one year , except for an alien paroled for prosecution , for deferred inspection or pending removal proceedings ; 4 . an alien who belongs to one of the following classes: aliens currently in temporary resident status pursuant to ina ยง210 or 245a ; aliens currently under temporary protected status ( tps ) , and pending applicants for tps who have been granted employment authorization ; aliens who have been granted employment authorization under 8 cfr 274a.12 ( c ) ( 9 ) , ( 10 ) , ( 16 ) , ( 18 ) , ( 20 ) , ( 22 ) , or ( 24 ) ; family unity beneficiaries pursuant to section 301 of p.l . 101-649 as amended ; aliens currently under deferred enforced departure ( ded ) ; aliens currently in deferred action status except an individual with deferred action under the dhs's deferred action for childhood arrivals process , as described in the secretary of homeland security's june 15 , 2012 , memorandum , shall not be considered to be lawfully present ; aliens whose visa petitions have been approved and who have a pending application for adjustment of status ; 5 . a pending applicant for asylum under ina section 208 ( a ) or for withholding of removal under ina section 241 ( b ) ( 3 ) or under the convention against torture who has been granted employment authorization , and such an applicant under the age of 14 who has had an application pending for at least 180 days ; 6 . an alien who has been granted withholding of removal under the convention against torture ; or 7 . a child who has a pending application for special immigrant juvenile status . appendix b . the estimated size of the noncitizen population in the united states using the 2015 american community survey 1-year estimates , in july 2015 , there were approximately 43.3 million foreign - born persons residing in the united states , approximately 13.5% of the total u.s. population . the foreign - born population was comprised of approximately 20.7 million naturalized u.s. citizens and 22.6 million noncitizens . crs does not estimate the unauthorized ( illegal ) alien population ; however , the pew research center's hispanic trends project produces estimates of the number of unauthorized aliens in the united states .