1 distillate and no . 2 dyed distillate at the point of sale , to be paid to the alliance on a quarterly basis . table b - 1 summarizes nora's assessed fees and other generated income during the years it operated ( 2001 through 2011 ) . nora's total revenue ( including assessments , interest , other income sources , and contract revenue ) reached nearly $125 million by the end of 2011 . fee assessments represented 97% of total revenue collected . see figure b - 1 . spending issues title vii section 707 ( d ) ( investment of funds ) authorized nora to invest funds collected through assessments , and any other funds received by the alliance , only in — 1 . obligations of the united states or any agency of the united states ; 2 . general obligations of any state or any political subdivision of a state ; 3 . interest - bearing account or certificate of deposit of a bank that is a member of the federal reserve system ; or 4 . obligations fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by the united states . by the end of 2011 , nora had spent $124.5 million ( table b - 2 ) , with just $0.5 million remaining from the $125 million collected in assessments ( table b - 1 ) . nora spent nearly 75% ( $92 million ) of its assessments in the form of state grants ( figure b - 2 ) . appendix b . national oilheat research alliance congress authorized the national oilheat research alliance ( nora ) in the 2000 energy act to develop projects for the research , development , and demonstration of clean and efficient oilheat utilization equipment ; and to operate programs that enhanced consumer and employee training . nora was a not - for - profit industry trade association of heating oil suppliers conceived of , and chartered under , title vii of the act . as such , it was exempt from taxation under section 501 ( c ) of the internal revenue code of 1986 . nora fell into a category of federally authorized programs known as check - off programs . to fund check - off programs , a fraction of the wholesale cost of a product is set aside by the producer and deposited into a common fund to be used to benefit producers and consumers . title vii included the provision in section 713 ( sunset ) that limited nora's authorization to four years after establishment ( february 2001 ) . section 302 ( national oilheat research alliance ) of the 2005 energy policy act ( p.l . 109-58 ) amended title vii to extend the sunset provision to nine years after nora's establishment date , effectively extending it to february 2010 . nora actually ceased operation at the end of 2011 , more than a year beyond its sunset date , while it disbursed remaining funds . although title vii , section 704 referenda , paragraph ( c ) — termination or suspension authorized nora to hold a referendum to determine whether the oilheat industry favored termination or suspension of the alliance , there is no indication of industry interest in doing so .