the definition of a covered fish under h.r . 394 would include any finfish modified or produced through the application of recombinant dna technologies . 394 would include exceptions to these prohibitions for scientific research or for fish collected for the purpose of supporting the act . applications for uses that would be prohibited under h.r . 394 would require an ea with a finding of no significant impact in accordance with nepa or an eis . the eis would require an environmental risk analysis that assesses impacts of covered fish on wild and cultured fish stocks , best - or worst - case probabilities of confinement failure , costs to eradicate escaped covered fish , and economic damage of escaped covered fish . 394 also would require completion of the report on environmental risks associated with ge seafood products , which was required under section 1007 of the food and drug administration amendments act of 2007 ( 21 u.s.c . in addition to labeling requirements , s. 738 would require an eis for any application related to the use of ge salmon intended for human consumption . the eis would include requirements similar to those stipulated for the eis under h.r . during the 113 th congress , concerns related to the approval process and implications of ge salmon approval were expressed by a number of members of congress . on april 24 , 2013 , 20 members of the house and 12 members of the senate sent similar letters that requested fda commissioner margaret hamburg halt the approval process . in particular , the letters stated that the fda process had not been adequate to ensure ge salmon is safe for the environment and consumers . they also expressed concern with the precedent that this ruling could set for future applications for other genetically engineered fish , such as tilapia and trout . in addition , members urged fda to develop labeling requirements to distinguish the product as genetically engineered . in the 113 th congress , several bills related to the production and labeling of ge salmon were introduced . 1667 included provisions that were similar to those in h.r . 394 ( 114 th congress ) . 584 and s. 248 would have required labeling of products which contain genetically engineered fish . 1699 and s. 809 would have required labeling of genetically engineered foods , including fish . on may 22 , 2013 , s.amdt . 965 to s. 954 was proposed and would have permitted states to require a label indicating that the food contains a genetically engineered ingredient . on may 23 , 2013 , the amendment was defeated by a vote of 27-71 . some have asserted that the fda's approach to ge salmon evaluation has failed to consider the full scope of potential impacts or to fully assess the risk of unintended consequences . they claim that neither the vmac nor the ea have fully considered the broader potential risks of aquadvantage salmon approval . they argue that fda is not suited to undertake biological and ecological studies of this nature , and they question whether the regulatory system has kept pace with advances in ge technology .