the third category is block grants . according to the now - defunct advisory commission on intergovernmental relations , a block grant is characterized by five basic traits: it authorizes federal aid for a wide range of activities within a broad functional area ; it gives recipient jurisdictions fairly substantial administrative discretion ; its administrative , fiscal reporting , planning , and program requirements are geared to keeping federal administrative intrusiveness to a minimum , while recognizing the need to ensure adequate oversight and that national goals are accomplished ; its formula - based distribution provision narrows grantor administrative discretion and provides some sense of fiscal certainty for grantees ; and its eligibility provision is fairly specific , relatively restrictive , and tends to favor units of general local government . the cdbg program meets all of the above characteristics of a block grant . there are three categories of recipients eligible for direct allocations of cdbg program funds: entitlement communities ( including insular areas ) , states , and section 107 special project grants . the primary goal of the cdbg program is "the development of viable urban communities , by providing decent housing and a suitable living environment and expanding economic opportunities , principally for persons of low and moderate income. as a condition for receiving funds , the program's authorizing statute requires states and local governments to certify that proposed cdbg activities meet one of the program's three national objectives . eligible activities must: principally benefit low - and moderate - income persons defined as families and individuals whose household incomes do not exceed 80% of a jurisdiction's median income ; aid in the prevention or elimination of slums or blight ; or meet an urgent need by addressing conditions that pose a serious and immediate threat to the health and safety of residents . the statute governing the program also requires states and entitlement communities to allocate at least 70% of their cdbg allocation , during a one - , two - , or three - year period specified by the grantee , to eligible activities principally benefitting low - and moderate - income persons . the statute and regulations governing the cdbg program detail the specific requirements and responsibilities of entitlement communities ; states ; nonentitlement communities ; and hud , the federal administering agency . starting in 1995 , hud revamped the cdbg application and planning requirements as part of a larger reinventing government effort carried out by the clinton administration . most significantly , as part of its reinvention efforts , the department published new rules governing planning and reporting requirements for cdbg , home , emergency solution grants , and housing opportunities for persons with aids . congress has also authorized related programs intended to supplement , but not supplant , the cdbg program . the rules consolidated planning and performance reporting requirements for these four programs and required eligible jurisdictions to designate a single starting date for the four grant programs .