, no resource standard ) . according to cms , in aca medicaid expansion states individuals under age 65 with disabilities who have ltss needs are likely to continue to qualify for medicaid under optional eligibility groups related to disability . , these "non - magi individuals" are still subject to the financial eligibility rules associated with those eligibility groups ( i.e. , both income and resource standards ) . nevertheless , some adults with disabilities who need ltss may still qualify and receive medicaid - covered ltss under the aca medicaid expansion . these individuals would be subject to magi financial eligibility rules ( i.e. cms states that the statute provides authority to "expand the reach" of the post - eligibility regulations to include magi individuals who receive ltss coverage as there are "equity reasons to consider the application of these rules to magi individuals. accordingly , the agency is considering rulemaking on this issue . other provisions in medicaid seek to recover medicaid costs through estate recovery programs . federal medicaid law requires states to recover from beneficiary estates any amounts paid for certain ltss and other related services upon a beneficiary's death . specifically , states are required to pursue the estates of individuals receiving services in a nursing facility or intermediate care facility for the developmentally disabled ( icf / dd ) , regardless of age upon the sale of property subject to a lien , and individuals aged 55 and older who received medicaid assistance in nursing facilities , hcbs , and related hospital and prescription drug services . the beneficiary then applies the rest of his or her income toward the cost of care . federal regulations require states to set a maximum amount for the mmna based on a reasonable assessment of need . as a result , estate recovery is generally applied to a beneficiary's home , if available , and certain other assets within a beneficiary's estate . for purposes of these estate recovery requirements , medicaid statute defines an estate as all real and personal property subject to a state's probate law . under certain circumstances , annuities are included in this definition . states may expand the definition of estate to include other real or personal property and other assets to which the medicaid beneficiary has legal title or interest at the time of death . estate recovery may be made only after the death of the individual and his or her surviving spouse , if any , and only at a time when there is neither a surviving child under age 21 nor a child , of any age , who is blind or permanently and totally disabled . to aid in estate recovery , states are authorized to impose liens on the property of certain beneficiaries prior to or after the beneficiary's death . liens may be imposed only when the individual resides in a nursing facility , icf / dd , or other medical institution determined by the state ; after notice of and opportunity for a hearing is given ; and it is determined that the individual cannot reasonably be expected to return to the home .