successive u.s . administrations have viewed nigeria , a top recipient of u.s. foreign aid , as a critically strategic country on the african continent . it is africa's largest economy and its most populous country , with more than 180 million people , roughly divided between muslims and christians . its muslim population , concentrated in the north , is among the world's largest . many u.s. officials , while stressing the importance of the u.s - nigeria relationship and the gravity of security threats within and emanating from the country , remain concerned about reported abuses by nigerian security services , and about the government's limited efforts to address perceived impunity for such abuses . for their part , nigerian officials have been described in the past as wary of perceived u.s. interference in internal affairs and dismissive of certain training offers . these factors have constrained security cooperation , despite shared concerns over terrorism and other regional security threats . assistant secretary of state for african affairs linda thomas - greenfield has long urged the nigerian government to take a more "holistic" approach to terrorism , suggesting that regional and socioeconomic disparities have contributed to boko haram recruitment . in february 2016 , she noted that the united states was exploring options to enhance security cooperation with nigeria , but reiterated that "the fight cannot be won just on the battlefield," and suggested that "equipment and training are only useful when employed by professional forces that respect human rights and earn the respect of the population. in those public comments , she reiterated that "nigeria and lake chad basin countries must address the drivers of extremism that gave rise to boko haram. other regional experts have similarly urged nigeria to take a "more multifaceted approach that prioritizes civilian protection and engagement," and pursues greater cooperation with its neighbors and international partners . in view of the growing impact boko haram has had on neighboring cameroon , niger , and chad , u.s. officials have increasingly sought to support programs to improve counterterrorism coordination between nigeria and its neighbors , and to improve each country's capacity to contain the group . in september 2015 , secretary of state john kerry declared during a visit to nigeria that he and president buhari had pledged to "join together in an effort to do a better job of taking on boko haram," tacitly acknowledging tensions and challenges in u.s. - nigeria counterterrorism cooperation during the jonathan administration . u.s. security assistance to the lake chad basin countries has increased significantly in recent years — all four countries benefit from a $40 million global security contingency fund ( gscf ) program that began in fy2014 , and the region is a focal area for the administration's new counterterrorism partnership fund ( ctpf ) . under the ctpf , dod plans to allocate $105 million for the lake chad basin region in fy2016 , and has requested $125 million for fy2017 . the state department has provided additional counterterrorism assistance , primarily through its peacekeeping operations ( pko ) account .