remaining funds can be awarded to other jurisdictions . the perf survey also found that law enforcement officers comply with their agency's body armor policy either all ( 88% ) or most ( 11% ) of the time . comfort and fit is another factor that effects whether law enforcement officers wear armor vests . law enforcement officers might not wear their vests because they cause discomfort through reduced mobility , increased weight , heat build - up under the vest , and chafing . ill - fitting body armor can especially be a problem for female law enforcement officers . there are no definitive data on how long an armor vest will last before it needs to be replaced . many manufacturers offer a five - year warranty on their armor vests , but this is not indicative of the useful lifespan of an armor vest . most armor vests are necessarily replaced several times over a law enforcement officer's career . there are several factors that can lead to the deterioration of an armor vest's effectiveness: ( 1 ) wear and tear , ( 2 ) the use of dry cleaning solvents , harsh detergents , bleach , and accumulated soap residue , and ( 3 ) improper storage and exposure to environmental conditions ( such as excessive moisture ) . law enforcement agencies also sometimes upgrade vests if they determine that the ammunition threat they face has increased and now exceeds the capacity of the vests issued to their officers . sometimes an armor vest might have to be replaced if an officer's weight has changed and the vest no longer fits properly . the age of an armor vest alone does not cause its ballistic resistance to deteriorate . an armor vest is only effective when the law enforcement officer is wearing it . the level of care and maintenance for the vest has been shown to have a greater impact than age . an unused armor vest that is 10 years old may be perfectly acceptable for use . also , as previously discussed , there have been instances where law enforcement officers have been killed while wearing body armor because the officer was struck in the torso in an area not covered by the vest or the bullet went through the vest's side panels . policymakers might consider whether to provide additional funding to the nij to do more research into developing new technology in ballistic material that could provide a higher level of protection while also being lighter and more comfortable , or new designs in armor vests that provide more protective coverage . congress could also consider providing funding for the nij to do more research into armor vests that provide a better fit for female officers . policymakers might also consider whether additional steps should be taken to help ensure that law enforcement officers properly maintain their body armor . as previously discussed , some law enforcement officers do not properly store their armor vests , and some officers are not aware that moisture can reduce their vests' effectiveness .