in addition , h.r . other legislation ( h.r . 3530 and s. 1738 ) would direct funds to provide support to child victims of pornography and human trafficking , and require reporting of children missing from foster care . in addition , two bills under consideration ( s. 1870 and h.r . 4058 ) would require state child welfare agencies and hhs to respond to sex trafficking of children , including those who may or may not be in foster care . further , another bill ( s. 1733 and its companion , h.r . 3610 ) would , in different ways , incentivize states to enact "safe harbor laws" that would discourage charging minors for prostitution or sex trafficking offenses , and encourage the diversion of these minors to child protective services . there have been concerns about possible duplication of efforts and a lack of coordination among the agencies that conduct anti - trafficking activities , and whether the fact that so many agencies are involved with anti - trafficking policy leads to duplication or funds not being used in the most efficient manner . the tvpa established the senior policy operating group ( spog ) in part to facilitate coordination on anti - trafficking policy across u.s. government agencies to ensure that there is not a duplication of efforts . however , the federal government does not currently have a national strategy broadly directed at combating human trafficking . s. 1733 would direct the attorney general to implement and maintain a national strategy for combating human trafficking . this strategy would be required to include , among other things , ( 1 ) integrated efforts ( at the federal , state , local , and tribal levels ) to investigate and prosecute human trafficking ; ( 2 ) internal department of justice case coordination ; ( 3 ) federal interagency coordination on the prevention , investigation , and apprehension of persons who target and exploit others for trafficking ; and ( 4 ) measurable objectives and quantifiable goals for combating human trafficking . in addition , s. 1733 would require the attorney general , as part of the annual report to congress on u.s. government trafficking activities , to report the number of human trafficking investigations opened by fbi , dhs , dol or the human smuggling and trafficking center ; and the number of such investigations that were reported to the u.s. attorneys , the doj human trafficking and prosecution division , or the doj child exploitation and obscenity section . the sex offender registration and notification act ( sorna ) provides a set of minimum standards for sex offender registration and notification in the united states . congress passed h.r . 3092 ( enacted as p.l . 113-38 ) , which requires the federal missing and exploited children's program to provide assistance to law enforcement on child sex trafficking . sorna defines sex offenders according to three tiers , tier iii being the highest classification and includes those individuals convicted of the most egregious crimes ( predicate offenses for sex offender registration and notification ) . the sorna requirements involve tier iii offenders being subject to the strictest registration and notification requirements .