ch . 109a , and the production of child pornography . unlike the "travel with a purpose" prohibition , the violation of §2423 ( c ) is not complete until illicit sexual activity occurs . a u.s. citizen who resides overseas and engages in illicit sexual activity violates §2423 ( c ) regardless of when he travelled abroad . there may be some doubt whether §2423 ( c ) covers overseas illicit sexual activity other than child prostitution . section 2423 ( g ) provides a limited affirmative defense to prosecution under §2423 ( c ) , where the defendant can prove by clear and convincing evidence that he reasonably believed that he was engaging in commercial sex with an adult . the consequences under §2423 ( c ) are the same as those under §2423 ( b ) . section 2423 ( d ) ( travel agents ) : section 2423 ( d ) creates a separate offense for a profiteer who arranges the travel outlawed in §2423 ( b ) or §2423 ( c ) : "whoever , for the purpose of commercial advantage or private financial gain , arranges , induces , procures , or facilitates the travel of a person knowing that such a person is traveling in interstate commerce or foreign commerce for the purpose of engaging in illicit sexual conduct shall be fined under this title , imprisoned not more than 30 years , or both. conspiring or attempting to commit any of the transportation crimes described in §2423 is also a federal crime and subject to the same penalty as the underlying offense . aiding and abetting a §2423 ( d ) offense warrants the same treatment . the offense thus carries the same penalties as the underlying crimes . defendants are subject to imprisonment for not more than 30 years ( for not more than 60 years for repeat offenders ) ; a mandatory term of supervised release of not less than 5 years ; a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for an organization ) ; and unless indigent , to a special assessment of $5,000 . the court may order the defendant to pay restitution . property realized through the offense or used to facilitate its commission may be forfeited to the united states . the phrase is not a term of art . the provisions that outlaw other sex offenses in the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the united states define the term "sexual act" and the less severely punished "sexual contact. given the breadth of §1591 in other areas , it may be that congress anticipated the section would apply to both commercial sexual acts and commercial sexual contact as understood in those provisions .