all of these units are discussed below . all of these units can be used for disaster response missions other than cbrn - related ones if the situation warrants . defense cbrn response force ( dcrf ) the dcrf is composed of various military units , which together have approximately 5,200 active component personnel . when activated , its capabilities include command and control , cbrn assessment , search and rescue , decontamination , emergency medical care , security , engineering , logistics , transportation , aviation lift , and air and ground medical evacuation . on order , it deploys in phases , with the first "force package" of approximately 2,100 personnel meant to begin deployment within 24 hours of notification and the second force package of approximately 3,100 personnel meant to begin deployment within 48 hours of notification . if activated , the dcrf would include elements of the marine corps' chemical biological incident response force ( cbirf ) , discussed below . command and control cbrn response elements ( c2cre ) each c2cre has approximately 1,500 personnel . in addition to having a core element that can provide immediate response capabilities , it is designed to provide command and control and logistical support for up to 20,000 follow - on forces . the intent of this is to allow it to provide additional support to the dcrf for a single catastrophic event , or to be used separately in the case of multiple events . it is meant to begin deployment within 96 hours of notification , although its posture can be adjusted by the commander of u.s. northern command . homeland response force ( hrf ) the 10 hrfs are regionally oriented national guard units aligned with each of the 10 fema regions . each hrf is made up of about 577 national guard personnel and is made up of a command and control element ( 180 personnel ) , a cbrn assistance and support element ( case ; 200 personnel ) , and a task force element ( 197 personnel ) . the command and control element can control additional national guard cerfps and wmd - csts . the case provides site security , force protection , and assistance with the movement of casualties . the task force element has the same structure and capabilities as a cerfp , discussed below . hrfs are expected to be ready to deploy six hours after notification . cbrne enhanced response force package ( cerfp ) national guard cerfps provide the following capabilities: "... incident site search of collapsed buildings and structures , conducting rescue tasks to extract trapped casualties , providing mass decontamination , performing medical triage and initial treatment to stabilize patients for transport to medical facilities ... and the recovery of cbrn incident fatalities. at present , there are 17 cerfps . each cerfp is made up of 197 personnel , drawn from existing national guard units , who are assigned to one of five teams within the cerfp: command and control , search and extraction , decontamination , medical , and fatalities search and recovery . they are meant to begin deployment within six hours of notification .