in addition , h.r . 1148 would give dhs the authority to refuse or revoke any visa if the secretary determines that such refusal or revocation is necessary or advisable in the security interests of the united states . 1148 would seek to expand the vsp by requiring dhs to conduct an onsite review of all visa applications and supporting documentation before adjudication at the top 30 visa - issuing posts designated jointly by the secretaries of state and homeland security as high - risk posts . 108-458 in december 2004 . foreign nationals ( i.e. , aliens ) not already legally residing in the united states who wish to come to the united states generally must obtain a visa to be admitted . 2278 ) received action in the 113 th congress but was not enacted . ( a ) grounds for revocation by consular officers . a consular officer , the secretary , or a department official to whom the secretary has delegated this authority is authorized to revoke a nonimmigrant visa at any time , in his or her discretion . ( b ) provisional revocation . a consular officer , the secretary , or any department official to whom the secretary has delegated this authority may provisionally revoke a nonimmigrant visa while considering information related to whether a visa holder is eligible for the visa . provisional revocation shall have the same force and effect as any other visa revocation under ina 221 ( i ) . ( c ) notice of revocation . on april 27 , 2011 , the dos promulgated regulations that broadened the revocation authority . unless otherwise instructed by the department , a consular officer shall , if practicable , notify the alien to whom the visa was issued that the visa was revoked or provisionally revoked . regardless of delivery of such notice , once the revocation has been entered into the department's consular lookout and support system ( class ) , the visa is no longer to be considered valid for travel to the united states . the date of the revocation shall be indicated in class and on any notice sent to the alien to whom the visa was issued . ( d ) procedure for physically canceling visas . a nonimmigrant visa that is revoked shall be canceled by writing or stamping the word ``revoked" plainly across the face of the visa , if the visa is available to the consular officer . the failure or inability to physically cancel the visa does not affect the validity of the revocation . these regulations sought to address a series of concerns that have been raised in recent years about the visa revocation process , especially relating to the timely transmission of information among federal agencies . as discussed more fully in appendix , ยง428 of the homeland security act ( hsa ) gave the secretary of dhs the authority to assign dhs employees to diplomatic and consular posts .