benefits are based on covered earnings . earnings up to the maximum taxable amount ( $132,900 in 2019 ) are subject to the social security payroll tax . fewer qcs are required for younger workers . in the case of workers having work history in multiple countries , international totalization agreements allow workers who divide their careers between the united states and certain countries to fill gaps in social security coverage by combining work credits under each country's system to qualify for benefits under one or both systems . the first step of computing a benefit is determining a worker's average indexed monthly earnings ( aime ) , a measure of a worker's past earnings . insured status is based on the number of quart ers of coverage ( qcs ) earned . in 2019 , a worker earns one qc for each $1,360 of earnings , and a worker may earn up to four qcs per calendar year . the amount needed for a qc increases annually by the growth in average earnings in the economy , as measured by social security's average wage index . to be eligible for most benefits , workers must be fully insured , which requires one qc for each year elapsed after the worker turns 21 years old , with a minimum of 6 qcs and a maximum of 40 qcs . a worker is first eligible for social security retirement benefits at 62 , so to be eligible for retirement benefits , a worker must generally have worked for 10 years . workers are permanently insured when they are fully insured and will not lose fully insured status when they stop working under covered employment , for example , if a worker has the maximum 40 qcs . there are currently about 63 million social security beneficiaries . most social security beneficiaries are retired or disabled workers , whose monthly benefits depend on their past earnings , their age , and other factors . benefits are also paid to workers' dependents and survivors , based on the earnings of the workers upon whose work record they claim . social security has a significant impact on beneficiaries , both young and old , in terms of income support and poverty reduction . under current law , social security's revenues are projected to be insufficient to pay full scheduled benefits after 2035 . for both of those reasons , social security is of ongoing interest to policymakers . most proposals to change social security outlays would change the benefit computation rules . evaluating such proposals requires an understanding of how benefits are computed under current law . a person who has a sufficient history of earnings in employment subject to social security payroll taxes becomes insured for social security , which makes the worker and qualified dependents eligible for benefits . benefits may be paid to eligible survivors of workers who were fully insured at the time of death . some dependents are also eligible if the deceased worker was currently insured , which requires earning 6 qcs in the 13 quarters ending with the quarter of death . to be eligible for disability benefits , workers must also satisfy a recency of work requirement .