workers. the department has wide - ranging responsibilities including trade , economic development , technology , entrepreneurship and business development , monitoring the environment , and statistical research and analysis . the department of commerce affects trade and economic development by working to open new markets for u.s. goods and services and promoting pro - growth business policies . the department also invests in research in development to foster innovation . the department of commerce , through the national oceanic and atmospheric administration , manages and monitors the nation's natural resources and assets to support both environmental and economic health . the department , through the census bureau , conducts the constitutionally mandated decennial census . finally , the department of commerce operates the national patent system . the mission of the department of justice ( doj ) is to "enforce the law and defend the interests of the united states according to the law ; to ensure public safety against threats foreign and domestic ; to provide federal leadership in preventing and controlling crime ; to seek just punishment for those guilty of unlawful behavior ; and to ensure fair and impartial administration of justice for all americans. the doj provides legal advice and opinions , upon request , to the president and executive branch department heads . the doj prosecutes individuals accused of violating federal laws and it represents the u.s. government in court . the department enforces federal criminal and civil laws , including antitrust , civil rights , environmental , and tax laws . the department , through agencies such as the federal bureau of investigation , the drug enforcement administration , and the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives , investigates organized and violent crime , illegal drugs , and gun and explosives violations . the doj , through the u.s . marshals service , protects the federal judiciary , apprehends fugitives , and detains individuals who are not granted pretrial release . it incarcerates individuals convicted of violating federal laws . the doj also provides grants and training to state , local , and tribal law enforcement agencies . the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) was created by the national aeronautics and space act of 1958 ( p.l . 85-568 ) to conduct civilian space and aeronautics activities . it has four mission directorates . the human exploration and operations mission directorate is responsible for human spaceflight activities , including the international space station and development efforts for future crewed spacecraft . the science mission directorate manages robotic science missions , such as the hubble space telescope , the mars rover curiosity , and satellites for earth science research . the space technology mission directorate develops new technologies for use in future space missions , such as advanced propulsion and laser communications . the aeronautics research mission directorate conducts research and development on aircraft and aviation systems . in addition to the mission directorates , the office of education manages formal and informal education programs for school children , college and university students , and the general public . the national science foundation ( nsf ) supports basic research and education in the non - medical sciences and engineering .