dhs's u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) is responsible for the initial adjudication of asylum applications filed by uac . doj's eoir conducts immigration proceedings that determine whether uac may be allowed to remain in the united states or must be deported to their home countries . ice is responsible for returning uac who are ordered removed from the united states to their home countries . the following sections discuss the role of each of these federal agencies in more detail . the obama administration and congress have both taken action since 2014 to respond to the uac surge . the administration developed a working group to coordinate the efforts of the various agencies involved in responding to the issue , temporarily opened additional shelters and holding facilities to accommodate the large number of uac apprehended at the border , initiated programs to address root causes of child migration in central america , and requested funding from congress to deal with the crisis . in turn , congress considered supplemental appropriations for fy2014 and increased funding for uac - related activities in orr and dhs appropriations for subsequent fiscal years . in response to the uac surge in the spring and summer of 2014 , the administration announced initiatives to unify efforts among federal agencies with uac responsibilities and to address the situation with programs geared toward unaccompanied children from several central american countries . additionally , congress increased funding for the hhs program responsible for the care of unaccompanied children , and permitted the secretary of dhs to transfer funds from within a specific cbp and ice account for the care and transportation of unaccompanied children , among other actions taken . since fy2014 , the administration has continued to request additional funding for programs geared toward unaccompanied children , and congress has appropriated for some but not all such requests . apprehensions of unaccompanied children rose substantially between fy2011 and fy2014 before declining considerably in fy2015 . however , the increased number of apprehensions in fy2016 and the most recent apprehension data for the first few months of fy2017 suggest that the flow of unaccompanied children to the united states has not abated . once in the united states , the number of unaccompanied children who will ultimately qualify for asylum or other forms of immigration relief that may allow them to remain in the united states remains unclear . many unaccompanied children have family members in the united states , many of whom may not be legally present . such circumstances raise challenging policy questions that may pit what is in the "best interests of the child" against what is permissible under the immigration and nationality act and other relevant laws . they most often arrive at u.s. ports of entry or are apprehended along the southwestern border with mexico . less frequently , they are apprehended in the interior of the country and determined to be juveniles and unaccompanied . although most are age 14 or older , apprehensions of uac under age 13 have increased . this report opens with an analysis of uac apprehension data .