who is responsible for federal facility security ? is there a national standard for federal facility security ? what are the types of threats to federal facilities , employees , and the visiting public ? how is threat information communicated among federal facility security stakeholders ? what are the potential congressional issues associated with federal facility security ? in general , federal facility security includes operations and policies that focus on reducing the exposure of the facility , employees , and the visiting public to criminal and terrorist threats . each federal facility has unique attributes that reflect its individual security needs and the missions of the federal tenants . in 1995 , usms categorized federal facilities by security level: level i — buildings with no more than 2,500 square feet , 10 or fewer federal employees , and limited or no public access ; level ii — buildings with 2,500 to 80,000 square feet , 11 to 150 federal employees , and moderate public access ; level iii — buildings with 80,000 to 150,000 square feet , 151 to 450 federal employees , and moderate to high public access ; level iv — buildings with 150,000 square feet or more , more than 450 federal employees , and a high level of public access ; and level v — buildings that are similar to level iv but are considered critical to national security ( eg , the pentagon ) . security operations may include all - hazards risk assessments ; emplacement of criminal and terrorist countermeasures , such as vehicle barriers , closed - circuit cameras , security checkpoints at entrances , and the patrolling of the grounds and perimeter of federal facilities ; federal , state , and local law enforcement response ; emergency and safety training programs ; and proactive gathering and analysis of terrorist and criminal threat intelligence . in addition to the fps , and according to the department of justice's office of justice programs ( ojp ) , there are approximately 20 federal law enforcement entities that provide facility security . this attention resulted in a number of frequently asked questions . this report answers several common questions regarding federal building and facility security .