appendix a . data recorded by an edr appendix b . edrs are not new . flight data recorders , also widely referred to as "black boxes," have been installed in aircraft since the 1950s and are used after accidents to reconstruct the critical moments of a plane's operations . event recorders are also in use in railroad locomotives and large cargo and passenger ships . but the mandatory installation of edrs in passenger cars has been controversial in congress . while legislators have generally recognized the devices' potential safety value , in passing the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act in 2012 ( map - 21 ) , congress declined to mandate edrs in new passenger vehicles due to some members' concerns about driver privacy . a proposal to bar the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) from using appropriated funds to develop regulations mandating data recorders was passed by the house of representatives in 2013 , but was not enacted . a bill to limit access to edr data , s. 1925 , was ordered to be reported by the senate commerce committee in april 2014 . an edr is a device installed in a motor vehicle that records certain technical information about a vehicle's operational performance for a few seconds immediately prior to and during a crash . early versions of edrs used analog signal processing and recording to analyze and store data and were first tested by nhtsa in the 1970s . the first commercial edrs were installed by general motors corp. ( gm ) in select models in 1974 . edrs have evolved over the past 40 years as motor vehicles have increasingly come to rely on electronic sensors . greater energy efficiency was a primary goal of the move to electronics . a key component in the electronics system is the engine control unit ( ecu ) , which collects and analyzes information about the engine's operation , such as throttle position , revolutions per minute , and airflow . based on these engine variables , the ecu sends instructions to the fuel injectors varying the length of time a fuel injector pulses or specifying how much spark advance the engine receives in order to improve fuel economy . these are among the variables which are recorded by edrs . but over time , as automakers sought ways to evaluate the sensors and make the new systems easier to service , the role of the ecu was expanded to include a diagnostic component which stored data on problems detected through the sensors . this new source of information was helpful to mechanics attempting to address vehicle performance issues , but also laid the groundwork for data recovery technology . for example , the airbag sensor could store a fault , but also could count the number of times the engine had been started since the fault was generated . an edr is a small box , which is generally installed under one of the front seats of a vehicle or sometimes in the center console . on june 10 , 2014 , during consideration of h.r .