direct export subsidies . the 2014 farm bill made several changes to title iii but left intact most programs that facilitate overseas market development and sales . key changes include alterations to the export credit guarantee program to align it with wto rulings concerning its use in facilitating exports of u.s. cotton and the elimination of the dairy export incentive program ( deip ) , which effectively curtailed the use of direct export subsidies . the bill also directs the secretary of agriculture to establish the position of under secretary of agriculture for trade and international affairs as part of a reorganization of the agency's trade functions . the value of u.s. agricultural exports climbed by nearly 60% between fy2009 and fy2014 , reaching a record $152 billion . the 2014 farm bill continues this pattern . usda's foreign agricultural service ( fas ) works to improve the competitive position of u.s. agriculture in the global marketplace . to this end , fas administers several export programs designed to improve the competitive position of u.s. agricultural goods in the world marketplace with the objective of facilitating export sales and improving foreign market access for u.s. farm products . the trade title of the 2014 farm bill , the agricultural act of 2014 ( title iii of p.l . 113-79 ) , as signed into law on february 7 , 2014 , establishes policy for five years through fy2018 . the law reauthorizes and amends usda's foreign agricultural export programs . budget authority for these programs is mandatory and not subject to annual appropriations . funds required for these export programs are provided directly by the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) through its borrowing authority . agricultural export programs generally fit within three broad groupings: 1 . export market development programs , 2 . export credit guarantee programs , and 3 . thereafter , u.s. farm exports receded to $139 billion in fy2015 , and usda projects that exports will decline further to $125 billion in fy2016 , which would mark the lowest ebb for farm exports since fy2010 ( table a - 1 ) . export earnings have declined in tandem with generally ample world harvests , resulting in lower market prices and a stronger u.s. dollar vis - a - vis trading partner currencies , which has reduced u.s. competitiveness in relation to other exporters , including brazil and argentina . in fy2015 , the downturn in export sales was led by lower unit prices for several major commodities — such as wheat , corn , broiler meat , and pork — the effect of which was compounded by a reduction in the quantities of these commodities exported . given that about 20% of u.s. agricultural production is shipped abroad , export sales are manifestly an important contributor to agricultural prices , farm income , and the financial well - being of a broad array of interests within the u.s. agribusiness sector , including crop and livestock processors and farm input suppliers , among others .