the results are listed in table 7 . these calculations illustrate the relative impacts of the four building blocks for each state . although kentucky's re generation increases by 415% between 2012 and 2030 ( from 0.4% to 2% ) , the re block has a relatively small impact , because re continues to account for a small percentage of the state's total generation . building block 4 has the largest impact ( tied with block 2 ) on emission rate baselines , reducing them , on average , by 13% , but the range of impacts is between 4% and 37% . for example in idaho , building blocks 1 , 2 , and 3 ( nuclear ) have no impact on the 2012 emission rate , because idaho has no coal - fired egus , no room to improve its ngcc utilization , and no nuclear generation . therefore , the only impacts to its 2012 baseline rate are due to the renewable component of building block 3 and ee improvements from building block 4 . as table 7 indicates , on average , building block 1 has the smallest impact ( 4% ) , decreasing state emission rate goals ( compared to 2012 baselines ) by a range of 0% to 6% . the emission rates in states ( eg , rhode island , maine , and idaho ) without coal - fired , steam egus are unaffected by this block ; states that employ coal - fired units to generate a significant percentage of their electricity ( eg , kentucky , west virginia , and wyoming ) see a greater impact to their emission rates . building block 2 , on average , generates the largest ( tied with block 4 below ) incremental impact ( 13% ) , ranging from a 0% to 38% change ( compared to baseline ) . the largest changes are seen in states that have both coal - fired egus and under - utilized ngcc plants . the smallest impacts are in states without any ngcc and states that already have relatively high ngcc utilization rates . although the nuclear component of building block 3 only affects three states , its impacts are considerable in those states . the re component of building block 3 , on average , reduces emission rate baselines by 9% ( 10% if the negative values are omitted ) . the impacts from the re block application range from 2% to 33% . multiple factors explain this range of impacts . for example , this block has a considerable effect in washington ( 33% ) , because it increases the state's re generation by 116% and re accounts for a substantial percentage of the state's total generation ( not counting hydroelectric power ) : 30% in 2012 and 65% in 2030 . this range is a result of several factors , including ( 1 ) the contribution of in - state electricity generation that comes from hydroelectric power or nuclear power ; and ( 2 ) whether the state is a net importer or net exporter of electricity .