circuit . rather , it concluded , epa's allocation of emission reductions among upwind states based on cost - effectiveness is a permissible , workable , and equitable reading of the provision . caa section 111 directs epa to develop federal "standards of performance" for new , modified , and reconstructed stationary sources of air pollution , called new source performance standards ( nspss ) . nspss are nationally uniform , lessening the incentive for companies to "shop" for locations with less stringent requirements . "standards of performance" are defined as emission standards reflecting the amount of emission reduction "achievable" through the use of the "best system of emission reduction" ( bser ) that is "adequately demonstrated," "taking into account" cost and nonair quality impacts . most of the phrases just quoted have been litigated , beginning in the caa's early years . case law holds that "adequately demonstrated" does not necessarily imply that any existing source of the type proposed for an nsps is able to meet the nsps . rather , portland cement ass'n v. ruckelshaus says that section 111 "looks toward what may fairly be projected for the regulated future , rather than the state of the art at present ...." still , lignite energy council v. epa cautions that "epa may not base its determination that a technology is adequately demonstrated or that a standard is achievable on mere speculation or conjecture ...." the agency may compensate for the absence of emissions data in a new source category by , for example , "extrapolation of a technology's performance in other industries. the state had argued that the act limits epa to reviewing whether the state's permit contained a bact determination . in 2014 , the supreme court took up the issue of whether psd new source review applies in the special case of greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions . epa had argued that once its regulations limiting ghg emissions from new motor vehicles took effect in 2011 , it was required to apply psd new source review to ghg emissions from stationary sources as well . its argument had some force: the psd portion of the act defines the new sources to which it applies as those emitting more than a certain amount of "any air polluta nt " and requires bact for "each air pollutant subject to regulation under this act. in 2007 , the supreme court had squarely held that ghgs are indeed "air pollutants" under the caa . the problem with this argument , however , was administrative unwieldiness . epa's view concededly meant that tens of thousands of new and modified stationary sources would now require psd permits , owing to the low statutory emissions thresholds that trigger those permitting requirements and the huge number of sources that emit above - threshold quantities of co 2 , the primary ghg . moreover , millions of existing stationary sources — office buildings , large apartment buildings , hospitals , etc. — would require title v operating permits , for the same reason .