appendix a . presidential nominations , 111 th congress appendix b . appointment action , 111 th congress appendix c. abbreviations of department . it excludes appointments to regulatory boards and commissions and independent and other agencies , which are covered in other crs reports . a profile of each agency tracks the appointments to positions within the agency , providing information on senate activity ( confirmations , rejections , returns to the president , and elapsed time between nominations and confirmation ) as well as further related presidential activity ( including withdrawals and recess appointments ) . the profiles also identify , for each agency , the executive - level positions in the agency requiring senate confirmation , the incumbents in those positions as of the end of the 111 th congress , and the pay levels of those officials . in troduction this report explains the process for filling positions to which the president makes appointments with the advice and consent of the senate ( pas positions ) . of these 347 nominations , 293 were confirmed ; 16 were withdrawn ; and 38 were returned to the president under the provisions of senate rules . it also identifies , for the 111 th congress , all nominations to executive - level full - time positions in the 15 executive departments . the constitution ( article ii , section 2 ) empowers the president to nominate and , by and with the advice and consent of the senate , to appoint the principal officers of the united states , as well as some subordinate officers . officers of the united states are those individuals serving in high - ranking positions that have been established by congress and "exercising significant authority pursuant to the laws of the united states" ( emphasis added ) . three distinct stages mark the appointment process: selection , clearance , and nomination by the president ; consideration by the senate ; and appointment by the president . table 1 summarizes appointment activity , during the 111 th congress , related to full - time executive - level positions in the 15 departments . president barack h. obama submitted to the senate 347 nominations to executive department full - time positions .