additional details are described further below . crs report r43357 , medicaid: an overview crs report r41210 , medicaid and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) provisions in aca: summary and timeline crs report r42978 , comparing medicaid and exchanges: benefits and costs for individuals and families crs report r43328 , medicaid coverage of long - term services and support . benefit packages have always varied across states and across eligibility groups . additional crs resources on medicaid are provided at the end of this report . historically , eligibility for medicaid was subject to "categorical restrictions" that generally limited coverage to the elderly , persons with disabilities , members of families with dependent children , certain other pregnant women and children , among others . finally , states also use waiver authority to design benefit packages . under section 1115 waivers , states tailor benefits to state - specified subpopulations that can include both currently authorized groups and / or new groups not specified in federal statute . each such waiver delineates the unique terms and conditions that are negotiated between a given state and the federal centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) . , table 1 provides examples of medicaid benefits available by selected eligibility classifications . mandatory benefits are services that a state must cover in its state medicaid plan . likewise , there are also a number of optional benefits that states may choose to cover . as illustrated , different medicaid subpopulations may have access to benefit packages that can be quite varied , and can be categorized into two broad groups: ( 1 ) traditional benefits , and ( 2 ) alternative benefit plans ( abps ) . for the medically needy subgroup , states may offer a more restrictive benefit package than is available to most categorically needy individuals . such individuals include people who meet the main categorical restrictions described above but may have higher income . states electing the medically needy option must provide coverage to certain pregnant women ( i.e. , prenatal and delivery services ) and children under age 18 . different eligibility classifications determine available benefits , as described below . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated that the coverage expansion provisions in the aca would increase enrollment in both the medicaid and the state children's health insurance programs by about 7 million in cy2014 , rising to 13 million by cy2024 . to qualify for medicaid , applicants must have income ( and sometimes assets ) that meet financial requirements . these financial criteria are usually tied to specific percentages of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) , and are sometimes based on certain cash assistance programs ( eg , supplemental security income or ssi ) . below is a description of services available for medicaid beneficiaries by eligibility classification . first , "categorical needy" individuals represent the vast majority of people enrolled in medicaid , most of whom receive traditional medicaid benefits ( described in more detail in the " traditional medicaid benefits " subsection ) . the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .