113-203 , respectively ) . this is especially the case compared to fy2011 , when rescissions were unusually large ( - $372 million ) and helped achieve that year's relatively large spending reduction . the general provisions title may contain appropriations for activities that are not part of regular agency appropriations . these sometimes include supplemental or disaster appropriations , and may be offset in scorekeeping adjustments by emergency spending designations . the domestic nutrition portion of this discretionary subtotal ( primarily wic , commodity assistance programs , and nutrition programs administration ) shows a +2.5% annual increase over 10 years ( +0.6% per year if adjusted for inflation ) . table 15 shows that the enacted fy2015appropriation contains emergency funding for conservation ( $91 million ) and ebola ( $25 million ) . some of the conservation funding was in the senate - reported bill but not in the house - reported bill ( see the heading " disaster assistance " earlier in this report ) . scorekeeping adjustments are a final part of the accounting of the appropriations bill that is not necessarily shown in the tables published by the appropriations committees . these adjustments are critical , however , for the bill to reach the desired total amount that complies with the 302 ( b ) spending limit for the subcommittee . some of these amounts are not necessarily specified by provisions in the bill but are related to program operations , such as direct and guaranteed loan programs . cbo calculates and reports these scorekeeping adjustments in unpublished tables . for fy2015 , the other scorekeeping adjustments in the enacted appropriation total - $514 million ( table 16 ) . some question whether the ccc should be used for programs that are not variable . the programs affected by chimps typically include conservation , rural development , bioenergy , and some smaller nutrition assistance programs . chimps have not affected the farm commodity programs or the primary nutrition assistance programs ( such as snap ) . the enacted fy2015 appropriation contains $785 million in chimps , similar to the level in each of the chamber - reported bills . this chimp amount is smaller than the chimp levels that were enacted since fy2011 ( table 13 ) . for more background on chimps , see crs in focus if10041 , reductions to mandatory agricultural conservation programs in appropriations law , and crs report r41245 , reductions in mandatory agriculture program spending . rescissions are a method of permanently cancelling the availability of funds that were provided by a previous appropriations law , and in doing so achieving or scoring budgetary savings . as an offset , rescissions can allow more spending in an appropriations bill . but by cancelling an authorization , a rescission can prevent an unobligated budget authority from being reallocated or repurposed by future appropriations . often rescissions relate to the unobligated balances of funds still available for a specific purpose that were appropriated a year or more ago ( eg , buildings and facilities funding that remains available until expended for specific projects , or disaster response funds for losses due to a specifically named hurricane ) .