( see below. ) section 108 of s. 2363 would reduce fees and facilitate access to "federal land and waterways" for commercial film crews of up to five people . it would amend 16 u.s.c . 460 l - 6d to specify that such crews could obtain a permit for $200 , good for one year , for commercial filming in areas and times that are open to public use . no additional fees may be charged . the agency may deny access if resources may be damaged and the damage cannot be mitigated ; if public use would be unreasonably disrupted ; if the public would face health or safety risks ; or if the filming would use "models or props that are not part of the natural or cultural resources or administrative facilities of the federal land. currently , such fees are variable and must generate a "fair return" based on the number of days of use , size of the crew , and amount and type of equipment . sometimes , the best access to federal land is through private property . the section defines normal agricultural practice . first , the practice is to be considered normal if recommended by the state office of the cooperative extension system of the department of agriculture . in addition , the applicable state game department is to be consulted and , if requested , may be asked to concur . it is unclear who may do the requesting , and what would be the effect if the applicable state game department does not concur . a normal agricultural practice is also defined to include the destruction of crops as required by the federal crop insurance corporation to obtain a crop insurance payment after a natural disaster . section 106 also requires an annual report from the secretary of agriculture to the secretary of the interior on any changes to normal agricultural practices . section 107 of s. 2363 addresses hunting , trapping , fishing , and recreational shooting on federal land , and appears to create an "open until closed" management policy for federal lands . it describes the factors a land management agency must consider to justify closing federal lands to hunting , trapping , fishing , or recreational shooting . the steps include specific criteria for closure determinations , revising planning documents , and filing reports with congress . this analysis will focus potential impacts of section 107 on lands managed by the bureau of land management ( blm ) and the forest service ( fs ) . while the bill's definition of federal public lands explicitly excludes national park service ( nps ) and fish and wildlife service ( fws ) lands , it may include other federal public land . at least two federal land management agencies , blm and fs , have authority to acquire property to provide easier access to federal lands . the authority includes eminent domain .