treasury highlighted four of its recommendations , summarized below . while expressing the need to retain focus on the historical context of the cra , these groups highlighted the need to address issues pertaining to banking deserts in underserved communities . community development investments ( cdis ) that meet public welfare investment ( pwi ) requirements are those that promote the public welfare , primarily resulting in economic benefits for low - and moderate - income ( lmi ) individuals . this appendix provides examples of cdi activities that would qualify for consideration under the cra investment test . in many cases , covered banks are more likely to take advantage of these optional vehicles to obtain cra credits if they perceive the underlying investment opportunities to have profit potential . loan participations banks and credit unions often use participation ( syndicated ) loans to jointly provide credit . when a financial firm ( eg , bank , credit union ) originates a loan for a customer , it may decide to structure loan participation arrangements with other institutions . the loan originator often retains a larger portion of the loan and sells smaller portions to other financial institutions willing to participate . the federal reserve system , however , did host research symposiums around the country to gather comments pertaining to cra reform . as reported by the federal reserve , some banking industry comments suggested , among other things , the need for consistency of the cra examinations to facilitate cra compliance . yet some tailoring may still be necessary with respect to determining assessment areas that better reflect each bank's business models , particularly for models that use technology to deliver products and services . the regulators also heard from community and consumer groups . suppose a financial firm originates a business or mortgage loan in a lmi neighborhood . a bank may receive cra investment credit consideration by purchasing a participation , thus becoming a joint lender to the lmi borrower . another motivation for congressional action was to discourage redlining practices . one type of redlining can be defined as the refusal of a bank to make credit available to all of the neighborhoods in its immediate locality , including lmi neighborhoods where the bank may have collected deposits . a second type of redlining is the practice of denying a creditworthy applicant a loan for housing located in a certain neighborhood even though the applicant may qualify for a similar loan in another neighborhood . this type of redlining pertains to circumstances in which a bank refuses to serve all of the residents in an area , perhaps due to discrimination . the cra applies to banking institutions with deposits insured by the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , such as national banks , savings associations , and state - chartered commercial and savings banks . the cra does not apply to credit unions , insurance companies , securities companies , and other nonbank institutions because of the differences in their financial business models . the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , the federal reserve system , and the fdic administer the cra , which is implemented via regulation bb .