the administration had requested the same amount . the program provides grants for the conservation of hundreds of bird species that migrate among north and south america and the caribbean . the act requires spending 75% of the funds on projects outside the united states . state and tribal wildlife grants help fund efforts to conserve species ( including nongame species ) of concern to states , territories , and tribes . the program was created in the fy2001 interior appropriations law ( p.l . 106-291 ) and further detailed in subsequent interior appropriations laws . ( it has no separate authorizing statute. ) the largest portion of the program is for formula grants to states and territories . funds from the formula grants may be used to develop state conservation plans as well as to support specific practical conservation projects . a portion of the funding is set aside for competitive grants to tribal governments or tribal wildlife agencies , and another portion for competitive grants to states . the two programs for competitive grants have no specific matching requirements . this grant program has generated considerable support from state and tribal governments . the house committee recommended the fy2014 level , but shifted the program to a greater emphasis on competitive grants , keeping the state formula grants as the lion's share of the funding . not every account is discussed . by far the largest portion of the fws annual appropriation is the resource management account , and it was within this account that both the administration and the committee focused their structural changes . the administration proposed to collapse all funding under endangered species , habitat conservation , and environmental contaminants and their various subaccounts into new ecological services and habitat conservation accounts , with the subaccounts divided differently among them compared to previous years . however , none of the administration's proposed changes removed subaccounts ( such as candidate conservation , consultation , and recovery ) from the overarching resource management account . comparison of funding levels between years for such traditional accounts for esa could not be made as there were no longer any accounts with those labels . the fy2015 budget justification made a case that the proposed structure more accurately reflected the field experience of its employees and would lead to more efficient allocation of resources . the committee bill rejected this argument , although it did make other changes in the budget structure , as discussed below . partners for fish and wildlife ( pfw ) works with private landowners to improve wildlife habitat on their lands . assistance may take various forms , from telephone consultations and advice , to site visits and planning , and — where wildlife benefits are very high — to financial or material assistance in improving habitat . the program offers great flexibility to landowners , and demand has generally exceeded resources . until fy2105 , the program had been funded through the resource management account , and the administration would have continued that budget structure . however , the committee recommended "moving the program to its own account in order to prevent the use of funds for activities not authorized by the partners for fish and wildlife act.