sec . prohibition on cancellation or modification of avionics modernization program for c - 130 aircraft . ( a ) prohibition. should the current fleet be modernized ? does the force structure support the future fleet ? and is the current active duty / reserve component mix correct ? the c - 130 hercules is a medium sized tactical transport aircraft providing multi - purpose theater support while assuming several diverse roles within the u.s. air force , navy , marine corps and coast guard . missions include tactical and intra - theater airlift and airdrop support , arctic resupply , aerial refueling , special operations support , aeromedical evacuation , aerial spraying , firefighting duties for the u.s. forest service , and natural disaster and humanitarian relief missions . the aircraft is very versatile with the ability to take off and land from unprepared surfaces during day or night in hostile environments and in all weather . the aircraft is typically used to support operations within a certain theater , as opposed to the c - 5 or c - 17 aircraft that routinely fly cargo internationally . the bulk of the u.s. government fleet comprises 667 aircraft . there are a small number assigned to other agencies , such as the u.s. forest service , but this report will focus on the aircraft assigned to the usaf , usn , usmc and the uscg . an important question for congress is to determine how many c - 130s are needed in the future to provide desired capability . in determining the desired fleet size an analyst may move away from the discussion of actual aircraft numbers toward a broader question of how much capability is desired to accomplish the missions of the future . a typical question might be how much cargo or how many people must be airlifted to support a specific scenario , like a major land battle , versus how many aircraft a commander may need to achieve the objective . this analysis is typically accomplished by the services but normally returns to a discussion of numbers of aircraft since this can be assigned a monetary value . for the purposes of this report , aircraft numbers will be used to indicate desired capability . a significant issue in the current c - 130 fleet is age of the c - 130h models . years of flight in austere environments , advancing technologies , and aircraft age are catching up to the fleet . the fleet faces part obsolescence issues , fatigue on the aircraft structure , and changing aviation regulations that may impact access to certain areas of the world . the average age of the c - 130h fleets in all the services is over 25 years . the figure below shows the breakout in the air force . as fleets age and aviation rules evolve , aircraft fleet managers are confronted with the choice to modify their current aircraft with new equipment ( modernize ) or replace the aircraft with new production models ( recapitalize ) . each option has advantages and disadvantages ; a significant driver for both options is cost . if the decision is made to recapitalize the older aircraft with new planes , cost becomes a major consideration .