by its nature , most federal funding for biomedical research flows from hhs . the united states public health service ( phs ) is the primary division of the department that oversees grants for research funded by the eight primary agencies and three human services divisions of hhs . this report concludes with an overview of the current developments with respect to the law governing fcois and biomedical research . to guide the discussion that follows , table 1 provides a brief synopsis of the various federal regulations on fcois and biomedical research . congress granted the surgeon general authority , with the approval of the secretary , to issue regulations necessary to administer the department . a significant portion of the more than $50 billion the federal government spends annually on research projects supports biomedical research . institutions applying for grants from a phs agency must establish procedures to "provide a reasonable expectation that the design , conduct , and reporting of research" will be free from bias resulting from conflicts of interest . and a host of different government agencies — primarily those housed within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) — financially support biomedical research . in addition to directly supporting certain biomedical research projects , the government — primarily though the food and drug administration ( fda ) — continually reviews the biomedical research that is used to support an application to market certain products , like drugs or medical devices . collectively , the various federal agencies that either support or oversee biomedical research have a strong interest in ensuring that the underlying research is scientifically rigorous and free of bias . if a researcher has a conflict of interest — that is , a real or potential incompatibility between one's private interests and one's public or fiduciary duties — that conflict , including a financial conflict , can potentially undermine the research . for example , a researcher employed by a university might be paid a consulting fee from a private company to help the company analyze the results of a clinical trial for an experimental cancer drug that the company hopes to one day market . the revisions to the phs objectivity rules included the lowering of financial interest reporting thresholds , expanding reporting obligations , and requiring institutions receiving federal funds to develop and enforce policies on fcois through training and education programs . although the revisions arguably increased clarity and transparency with respect to the phs financial conflict rules , the administration of the phs fcoi process is still largely left to grantee institutions . at the university , the researcher might also be participating in a similar clinical investigation that is funded by a grant from the national institutes of health . to guide the discussion that follows , figure 1 provides a flowchart of the process by which fcois are identified and managed pursuant to the phs general objectivity requirements . some commentators have even suggested that the discrepancies among research institutions with respect to their fcoi policies may lead to a "race to the bottom" where investigators "leave institutions with stringent policies to go to more lenient ones.