provisions under h.r . 3964 would be in effect beyond the current drought , and would continue in perpetuity absent future changes to the statute . as discussed above , this could have long - term environmental effects that change the scope of water planning in the bay - delta region . for example , some have argued that if esa and state protections in the bay - delta are removed as proposed , there would be no incentive to implement the bdcp , a habitat conservation plan currently under development . both bills elevate the need to supply additional water to users in comparison to other uses ( eg , environment and recreation ) . 3964 were enacted . under a separate provision , the accord protected water users from losing water supplies to support future listings of species under esa . according to the accord , the protection of species that are listed after the accord shall result in no additional water cost relative to the bay - delta protections embodied in the plan and will , to the maximum extent possible , use the flexibility provided within section 4 ( d ) of the esa . the long - term effects of s. 2198 itself would be tempered since most of its provisions will sunset after the drought declaration in california is lifted . the duration of these changes varies . in some cases , they would be authorized only in times of a declared drought or decreased water supplies , and in other cases , these activities would be authorized permanently under all conditions . 3964 primarily aims to increase water deliveries to california's cvp contractors , particularly those south of the delta , who have seen reductions in deliveries since passage of the cvpia in 1992 . the bill would potentially ease some restrictions on cvp and swp water operations and would allow more water to be available for users resulting from those changes . the bill would likely result in greater water deliveries by preempting some federal and state laws , including fish and wildlife protections and other cvp operational mandates tied to the coordinated operations of the cvp and swp . 3964 would implement several measures that would redirect water from fish and wildlife uses , among others , to agricultural and municipal users . it is unclear what impacts such changes would have on other water users in the state . 3964 is enacted is difficult . for example , one of the bill's most significant changes would be to set the 1994 bay delta accord as the operational guide for the cvp and the swp , while also waiving federal esa regulations and other laws pertaining to the operation of the cvp and swp . this would set maximum restrictions on water exports from the delta depending on the time of year and guarantee a reliable supply of water for certain stakeholders , among other things . however , the exact amount of additional water made available in accordance with this change would depend on a number of factors .