the statute , at 5 u.s.c . section 7353 ( b ) , then expressly authorizes the designated supervisory ethics offices in the government to make exceptions to this general restriction , and to issue regulations setting out circumstances under which gifts may be accepted . the regulations of the oge , the supervisory ethics agency for the executive branch , set out the detailed guidelines and standards for officials in the executive branch of government . there are also in place requirements for confidential disclosure reports to be filed with an employee's agency by some lower level federal officers and employees . generally , the confidential reporting requirements apply to rank and file employees who are compensated below the threshold rate of pay for public disclosures ( gs - 15 or below , or less than 120% of the basic rate of pay for a gs - 15 ) , and who are determined by the employee's agency to perform duties or exercise responsibilities in regard to government contracting or procurement , government grants , government subsidies or licensing , government auditing , or other governmental duties that may particularly require the employee to avoid financial conflicts of interest . items to be disclosed in confidential reports also include gifts and reimbursements over certain amounts received from private sources . the current aggregate threshold amount for disclosure of gifts in both public and confidential reports is $375 . in addition to the statutory "gifts" provision and regulations , federal officers and employees continue to be subject to the restrictions of the federal bribery law at 18 u.s.c . ยง201 ( b ) , which prohibits the receipt of anything of value "in return for" being influenced in the performance of an official duty . within this federal bribery statute is the so - called "illegal gratuities" clause , at 18 u.s.c . ยง201 ( c ) , prohibiting the receipt of anything of value "for or because of" an official act . the bribery provision has been interpreted to require a so - called quid pro quo , that is , a corrupt agreement or "bargain" to do some official act ( or refrain from doing some official act ) in return for the thing of value ; the "illegal gratuity" provision , however , merely requires that the thing of value be given for or "because of" an official act and could have been given merely as a "thank you," even for an act already completed that would have been done by the public official without the thing of value being offered . additionally , federal employees may not use their official positions ( "under color of official right" ) to "extort" something of value for themselves , and may not receive things of value in circumstances that implicate "honest services" fraud within the prohibitions of the wire fraud and mail fraud laws . concerning the receipt of things of value , federal officers or employees may not receive something of value as private "compensation" for representational services rendered to persons before federal agencies , and may not receive from a private source any salary supplementation for their official duties performed on behalf of the united states government .