house - passed h.r . headers in bold italics note the theme . under each theme , appropriations are listed by department and subtotaled . the left column notes the department or agency and the funded activity by appropriation . the administration's request is in the next column , in millions of dollars of budget authority , followed by the appropriations that would be provided under the senate bill and the house bill . the table only reflects new budget authority that would be provided in the legislation: transfers , rescissions , and redirection of appropriated funds are not included in the table . a brief narrative description of the request and each bill follows , which explores those issues , as well as the potential budgetary impact of each proposal . the administration requested $4,346 million in supplemental appropriations to address two issues: the surge in unaccompanied and escorted children illegally crossing the southwest border , and a shortfall in federal funding to pay the costs of wildland fires . of the request , $3,731 million was for the southwest border crisis to be distributed through appropriations that would fall under four appropriations subcommittees: commerce , justice , science , and related agencies ( 2% of the border funding ) ; homeland security ( 42% ) ; labor , health , and human services , education , and related agencies ( 49% ) ; and state , foreign operations , and related programs ( 8% ) . the request included a general provision allowing up to $250 million of this amount to be transferred among applicable appropriations , which would give the administration additional flexibility in how these funds may be used . the administration also requested expanded transfer authority specifically for supplemental funds appropriated to dhs . the request included $615 million to cover wildland fire suppression and emergency rehabilitation activities . similar to the administration's request , the bill would also create a new adjustment to statutory spending limits to accommodate a portion of spending subsequently provided for "wildfire suppression operations," formulated with the intent of minimizing any additional spending beyond what is allowed under current law by tying it to the existing disaster relief cap adjustment . the administration requested the supplemental funding be designated as an emergency under the budget laws . funding with the designation would not count against the discretionary spending caps for fy2014 , and an offset would not be needed to avoid violating those caps . s. 2648 has four titles , one each for border issues , wildfire , and aid to israel , as well as a title of general provisions that apply broadly across the bill . it would provide $1 billion less than the administration requested for managing the situation on the southwest border , and $225 million in funding for military assistance to israel that the administration had not formally requested . the bill would provide the requested wildfire funding , and includes an amendment sought by the administration to make it easier to fund federal costs for fighting wildland fires . the senate bill would provide almost double the supplemental funding requested for doj to speed the adjudications of those taken into custody along the border , appropriating $125 million .