cir . 2005 ) ; in re broering , 1 p.a.r . for example , if a candidate solicits or advertises the endorsement of a political party or uses a political party's resources to further his or her campaign , these actions may rebut the presumption that an election is nonpartisan , and thus , indicate that the election is a partisan one . as such , if any candidate for municipal judge becomes associated with a political party , you should immediately contact our office for further guidance . in addition to the general exceptions for candidacies in nonpartisan elections , the hatch act also provides that regulations issued by the office of personnel management may establish that employees in certain communities in and around the washington , dc , metropolitan area , or in other communities where the majority of voters residing there are federal employees , may participate in certain local political activities which might otherwise be prohibited . these regulations allow federal employees in such exempted localities to run as independent candidates even in partisan elections in that locality or municipality . the office of personnel management has issued regulations specifying those communities in which federal employees may be independent candidates in partisan elections . such employees may also solicit , receive , and accept political contributions in connection with that local or municipal election , but would still be prohibited from soliciting contributions from subordinates or engaging in political activities while on duty or in federal workspace . the office of personnel management regulations note that a candidacy for or service in the particular office in question will be permitted only if such candidacy and service will not "result in neglect of , or interference with , the performance of the duties of the employee or create a conflict , or an apparent conflict , of interest. most federal employees in the executive branch are allowed to hold and campaign for positions and offices in political parties and other partisan political organizations . in prohibiting candidacy in an election for "partisan political office," the hatch act expressly excludes from the prohibition "any office or position within a political party or affiliated organization": "partisan political office" means any office for which any candidate is nominated or elected as representing a party any of whose candidates for presidential elector received votes in the last preceding election at which presidential electors were selected , but shall exclude any office or position within a political party or affiliated organization . specifically as to the permissibility of a federal employee to run for and to hold a "political party position," the hatch act regulations permit the following: ยง 734.204 participation in political organizations . an employee may: ( b ) serve as an officer of a political party or other political group , a member of a national , state , or local committee of a political party , an officer or member of a committee of a political group , or be a candidate for any of these positions... .