the outcome was historic in numerous ways . the victorious bjp won a majority of the body's 543 seats , becoming the first party to do so since 1984 and the first - ever non - indian national congress party to rule india's federal government without coalition partners ( the dynastic , nehru / gandhi congress party suffered what was by far its worst - ever national defeat , although it continues to lead 11 state governments ) . the bjp's 282 seats allowed the party to elevate modi to the prime minister's seat , and he was sworn in to office on may 26 . modi is india's first - ever lower - caste prime minister , the first born after the country's 1947 independence , and the first not to have been steeped in delhi's rarified political circles—an "outsider" in more ways than one . india's smaller upper parliamentary chamber of a maximum 250 seats , the rajya sabha ( council of states ) , is on a different election schedule from that of the lok sabha . this body may review , but not veto , revenue legislation , and has no power over the prime minister or his / her cabinet . still , the bjp's governance agenda can be impeded in the rajya sabha , where the former incumbent congress party holds a plurality of seats ( 68 ) and can align with other bjp opponents to block certain legislation . moreover , many key reforms that may be pursued by the new government—including in tax policy , labor laws , land acquisition , subsidy cuts , and infrastructure project clearance—will be dependent on the participation of state governments , only eight of which are currently controlled by the bjp or its allies . analysts identify convincing reasons to believe that the indian electorate did not elect narendra modi for his bold hindu nationalism . instead , modi's mandate most likely derived from the electorate's acute desire to see uncorrupt governance in new delhi and a repaired economy with plentiful jobs , and not from support for any parochial agenda . moreover , with muslim votes split between the numerous "secular" alternatives to the bjp , modi's electoral outlook was much improved . winning a majority of seats with less than one - third of votes cast ( the bjp won 31% of the popular vote ) was possible only through a significant splintering of the country's "anti - bjp vote. this leads some to argue against the "historic election" narrative: more than two - thirds of votes were cast for non - bjp candidates , the bjp continued to fare poorly in most of the country's south and east , and regional parties continued to account for roughly half of all votes cast . prime minister modi has pared down the size of the cabinet considerably , from 71 ministers under the previous government to 44 today . key officials include recent bjp president and current home minister rajnath singh ; external affairs minister and overseas indian affairs minister sushma swaraj , a bjp parliamentary stalwart ; and arun jaitley a corporate lawyer now serving as finance minister , defense minister , and corporate affairs minister .