appendix a . chip data by state table a - 1 provides fy2013 data by state regarding chip program type , income eligibility levels , and enrollment . table a - 2 shows fy2015 chip e - fmap rates and fy2013 chip expenditures ( including both federal and state expenditures ) . appendix b . upper income eligibility levels in medicaid , chip , and subsidized exchange coverage state - by - state income eligibility level for medicaid , chip , and subsidized exchange coverage for infants , children aged 1 to 5 , children aged 6 to 18 , and pregnant women and unborn children are provided in figure b - 1 , figure b - 2 , figure b - 3 , and figure b - 4 ( respectively ) . most children and pregnant women in families with income under 400% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) are eligible for medicaid , chip , or subsidized exchange coverage . the income eligibility levels for medicaid and chip vary by state and population ( i.e. , age of child or pregnant women ) , and subsidized exchange coverage is available for most children and pregnant women with incomes between 100% fpl and 400% fpl that do not have access to other minimum essential coverage , such as medicaid or chip . the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l . 111-148 , as amended ) largely maintains the current chip structure through fy2019 . the law also extends federal appropriations through fy2015 and requires states to maintain their medicaid and chip child eligibility levels through fy2019 as a condition for receiving medicaid federal matching funds . on april 16 , 2015 , president obama signed into law the medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 ( macra ; p.l . macra repeals the sustainable growth rate ( sgr ) mechanism ( which overrides the reduction in the medicare physician fee schedule that was set to begin in april 2015 ) and extends funding for chip , among other provisions . specifically , macra extends chip funding for two additional years ( i.e. , through fy2017 ) and maintains the current allotment formula with the 23 percentage point increase to the enhanced federal medical assistance percentage ( e - fmap ) . macra also extends the "qualifying state" option , the child enrollment contingency fund , "express lane" eligibility , outreach and enrollment grants , the pediatric quality measures program , and the childhood obesity demonstration project . congress will face a decision with regard to the future of chip when federal chip funding expires after fy2017 . the health insurance market is far different today than when chip was established . chip was designed to work in coordination with medicaid to provide health coverage to low - income children . in general , chip allows states to cover chip children with no health insurance in families with annual income above state medicaid eligibility levels . before chip was established , no federal program provided health coverage to children with family with annual incomes above medicaid eligibility levels .