the court reasoned that it is unlikely that congress intended this result . as of the date of this report , the scope of pom wonderful's holding as applied to all food / beverage lanham act claims is unclear . the supreme court , in its decision , emphasized that the fdca does not preclude lanham act claims like pom's . however , the case history , as discussed in the previous section , reveals that the courts have distinguished between lanham act claims that require courts to interpret fda regulations and those , like pom's , that permit a court to consider the lanham act "independently" from the fda regulations . the intention of the legislature to repeal 'must be clear and manifest.' congressional intent to repeal a statute or part of a statute should be clear and present in the text . repeal by implication generally is allowed only where " ( 1 ) provisions in the two acts are in irreconcilable conflict , the later act to the extent of the conflict constitutes an implied repeal of the earlier one ; and ( 2 ) if the later act covers the whole subject of the earlier one and is clearly intended as a substitute , it will operate similarly as a repeal of the earlier act. creating a corollary to the second part of this rule , the supreme court has stated that absent a clear intention otherwise , "a specific statute will not be controlled or nullified by a general one , regardless of the priority of enactment. prior to pom wonderful , courts have both permitted and denied a plaintiff to pursue a food or beverage lanham act claim in particular circumstances . generally , courts allow a lanham act claim if the claim does not depend on the direct or indirect interpretation of the fdca or fda regulations . the court in grove fresh distributors , inc. v. flavor fresh foods , inc. permitted the plaintiff's lanham act claim , which turned on the definition of orange juice from concentrate . the plaintiff alleged that the defendant's representation that the product was 100% orange juice from concentrate was false because the product contained additives and adulterants . even though the plaintiff referred to the fda regulation's definition of orange juice in its claim , the court still permitted the lanham act claim to continue because the plaintiff did not have to rely on the fda regulations to meet the elements of the lanham act . according to the court , the plaintiff could have used other alternatives , such as the market definition of orange juice , in order to show that the defendant's representation was "false" under the lanham act . before pom wonderful , courts generally did not permit a lanham act claim if the claim required an original interpretation of fda regulations and the fda had not yet ruled or acted upon that particular product . permitting such a claim would , according to the courts , usurp fda's interpretive authority and undermine congress's decision to limit fdca enforcement to the federal government . the court in summit technology , inc. v. high line medical instruments extended deference to the fda for the same reason .