several new regulations are pending . the jones act requires that vessels transporting cargo between two u.s. points be built in the united states , crewed by u.s. citizens , and at least 75% owned by u.s. citizens . the law was enacted in 1920 ( merchant marine act of 1920 , ยง27 , p.l . one of the motivations for the u.s. - build requirement was to facilitate the disposal of cargo ships constructed during world war i by the u.s . shipping board , a government agency set up in 1916 to purchase , construct , and operate merchant ships during the war . the jones act authorized the sale of these vessels to the private sector . the jones act stated an explicit national policy of supporting a u.s. merchant marine and a u.s. shipbuilding industry in the interest of national defense . these fall into two main categories . one concerns the coast guard's role in preventing oil spills by regulating the safety of vessels and the training and working conditions of crews . the other has to do with the impact of the jones act , a 1920 law that restricts domestic waterborne transport to vessels built in the united states and crewed by u.s. citizens , which may now be affecting u.s. producers' decisions about how to ship crude oil and whether to send it to refineries in the united states or in canada . the vast majority of u.s. refineries are located along the coast ( including the great lakes ) or an inland waterway . most coastal refineries traditionally have been supplied by imported crude , and some lack pipeline connections and may not be equipped or have the space to receive crude by rail . for this reason , large amounts of oil are being moved out of production areas by truck or rail , but are being transferred to barges or tanker ships for the last leg of the trip to a refinery . crude oil produced at eagle ford , tx , is conveniently located for waterborne transport due to its proximity to the coast . some of it moves through the port of corpus christi , where outbound crude oil shipments nearly trebled from 2012 to 2013 . the nearby port of victoria , tx , has also experienced a dramatic increase in crude oil barge traffic . it appears that most of the texas crude moving by vessel goes to coastal refineries in texas and louisiana or to the louisiana offshore oil port ( loop ) , an offshore ship - to - pipeline transfer facility . a comparatively small amount of eagle ford crude oil moves by water to refineries in proximity to new york harbor and the delaware river , but much larger quantities seem to be going to refiners in canada's atlantic provinces . while much of the oil coming from the bakken region moves to refineries by rail , there are now several well - established intermodal routes involving water transport .