it was extended several times . under this provision , individuals who itemize deductions may take a deduction for state and local sales taxes in lieu of taking a deduction for state and local income taxes . taxpayers may keep individual receipts or may use an internal revenue service ( irs ) look - up table . the irs table amounts , however , do not include the sales taxes paid for cars , motorcycles , boats , aircraft , or a home , or local sales taxes , which are added . the value of a given dollar amount of deduction is higher for taxpayers with higher marginal tax rates . in addition , as an itemized deduction , the deduction tends to be concentrated in the higher - income classes that itemize deductions . as shown in table 2 , about half of the deductions are taken by those in the $100,000 or more income class , who account for about 15% of returns . itemizing taxpayers in the seven states without a general income tax but with a general sales tax typically benefit the most from the optional sales tax deduction . one reason to retain the sales tax option is to provide equity across the states , as it would offer filers in states that do not impose an income tax ( or which have a low income tax rate ) an alternative means of reducing their federal tax liability . equity across states is an elusive concept in general , however . the effective value of the transit benefits rises with the marginal tax rate of a recipient . the value of the exclusion for transit benefits also depends on the location of the employer: the provision is targeted towards the taxpayers working in the highly urbanized areas or other places where transit is available or parking space is limited . benefits to states depend on the level as well as type of tax and on the level and distribution of income . for example , new hampshire has neither an income nor a sales tax , and received a higher than average benefit from federal tax deductions in analysis of 2004 activity . one reason that the sales tax became a target for elimination in 1986 was that most taxpayers looked the tax up in a table and the deduction did not reflect their actual sales tax paid . taxpayers could also rely on their own receipts but that was a burden on both taxpayers and tax administrators . there were also concerns that other selective sales taxes or taxes imposed at other than the retail level were not deductible . these concerns also apply to an optional sales tax deduction . the path act extended the above - the - line deduction for qualified tuition and related expenses through the 2016 tax year . this provision allows taxpayers to deduct qualified tuition and related expenses for postsecondary education from their adjusted gross income . expenses that qualify for this deduction include tuition payments or any fees required for enrollment at an eligible institution .