most of these children are aged 14 or older . the number of unaccompanied children has increased in the past six years and has surged in this current year . in fy2008 , the number apprehended by u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) totaled 8,041 . in the first 8½ months of fy2014 , apprehensions climbed to 52,000 ( figure 1 ) . nationals of guatemala , honduras , el salvador , and mexico , have accounted for almost all unaccompanied alien children apprehended at the mexico - u.s. border during this period . in the past three years , apprehensions of mexican unaccompanied children , which rose substantially in fy2009 , have since varied between 12,000 and 17,000 . in contrast , apprehensions of unaccompanied children from guatemala , honduras , and el salvador have increased considerably during this period . in fy2009 , mexicans accounted for 82% of the 19,668 unaccompanied child apprehensions , while the central american countries accounted for 17% . by the first eight months of fy2014 , the proportions had almost reversed , with mexican apprehensions comprising only 23% of the 52,000 uac apprehensions , and uac from the three central american countries comprising 75% of the total . the total increase in apprehensions in the past three years stems mainly from large increases in the number of unaccompanied children from the three central american countries . the similarity of the trends characterizing apprehensions of unaccompanied alien children from el salvador , guatemala , and honduras , and their stark divergence from those characterizing unaccompanied mexican children suggests that factors specific to central america's "northern triangle" underlies the sudden surge in total unaccompanied child apprehensions . what follows is a discussion of possible causes originating in the countries themselves ( "push factors" ) and other possible causes originating in the united states ( "pull factors" ) . central america is a region encompassing seven countries of the isthmus between mexico and south america: belize , costa rica , el salvador , guatemala , honduras , nicaragua , and panama ( figure 2 ) . it concludes with caveats on the attribution of causes to this situation . unaccompanied alien children ( uac ) are defined in statute as aliens under age 18 , who lack lawful immigration status in the united states , and who are without a parent or legal guardian in the united states or lack a parent or legal guardian in the united states who is available to provide care and physical custody . they typically arrive at u.s. ports of entry or are apprehended along the southwestern border with mexico . less frequently they are apprehended in the interior and determined to be a juvenile and unaccompanied . the overwhelming majority of the unaccompanied child migrants apprehended in mexico or at the u.s. - mexico border have come from guatemala , honduras , and el salvador , which are often referred to as the "northern triangle" countries of central america . high violent crime rates , poor economic conditions fueled by relatively low economic growth rates , relatively high poverty rates , and the presence of transnational gangs appear to be some of the main distinguishing factors between these three northern triangle countries and other countries in the region .