this report focuses on unaccompanied alien children as asylum seekers . to bring clarity to the unique policies toward unaccompanied children , this report compares their treatment to that of unauthorized adults and families with children in the specific contexts of asylum and expedited removal . it further builds on a set of crs reports analyzing the issues surrounding unaccompanied alien children . under the ina , foreign nationals present in the united states may apply for asylum with the united states citizenship and immigration services bureau ( uscis ) in the department of homeland security ( dhs ) after arrival into the country , or may seek asylum before the department of justice's ( doj's ) executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) during removal proceedings . rather , proponents of current law maintain that the prudent response to the surge of unaccompanied children is to temporarily increase appropriations so that it can be expeditiously implemented . to receive asylum in the united states , foreign nationals must demonstrate a well - founded fear that if returned home , they will be persecuted based upon one of five characteristics: race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion . because "fear" is a subjective state of mind , assessing the merits of an asylum case rests in large part on the credibility of the claim and the likelihood that persecution would occur if the alien is returned home . foreign nationals — specifically in this context adults and families with children — apprehended along the border or arriving at a u.s. port of entry who lack proper immigration documents or who engage in fraud or misrepresentation are placed in a procedure known as expedited removal ; however , if they express a fear of persecution , they receive a "credible fear" hearing with a uscis asylum officer and — if found credible — are referred to an eoir immigration judge for a hearing . the surge of central american children coming to the united states who are not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian and who lack proper immigration documents is raising complex and competing sets of humanitarian concerns and immigration control issues . the most notable and recent revisions to asylum policy that pertain to unaccompanied children were included in the william wilberforce trafficking victims protection reauthorization act ( tvpra ) of 2008 . the asylum provisions of the tvpra were part of a larger set of provisions that revised the initial processing , temporary placement , and immigration relief options for unaccompanied children . prior to the tvpra revisions , the unaccompanied child who sought asylum did so during a removal proceeding before an immigration judge in eoir . current law requires that unaccompanied alien children are treated differently than unauthorized adults or unauthorized families with children who come to the united states seeking asylum . the treatment of adults and families with children is prescribed by the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) , as notably amended by the illegal immigrant reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 . adults and families from the same three countries — el salvador , guatemala , and honduras — have also been coming in increasing numbers over the same period .