finally , h.r . this report compares h.r . 4007 , as passed by the house , to the existing statutory authority . it provides a brief overview of h.r . 4007 , as passed by the house ; identifies select differences for comparison ; analyzes each section of h.r . 4007 , as passed by the house , in the context of the existing statutory authority ; and discusses several policy issues raised by the obama administration in the context of chemical facility security legislation . 4007 has both similarities and differences with the existing statute . 4007 , as passed by the house , incorporates much of the language in the existing statutory authority . in contrast with the existing statute , h.r . 4007 , as passed by the house , would amend the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l . 107-296 , as amended ) . it would create a new title , title xxi , called chemical facility anti - terrorism standards . another key difference between h.r . 4007 , as passed by the house , and the existing statute is the absence of a statutory termination date . the statutory authority would be permanent , though h.r . table 1 below highlights selected differences between h.r . 4007 , as passed by the house , and p.l . 109-295 , section 550 , as amended . for a fuller comparison of legislative text , see table a - 1 in the appendix . this section of the report discusses each section of h.r . 4007 , as passed by the house , and provides policy analysis regarding selected provisions in the context of the existing statutory authority and cfats regulation . for a direct comparison of the bill language and the existing statutory authority , see table a - 1 . 4007 , as passed by the house , contains three sections . executive branch agencies have raised several issues with regard to chemical facility security in testimony or in official reports . 4007 , as passed the house , addresses some of these issues directly . this section does not attempt to discuss these issues in the broader policy context , but instead compares them with action taken in the context of h.r . 4007 , as passed by the house . for more information on these issues , including discussion of various policy alternatives , see crs report r42918 , chemical facility security: issues and options for the 113 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] . previous debate on chemical facility security has included whether to mandate the adoption or consideration of changes in chemical processes to reduce the potential consequences following a successful attack on a chemical facility . suggestions for such changes have included reducing the amount of chemical stored onsite and changing the chemicals used . in previous congressional debate , these approaches have been referred to as inherently safer technologies or methods to reduce the consequences of a terrorist attack . in 2010 , the obama administration expressed its position on the use of inherently safer technologies to enhance security at high - risk chemical facilities in some circumstances .