it is important to note , however , that the j.e.f.m . the report also does not address effective assistance of counsel . aliens have generally been seen as having both constitutional and statutory rights to counsel at their own expense in formal removal proceedings . the constitutional right is grounded in the fifth amendment's guarantee of due process , while the statutory right arises from the ina and related provisions of immigration law . the regulations implementing these statutory provisions further establish these and other rights pertaining to counsel in removal proceedings . aliens , as a category , have generally not been seen as having either constitutional or statutory rights to counsel at the government's expense in administrative removal proceedings . the sixth amendment right to appointed counsel for indigent persons applies only in criminal proceedings , not in civil proceedings such as removal . the ina and its implementing regulations also do not purport to provide a right to counsel at the government's expense for any aliens except those subject to removal proceedings before the alien terrorist removal court , which has not been used to date . nonetheless , individual aliens could be found to have a right to counsel at the government's expense based on the fifth amendment's guarantee of due process or section 504 of the rehabilitation act , depending upon the facts and circumstances of the case . courts have repeatedly declined to find that indigent aliens have a sixth amendment right to counsel at the government's expense in removal proceedings . those who would afford such a right to aliens often emphasize the serious consequences that being removed from the united states can have for aliens . they sometimes also note that immigration law has become increasingly intertwined with criminal law ( a phenomenon sometimes referred to as "crimmigration" ) . however , such arguments have consistently proved unavailing because the sixth amendment explicitly refers to "the assistance of counsel" in "criminal proceedings," and removal proceedings are civil in nature . thus , courts have deemed it appropriate that aliens subject to removal receive a different degree of protections than criminal defendants because removal proceedings are civil , not criminal . aliens are , however , entitled to counsel at the government's expense in criminal proceedings to the same extent as citizens . this can include any criminal proceedings that may also result in a judicial order of removal , although such orders are rarely sought . the ina also generally does not purport to afford aliens a right to counsel at the government's expense in removal proceedings . alone among the provisions of the ina , 8 u.s.c . section 1534 states that "[a]ny alien financially unable to obtain counsel shall be entitled to have counsel assigned to represent" him or her . however , this provision applies only to aliens removed by the alien terrorist removal court , a forum which has not been used to date . all the other provisions of the ina and their implementing regulations specify that aliens' right to counsel shall be "at no expense to the government.