covariates . a wide and divergent set of covariates are used across these studies . different researchers choose to control for different factors that they hypothesize will affect some measure of college price . in many of the studies , for example , some measures of state appropriations for higher education , endowment , income per capita , and selectivity are used . in other studies , however , these more common covariates are included with less common covariates , such as home equity in the area of the college , unemployment in the state , percentage of population aged 18-24 , and number of governing boards . there is little to no consistency about the mix of covariates across studies . as such , covariates that are found to be statistically significant in some studies are not present in other studies , thus making comparisons across studies difficult . this in turn makes it difficult to find a consensus or consistent set of robust conclusions in this literature . there are often contradictory findings within studies , depending on the specifications used in the different models . direction of causality . in regression models , causality runs from the independent variables to the dependent variable . to be statistically valid , a regression model must meet certain criteria , one of which is that neither the dependent variable , nor another independent variable or a missing variable , can influence any independent variable . in the world of actual policy phenomena , this criterion rarely holds because of the complex interactions among variables . for example , in the current case , it is possible that the level and structure of financial aid ( independent variable ) is influenced by the pricing strategies of institutions of higher education ( dependent variable ) . in studies that include a measure of state aid as an independent variable , for example , the estimates may be biased if the dependent variable ( a measure of college prices ) affects state aid . this is a form of endogeneity bias . instrumental variables . one way to address engodeneity bias is through the use of instrumental variables . that is , if the independent variable is endogenous to the dependent variable , an instrumental variable that is related to the independent variable but exogenous to the dependent variable may be used to understand the causal effect of the variable of interest on the outcome variable . for example , the typical outcome variable in the studies under review is some measure of price . but , as noted , price may affect a key explanatory variable — financial aid . thus , to understand the effect of aid on price , some researchers try to identify a variable that is related to aid but only affects price through aid rather than affecting it directly . one study , for example , uses state general tax revenue and state lottery revenues as instruments for state financial aid . the choice of valid instruments can be difficult but may be important to correct for endogeneity bias . the range of instrumental variables used in the studies under review shows the difficulty in choosing valid instruments .