pursuant to the u.s . sentencing guidelines , defendants convicted of violating the act receive a base offense level of six , resulting in a guideline recommendation of a final sentence of zero to eighteen months in prison , depending on the defendant's criminal history . if the defendant had previously violated the act or if the offense involved fraud , the sentence could increase considerably . the sentencing guidelines also provide that an "upward departure" "may be warranted" if the offense "created a substantial risk of bodily injury or death ; or bodily injury , death , extreme psychological injury , property damage , or monetary loss resulted from the offense. two supreme court cases established this principle . in united states v. dotterweich , justice frankfurter , writing for a five - member majority , explained that the fd&c act "dispenses with the conventional requirement for criminal conduct awareness of some wrongdoing " and that criminal accountability extends to all who have "a responsible share in the furtherance of the transaction which the statute outlaws. the court reasoned that the strict liability standard was necessary because "[i]n the interest of the larger good [the act placed] the burden of acting at hazard upon a person otherwise innocent but standing in responsible relation to a public danger. over thirty years later , in united states v. park , the supreme court reaffirmed dotterweich . in articulating what is known as the "responsible corporate officer" or " park " doctrine , the court held that a showing of criminal liability under the fd&c act did not require an "awareness of some wrongdoing" by the defendant , but instead merely required the defendant to be in a "position in [a] corporation" in which he had "responsibility and authority either to prevent in the first instance , or promptly to correct , the violation complained of , and that he failed to do so. in so holding , the court noted that while the strict liability standard imposed by the fd&c act is "beyond question demanding" the standard is "no more stringent" than what should be expected of "those who voluntarily assume positions of authority in business enterprises whose services and products affect the health and well - being of the public that supports them. while the lack of a mens rea element in fd&c act criminal cases could theoretically allow fda and doj to "bring a criminal action ... in virtually every serious case" of an fd&c act violation , two defenses may diminish the potential reach of the act's criminal sanctions . first , an individual accused of an fd&c act crime could raise the affirmative defense of "impossibility. the "impossibility defense" is available to a corporate officer who can introduce evidence that "he exercised extraordinary care , but was nevertheless unable to prevent violations of [the fd&c act]. upon such a showing , the burden of proof then shifts to the government to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the officer was not actually powerless to prevent or correct the violation .