eligible employers that are not covered by the exemption may instead seek protection through the accommodation . to qualify for the accommodation under the july 2013 final rules , an organization was required to ( 1 ) object to coverage of at least some of the contraceptive services based on religious beliefs ; ( 2 ) be a nonprofit entity ; ( 3 ) hold itself out as a religious organization ; and ( 4 ) comply with the self - certification requirements of the rule . following hobby lobby , the regulations implementing the accommodation were amended to reflect broader eligibility , as discussed in more detail below . the free exercise clause prohibits the government from prohibiting the free exercise of religion . traditionally it had been interpreted to require that the government show a compelling interest for any government action that interfered with a person's exercise of religious beliefs . however , in 1990 , the supreme court reinterpreted that standard , explaining that the free exercise clause never "relieve[s] an individual of the obligation to comply with a valid and neutral law of general applicability. the court's decision lowered the baseline of protection , but emphasized that congress remained free to consider whether additional protection would be appropriate through the legislative process . congress responded to the court's decision by enacting rfra , which essentially reinstated the heightened standard of protection . rfra states that the "[g]overnment shall not substantially burden a person's exercise of religion even if the burden results from a rule of general applicability , except as provided in subsection ( b ) . subsection ( b ) requires that any substantial burden must further a compelling governmental interest and use the least restrictive means to achieve that interest . a number of potential legislative responses have been mentioned since the court announced its decision in hobby lobby . it is important to remember that the court's decision was based on the statutory protections in rfra , not in constitutional protections of the first amendment . just as congress may enact heightened protections for religious exercise as it did in rfra and as it may determine the scope of protection available , it may enact statutory language to clarify the effect of rfra regardless of the court's decision . the court essentially created a working definition of person under rfra , but congress may confirm or alter that definition at its discretion . alternatively , it may consider preempting rfra with respect to certain legislative requirements . generally speaking , the hobby lobby decision clarified the scope to which persons may be eligible for protection under rfra , but in the practical context of the contraceptive coverage requirement , it essentially addressed the question of whether the requirement's implementing regulations sufficiently addressed the range of entities with religious objections . since aca's enactment , hhs has developed various iterations of administrative regulations to address religious objections .