as consideration of h.r . 2271 or similar legislation continues , congress may focus on specific language related to consultation , duration of emergency measures , grid recovery activities , and other details to ensure that they align with a complex industry structure while achieving the bill's objectives in the event of a future security incident . as discussed above , the doe's quadrennial energy review calls for federal efforts to develop one or more critical hv transformer reserves . 2244 would mandate a doe plan for how such a reserve program could be carried out . some in the utility industry support the policy intentions of such a reserve , as already demonstrated by the industry's own spare hv transformer programs and planned expansion of those programs , but they believe stakeholders "will be better served by allowing the industry to create the structure , cost responsibility and pricing for [transformer] sparing services as opposed to a top - down government solution. they believe federal assistance would be most helpful if limited to funding the startup of a transformer reserve program administered by the asset owners themselves . the grid assurance sparing service appears consistent with a private sector - driven approach to expand existing spare transformer initiatives . others have questioned the cost - effectiveness of a new national hv transformer reserve program , asserting that — had it been in place — the reserve program envisioned by h.r . 2244 would not have been called upon by any grid incident over the last ten years . as congress considers any plans for a federally administered strategic transformer reserve , it may consider the relationship of such a program to ongoing industry efforts to maintain hv transformer spares , the relationship between federal and state administrators of such a program , its cost - effectiveness , and its practical requirements ( eg , size , location , and transportation ) . in addition to measures focused on the protection of critical hv transformers from physical attack , analysts have advocated policies to reduce the criticality of individual hv assets by enhancing the overall "resiliency" of the electric power grid . as a report from the executive office of the president states , grid resilience ... includes hardening , advanced capabilities , and recovery / reconstitution . although most attention is placed on best practices for hardening , resilience strategies must also consider options to improve grid flexibility and control . resilience includes reconstitution and general readiness such as pole maintenance , vegetation management , use of mobile transformers and substations , and participation in mutual assistance groups . a number of federal , state , and industry initiatives exist to address various aspects of electric power grid resiliency . while many of these initiatives have been motivated by weather - related events such as the northeast blackout of 2003 and electric grid failure during superstorm sandy , policies to improve grid resilience also have benefits in the context of intentional physical attacks . for example , an official from pjm has reportedly stated , you can only harden a substation so much . if someone wants to attack a substation , they will.... that leads us to the resilience piece .