in response to e.o . 13520 , omb created a central website , paymentaccuracy.gov , which includes data for all high priority programs , as the executive order required . omb also revised omb circular a - 123 , appendix c , to incorporate the new requirements for high priority programs . under the revised circular , a program is deemed high priority if it has reported more than $750 million in improper payments in the most recent fiscal year ; not reported an improper payments amount for the most recent fiscal year , but has reported more than $750 million in improper payments in a previous fiscal year ; or not yet reported on improper payments for the program as a whole , but has determined that the total amount of improper payments for program components that have been measured exceeds $750 million . as of july 2014 , omb had identified 13 high priority programs , 12 of which reported improper payment amounts for fy2013 . according to omb , data on the one high priority program that has not yet reported any improper payments amounts , the children's health insurance program ( chip ) , may be available at the end of fy2014 when a valid error rate is anticipated to be established . five other high priority programs did not begin reporting improper payments data in fy2004 , as required under ipia , due to difficulties developing estimates . these programs were the national school lunch program , which first reported improper payment amounts for fy2007 ; medicaid , medicare part c , and pell grants , each of which first reported for fy2008 ; and medicare part d , which first reported improper payment amounts for fy2011 . data on high priority programs are thus incomplete , as the number of programs reporting improper payments amounts and rates varied over time . table 2 , below , identifies the amount of improper payments issued by each high priority program from fy2004 through fy2013 . the data in table 2 show that 12 high priority programs issued $738 billion in improper payments in the past 10 fiscal years . the data also show that a subgroup of four of the high priority programs — medicare fee - for - service , earned income tax credit ( eitc ) , medicaid , and medicare advantage — accounted for a large proportion of the government's total improper payments each of those years . in fy2013 , those four programs accounted for $77 billion of the government's total improper payments of $106 billion . restated , four programs accounted for an estimated 73% of all of the government's improper payments in the most recent fiscal year for which data are available . three of those programs have seen their improper payments increase significantly since they first started reporting: improper payments for the medicare fee - for - service program increased 64% , eitc 50% , and medicare advantage 71% . overall , just 2 of the 12 high priority programs that have reported improper payments data so far , medicaid and rental housing assistance , have seen a decrease in the amount of annual improper payments between their first year of reporting and fy2013 .