specifically , h.r . 5 would have revised and enhanced requirements for federal agency notification of the chief counsel prior to the publication of any proposed rule ; expanded the required use of small business advocacy review panels from three federal agencies to all federal agencies , including independent regulatory agencies ; empowered the chief counsel to issue rules governing federal agency compliance with the rfa ; specifically authorized the chief counsel to file comments on any notice of proposed rulemaking , not just when the rfa is concerned ; and transferred size standard determinations for purposes other than the small business act and the small business investment act of 1958 from the sba's administrator to the chief counsel . the sba's office of advocacy is a relatively small office with a relatively large mandate — to represent the interests of small business in the regulatory process , produce and promote small business economic research , and facilitate small business outreach across the federal government . it faces several challenges . for example , the position was filled on an interim basis by claudia rodgers , a long - time advocacy senior staff member , from january 2015 ( following winslow sargeant's departure ) until darryl l. depriest's senate confirmation on december 10 , 2015 . depriest left office in january 2017 . major l. clark , iii , previously assistant chief counsel for procurement policy for advocacy , is currently filling the chief counsel's position on an interim basis . chief counsels leave office for various reasons , such as a change in administration or for more lucrative positions in the private sector . third , one of advocacy's primary functions is to monitor and report on federal agency compliance with the rfa , provide comments on proposed rules , and train federal regulatory officials to assist them in complying with the rfa's provisions . however , as gao has noted , the rfa does not define significant economic impact or substantial number of small entities , two key terms for triggering advocacy's role under the rfa . the lack of clarity concerning these key terms makes it difficult for advocacy to objectively determine agency compliance with the rfa and also makes it more difficult for advocacy to train federal regulatory officials in how to come into compliance with the act . gao and others have recommended that congress clarify the meaning of these terms . however , the rfa's original authors purposely decided not to provide a precise definition for these terms . they argued that the varying missions and constituencies served by federal agencies necessitated the provision of discretion to allow federal agencies to "determine what is significant to their programs and particular constituencies. fourth , advocacy is subject to criticism from those who believe that it should be more aggressive in preventing federal regulations ( i.e. , from those who generally oppose federal regulations , especially regulations related to environmental issues and health care reform ) and from those who believe that it should be less aggressive in this regard ( i.e. , from those who generally view federal regulations favorably , especially in addressing environmental and workplace safety issues ) .