this report will not be updated . this report was funded , in part , by a grant from the joyce foundation . with shale gas resources in north america and around the world continuing to be identified , evaluated , and developed , there is an increased expectation by many in academia , government , and industry that there is now resource abundance . the united states has led this trend , and the overall u.s. natural gas supply likely will expand in the near term and beyond . the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) , in the annual energy outlook 2014 projections , reflects this advancing pace in natural gas production . the united states is facing increasing industrial and power demands for natural gas , as well as possibly becoming a net liquefied natural gas ( lng ) exporter and overall gas exporting country by 2016 and 2018 , respectively . at the same time , figure 1 illustrates how prices for the commodity are continuing to trend near historical lows . current expectations are for those levels to continue in the near and mid - terms . while low prices are generally good news for consumers in the industrial , power generation , commercial , and residential sectors , they do cause a number of closely related technical and market impacts worth further research and analysis . recent changes in thermal coal use in the united states , illustrated in figure 2 , impacted by switching from coal to natural gas , are substantial and will likely continue to trend downward due to overall market influences of natural gas prices relative to coal , along with current and pending federal and state policy . coal - to - gas switching for u.s. power generation doubled in 2012 from the same period in 2011 , with gas use for power generation doubling from 3 billion cubic feet per day to 6 billion cubic feet per day . although coal export to asian and european electric power generation operators has risen , there has still been a net negative impact on the mining sector in several regions of the united states . rail capacity that was used to move coal to market is now underutilized . on the other hand , some of the rail capacity is now being redeployed to move crude oil from shale deposits in the upper western united states to eastern refineries where demand for domestic west texas intermediate ( wti ) priced crude has increased relative to higher - cost brent priced imports from other global locations . pipeline capacity to accomplish the same goal has regulatory , right - of - way , and financial challenges , and is viewed by some as insufficiently responsive to the rapid increase in development . it is possible that rail will one day move natural gas as well . the addition of a large number of u.s. and international oil and natural gas companies entering shale gas developments during the last six years , with larger capital budgets and longer investment horizons , has advanced both private and public research on natural gas extraction technologies . the presence of these companies also may increase the likelihood of other countries' developing shale formations .