this section provides an overview of these changes . as it has since establishing the sbir and sttr programs , congress seeks to better understand and address challenges to the programs' effectiveness . the following section provides an overview of selected ongoing issues that congress may opt to consider . much of the debate over the reauthorization of the sbir and sttr programs in 2011 revolved around a regulation that required at least 51% ownership by an individual or individuals . some experts argued that participation by small firms that are majority - owned by venture capital companies , hedge funds , and private equity firms should be permitted . proponents of this change maintained that , particularly in the biotechnology sector , the most innovative companies were not able to use the sbir program because they did not meet these ownership criteria . opponents of altering the eligibility requirements argued that the program is designed to provide financial assistance where venture capital is not available . they asserted that the program's objective is to bring new concepts to the point where private sector investment is feasible . while the new law permits limited participation by majority venture capital owned companies , it remains to be seen how this will affect the outcomes of the two programs . a continuing issue for the sbir and sttr programs is agency compliance with expending the statutory minimum percentage of extramural research funding annually . in a september 2013 report , gao found that 8 of the 11 agencies participating in the sbir program and 4 of the 5 agencies participating in the sttr program failed to consistently comply with spending requirements for fy2006-fy2011 . in june 2014 , gao reported that three agencies failed to comply with the sbir requirement and three failed to comply with the sttr requirement in fy2012 . gao reported that program managers at two of the non - compliant agencies asserted that their agencies would be in compliance if the agencies spent the total amount reserved or budgeted for their programs , regardless of what year the funding was spent . gao asserted that the law requires agencies to "expend" a certain amount of funding each year and attributes the agencies' misinterpretation , in part , to the sba's sbir and sttr policy directives which "inaccurately state that the authorizing legislation requires agencies to 'reserve' the minimum amount each year. among the factors affecting agencies' failure to comply with meeting the mandatory minimum expenditure levels are challenges in calculating the amount to be set aside ; the enactment of appropriations after the start of the fiscal year ; and differing agency interpretations of the statutory requirement for "expended. the sbir and sttr set - asides are based on an agency's extramural budget for research or research and development . the calculation of the amount of this budget can be complex for some agencies . for example , several agencies support extramural r / r&d funding through multiple subunits . in addition , agency extramural r / r&d funding can come from more than one appropriations account , and such accounts can include activities and programs that are not extramural r / r&d .