some have previously suggested that this provision , by itself or in conjunction with 5 u.s.c . certain uacs could potentially be encompassed by the protections of section 504 . the federal government's 2014 announcement that it would award $2 million in grants to enroll "about 100 lawyers and paralegals" to represent children in immigration proceedings prompted questions about whether the government is barred , under section 292 of the ina , from using appropriated funds to provide counsel to uacs in removal proceedings . as previously noted ( see " do uacs have a right to counsel at the government's expense in removal proceedings ? those making this argument seemingly construe the language about aliens' "privilege" to have counsel at their own expense to mean that the government may not pay for counsel for them . however , this interpretation does not appear to have been adopted by any court , and other interpretations could be advanced . in particular , an argument could be made that these provisions only restrict aliens' ability to claim an entitlement to counsel at the government's expense , and do not preclude the government from paying for aliens' counsel pursuant to other provisions of law or at its discretion . along with the vast majority of countries , the united states is a party to the vienna convention on consular relations ( vccr ) , a multilateral agreement codifying consular practices originally governed by customary practice and bilateral agreements . pursuant to article 36 of the vccr , when a national of a state party ( i.e. , country ) is arrested or otherwise detained in another state party , appropriate authorities within the arresting state must inform the person arrested "without delay" of the ability to have his / her consulate notified . the vccr does not require the arresting state to notify the appropriate consular officials in every instance ; rather , it requires the arresting state to notify the foreign national in its custody that he / she has the option of having his / her consulate notified . a foreign consular officer also is provided the right to communicate and be provided access to a detained national , including the ability to visit the national in the detention facility and arrange legal representation . dhs regulations require that "[e]very detained alien shall be notified that he or she may communicate with the consular or diplomatic officers of the country of his or her nationality in the united states. the united states also has bilateral agreements with a number of countries that require consular notification in the event that one of the parties arrests a national of the other party . most uacs encountered by cbp along the u.s. - mexico border are from countries ( including mexico ) that are parties to the vccr but do not have separate agreements requiring mandatory consular notification . the vccr identifies consular functions as including "safeguarding ... the interests of minors and other persons lacking full capacity who are nationals of the sending state , particularly where any guardianship or trusteeship is required with respect to such persons.