no substantive progress on nato enlargement was announced at the wales summit . the allies did , however , reaffirm their commitment to nato's "open door" policy and said that they would make a decision by the end of 2015 on whether to invite montenegro to join the alliance . they also agreed to boost nato's partnership with aspiring member georgia . this fell short of the u.s. administration's stated goal of granting georgia a membership action plan ( map ) at the summit . however , since the annexation of crimea in march , only a handful of allies have announced defense spending increases . in wales , the allies committed to halting any further cuts in national defense spending and agreed to aim to meet nato's target of spending 2% of gdp on defense within a decade . nonetheless , some analysts caution that nato's latest effort to boost defense spending and enhance military capabilities could face the same challenges as the long line of similar post - cold war capabilities initiatives that have had mixed success , at best . the administration also underscored its commitment to the transatlantic security relationship and to defending nato allies , particularly in response to russia's action in ukraine . among other things , president obama highlighted the proposed $925 million european reassurance initiative ( eri ) , for which the administration has requested congressional approval in the department of defense's fy2015 overseas contingency operation ( oco ) budget request . accordingly , these allies have advocated a renewed nato focus on territorial defense in europe and deterring russia . the formal agenda for the wales summit focused on three main issues: adoption of collective defense and military capabilities initiatives aimed at reassuring allies and deterring russia ; marking nato's transition in afghanistan ; and enhancing support of partner countries outside the alliance . before russia's annexation of crimea in march , nato's wales summit was expected to be defined largely by leaders' efforts to outline a new , and perhaps more modest , set of priorities for an alliance moving on from a taxing decade of war in afghanistan . to many analysts , the end of the afghanistan mission represents the next step in nato's post - cold war evolution from a regional defense organization focused exclusively on deterring the soviet union to an alliance confronting an array of complex security challenges across the globe . however , russia's ongoing intervention in ukraine has caused some allies to question one of the key premises on which nato's transformation has been based — that russia no longer poses a significant security threat to the alliance . in wales , nato leaders reaffirmed their condemnation of russia's intervention in ukraine and announced a slate of collective defense measures intended to deter further russian aggression . however , they did not come to agreement on managing nato's relations with russia over the medium to long term . the lack of consensus on these questions could have significant implications for nato's future .