doj grants for victim services . through this program , doj may award grants to states , indian tribes , local governments , and nonprofit , nongovernmental victims' services organizations to develop , expand , or strengthen service programs for victims of trafficking in the united states . while this did not specifically add services to trafficking victims to the purpose areas of all vawa programs , it clarified that services can be provided to certain victims populations who are also trafficking victims . this reauthorization also amended several vawa grant programs to specifically add to their allowable activities serving victims of trafficking . as such , these grants may be used to enhance the criminal and juvenile justice response to child victims of sex trafficking . there has been growing concern over sex trafficking of children in the united states . demand for sex with children ( and other forms of commercial sexual exploitation of children ) is steady , and profit to sex traffickers has increased . while law enforcement , policy makers , social service providers , and the public have acknowledged the presence of this issue , they have grappled with measuring the extent of child sex trafficking as well as determining how best to combat it from a number of angles . within the criminal justice realm , law enforcement is tasked with investigating and prosecuting both the supply side ( sex traffickers , or pimps ) as well as the demand side ( buyers of commercial sex ) of sex trafficking . in addition to the challenges in prosecuting traffickers and buyers of sex with children , law enforcement faces challenges with how to handle the girls and boys whose bodies are sexually exploited for profit . indeed , the u.s. view of juveniles involved in commercial sexual activity has evolved over the past decade . how to categorize the juveniles involved in commercial sexual activities has become one of the perennial issues for law enforcement and policy makers . a central question is whether these youth should be characterized as victims or perpetrators . the federal government and some states have conceptualized these children differently , and this variability has contributed to the implementation of differing policies throughout the country . in outlining what constitutes "severe forms of trafficking in persons," the tvpa includes both sex trafficking and labor trafficking . generally , both forms of trafficking involve some element of force , fraud , or coercion . with respect to sex trafficking , however , the law specifies that when a minor — an individual under the age of 18 — is involved , the commercial sexual activity need not contain force , fraud , or coercion in order to be deemed sex trafficking . in other words , for purposes of prosecuting a trafficker , if a minor is involved in a commercial sex act , he or she is considered a victim of sex trafficking ( and thus a victim of a severe form of trafficking in persons ) in the federal government's eyes . notable elements of this position include the following: a minor is considered a victim of trafficking regardless of whether the commercial sex act is believed to be forced or voluntary .