others live with their mothers only or with their fathers only . moreover , in each of the family living arrangements mentioned there may or may not be other children , some full siblings , some half - siblings , some step - siblings or perhaps unrelated . nonmarital childbearing , cohabitation , divorce , re - partnering , and multi - partner fertility ( i.e. , adults who have biological children by more than one partner ) significantly impact children , and public policies that may work for less complicated families may not work for them . a majority of nonmarital births now are to cohabiting parents . between 2006 and 2010 , 58% of nonmarital births were to cohabiting parents , compared with 40% in 2002 . unlike in years past , although most of the children born outside of marriage are raised by a single parent ( who may or may not have a "significant other" ) , many , especially during their infancy , live with both of their biological parents who are not married to each other . it also discusses the importance of establishing paternity for children born outside of marriage . in 2006 and 2007 , the u.s. total fertility rate reached the replacement rate . however , the total fertility rate has steadily declined over the last six years . the total fertility rate for the united states was 1,869.5 births per 1,000 women in 2013 . others contend that it is often the case that adults pursue individual happiness in their private relationships , which may be in direct conflict with the needs of children for stability , security , and permanence in their family lives . it also is recognized that most people , especially unmarried parents , have a positive attitude towards marriage . although marriage and family life are generally considered private issues , they have become part of the public arena primarily because of public policies that help families affected by negative outcomes associated with nonmarital births to maintain a minimum level of economic sufficiency . the abundance of research on the subject of the impact on children of various living environments also raises the stakes , in that it is now almost unanimously agreed that children living with married biological parents fare better on a host of measures — economic , social , psychological , and emotional — than children living with a single parent or in a step - parent or cohabiting situation . some observers contend that although women of all age groups are having children outside of marriage , given the scarcity of resources in most areas of public finance , it may be wiser to pursue a strategy that focuses primarily on reducing nonmarital births of adolescents and women in their early twenties . one of the trends that this report highlights is that although there has been a rise in nonmarital births , it does not mean that there has been a subsequent rise in mother - only families . instead , it reflects the rise in the number of couples who are in cohabiting relationships .