what do members vine about ? the use of vine by members of congress is an evolving phenomenon . as members continue to embrace new technologies , their use of social media applications , like vine and other platforms , may increase . vine allows members to communicate directly with constituents ( and others ) in a potentially interactive way that is not always possible using more traditional modes of communication . for members and their staff , the ability to transmit real time information through videos and pictures , and observe how that information is shared across the internet , could be influential for issue prioritization , policy decisions , and voting behavior . unlike other forms of social media such as twitter , vine's emphasis is on visual instead of written communication . whereas twitter's focus is on communicating short bursts of information in 140 characters or fewer , vine has the ability to translate those written thoughts into short series of pictures or videos that could potentially allow members of congress to disseminate their messages more effectively . one strength of social media , including vine , is the potential for posts to go "viral," which would allow members to communicate policy ideas , stake out positions , or announce events to an audience potentially far wider than just their followers . further , vine allows for a clear distinction between member and staff postings . twitter , and other text - centric social media platforms , can obscure whether posts are coming directly from a representative or senator or from a staff member . to combat this problem , some offices have the member sign his or her tweets , often with initials , to indicate that the post came directly from the member . for vine , this process can be straightforward because a member can appear on camera to deliver his or her message directly . if the member does not appear in the vine , then the public may assume that staff posted the message . even with the ability to provide short video contents , vine is currently not nearly as popular as twitter or many other social media sites . while specific analysis on the percentage of adults using vine is not currently available , the pew internet research project conducted a study on the use of vine - like applications to watch videos on smartphones and the web . the pew project found that "... apps such as vine are emerging which allow users to easily record and share short videos . among online video consumers , 17% say they watch videos using a cell phone app like vine . and among online video posters , 23% say that they have posted a video using this kind of app. the use of video sharing applications is becoming more popular . consequently , the opportunities for members of congress to use these applications and websites to disseminate public policy positions and constituent services information are also increasing . how members use social media continues to evolve . some reports have suggested that members are dedicating additional staff ( or hiring new staff ) to handle social media as part of their messaging and communications strategy .