according to s.rept . 115-282 , the senate committee bill would provide $47.7 million for el salvador and $254.7 million for carsi . the assistance would be provided under the same terms and conditions as the assistance appropriated in fy2018 . according to h.rept . 115-829 , the house appropriations committee's bill would provide up to $595 million for the u.s. strategy for engagement in central america , but it does not specify an aid amount for el salvador . a full - year appropriations measure has yet to be enacted , but a continuing resolution ( p.l . 115-245 ) , signed by president trump on september 28 , 2018 , continues to provide assistance at the fy2018 level until december 7 , 2018 . el salvador signed a second $277 million compact on september 30 , 2014 , to focus on improving transportation infrastructure , employment opportunities , and the investment climate . the salvadoran government committed to match that contribution with $88 million in complementary investments . key compact projects include the following: investment climate project ( $42 million mcc funds / $50 million salvadoran funds ) : seeks to help the government develop and implement regulatory improvements and to better partner with private investors to build infrastructure and provide public services . human capital project ( $100.7 million mcc funds / $15 million salvadoran funds ) : supports full - day schooling ; reforms to the policies and operations that govern teacher training and student assessment ; and a new technical , vocational , education , and training system that is aligned with labor market demands . logistical infrastructure project ( $109.6 million mcc funds / $15.7 million salvadoran funds ) : will widen the part of el salvador's coastal highway that connects the airport and the ports of la unión and acajutla and improve border crossing facilities into honduras at el amatillo . in response to some lingering concerns expressed by board members , the salvadoran government designed a priority action plan that was then agreed to by both governments to be completed prior to the compact's signing . the action plan required the salvadoran government to ( 1 ) appoint a director and deputy director to a newly established financial crimes investigation unit in the police ; ( 2 ) approve an asset forfeiture law ; ( 3 ) approve reformed anti - money - laundering legislation that meets international standards ; ( 4 ) approve reforms to the country's public - private partnership law to make it attractive to investors ; and ( 5 ) issue a revised decree on how corn and bean seed are procured that is consistent with cafta - dr . the fifth condition was subsequently removed . the compact entered into force in september 2015 . dod provides counternarcotics foreign assistance to train , equip , and improve the counternarcotics capabilities of relevant agencies of the salvadoran government with its counternarcotics central transfer account appropriations . dod assistance totaled $6.4 million in fy2016 , $4.7 million in fy2017 , and an estimated $4.5 million in fy2018 . migration is a major issue in u.s. relations with el salvador .