table 1 summarizes these issues . international responses are accelerating , though it remains to be seen how much it will ultimately cost to contain the outbreak and when this will be achieved . the financial requirements for containing the outbreak are rising along with the spread of the outbreak ( figure 7 ) . in march , who estimated that it would take $4.8 million to contain the outbreak . at the end of april , more than 200 evd cases had been discovered in guinea , less than a dozen in liberia , and none in sierra leone . in august , the organization revised its ebola response plan , estimating it would cost roughly $490 million to contain the outbreak . by then , the outbreak had reached sierra leone and nigeria and had caused 3,685 evd cases , including 1,841 deaths . the outbreak is continuing to spread , is causing broader social and economic disruptions , and has infected more than 10,000 people . in september , the united nations ( u.n. ) established the u.n. mission for ebola emergency response ( unmeer ) to coordinate the international response to the outbreak . that month , the united nations security council held a special meeting on ebola , urging member states to expedite support for the affected countries and to contribute to a u.n. integrated ebola response plan . the six - month , $988 million plan calls for addressing the health and social impacts of the outbreak ( table 3 ) . roughly half of the funds would be spent on health programs and the balance would be spent on addressing issues such as food insecurity , economic disruptions , and establishing and maintaining supply chain networks . as of october 29 , 2014 , donors have contributed $493 million towards the un plan and pledged to provide an additional $279 million ( figure 8 ) . donors are also providing resources for addressing the ebola outbreak outside of the un response . the united nations office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs ( unocha ) estimates that some $894 million has been committed for addressing the outbreak and an additional $938 million has been pledged for the immediate and long - term preparedness needs . who and unocha will likely revise their requests for funding and material support as the outbreak continues to spread . the united states is the leading funder of the international ebola response and its financial support is continuing to rise . the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) reports that as of october 22 , u.s. humanitarian funding for evd responses totaled $344.6 million . in addition , the department of defense ( dod ) is planning to spend more than $1 billion on containing the outbreak in support of u.s. evd activities in west africa , as described below . on october 17 , president obama established an ebola czar to coordinate u.s. domestic and global responses to the ebola outbreak . global ebola strategy has four key goals: 1 ) control the outbreak , 2 ) mitigate second order impacts , 3 ) establish coherent leadership and operations , and 4 ) advance global health security .