the halliburton cases illustrate the importance of class certification . the history of the cases leading to the second supreme court halliburton decision is lengthy , spanning more than a decade . thus far , the courts have dealt only with the issue of class certification ; they have not yet had the opportunity to address the merits of the plaintiffs' arguments . the federal district court decision has fleshed out some of the particulars of the supreme court's halliburton ii decision . it approved the use of event studies by both parties to attempt to determine whether alleged misstatements cause a drop in share price . proponents and opponents of securities class actions have actively argued their points . proponents believe that certification requirements must be kept to a minimum because investors should be able easily to pursue companies that have committed fraud . they argue that investor protection benefits both individual investors and the securities markets in general by maintaining the integrity of the marketplace . there have been three rounds of decisions in the federal district court for the northern district of texas and two rounds in the u.s. court of appeals for the fifth circuit and the u.s. supreme court . after its second decision , the supreme court remanded the case for further proceedings consistent with its opinion . the federal district court for the northern district of texas has issued a third decision on class certification after the supreme court's remand . this report will first discuss requirements for securities fraud class action certification and then go through the rounds of the halliburton federal decisions , ending with the third federal district court decision . it appears that over the past thirty years the supreme court has struck something of a middle ground in setting out the parameters for securities fraud class action certification , finding for neither plaintiffs nor defendants in all challenges . the court has held that there must be predominance of common issues of fact or law ( general telephone company of the southwest v. falcon , as affirmed by basic v. levinson ) , a burden which plaintiffs must meet . presuming reliance on material misstatements is allowed under certain circumstances ( basic v. levinson ) , a development opposed by defendants , who have argued for direct reliance . limiting or eliminating proof of materiality at the class certification stage ( amgen , inc. v. connecticut retirement plans ) is another development which defendants opposed . not having to prove loss causation at the class certification stage ( supreme court's first halliburton decision ) was another favorable decision for class action plaintiffs . requiring proof of market efficiency ( basic v. levinson ) is a burden which the plaintiffs may find difficult at times to meet . allowing defendants at the class certification stage to rebut the presumption of reliance ( basic v. levinson ) is a decision which plaintiffs may oppose . in the same way , the supreme court struck a kind of middle ground in its decision of halliburton ii .