below is a summary of each title in h.r . each title addresses a different aspect of california water policy . title i , central valley project water reliability . overall , title i would make numerous changes to management and operation of the federal central valley project ( cvp ) , primarily by amending the central valley project improvement act ( cvpia ) . among other things , it would alter cvpia in the following ways: broaden the purposes for which water previously dedicated to fish and wildlife can be used ( by removing the directive to modify cvp operations to protect fish and wildlife with dedicated fish flows and making this action optional ) ; add to the purposes a provision "to ensure" water dedicated to fish and wildlife purposes is replaced and provided to cvp contactors by the end of 2018 at the lowest "reasonably achievable" cost ; changing the definitions of fish covered by the act ; broaden purposes for which central valley project restoration fund ( cvprf ) monies can be used ; reduce revenues into the cvprf ; mandate that the cvp be operated under a1994 interim agreement , the bay - delta accord ; and mandate development and implementation of a plan to increase cvp water yield by october 1 , 2018 . title ii , san joaquin river restoration . title ii would direct the secretary to cease implementation of the san joaquin river restoration settlement agreement , which was agreed to in 2006 and authorized under the san joaquin river restoration settlement act ( sjrrs ) in 2010 . it would declare that the new legislation satisfies all obligations of the secretary and others to keep in good condition any fish below friant dam , including obligations under the california fish and game code , the state public trust doctrine , and the federal esa . it would also remove the salmon restoration requirement in the sjrrs that was authorized in p.l . title iii , repayment contracts and acceleration of repayment of construction costs . this title would direct the secretary of the interior , upon request from water contractors , to convert utility - type water service contracts to repayment contracts , and then allow accelerated repayment of those outstanding repayment obligations . irrigation repayment obligations for the cvp for 2012 , the last year for which such data are readily available , total approximately $1.18 billion ; municipal & industrial ( m&i ) repayment obligations for 2012 , the last year for which such data are readily available , total approximately $121 million . allowing this accelerated ( or early ) repayment would allow irrigators to be exempt from certain reclamation requirements sooner than under current repayment schedules . title iv , bay - delta watershed water rights preservation and protection . title iv would provide assurances of water rights protections for those with water rights senior to the cvp , including sacramento river valley settlement contractors . it would also direct a new shortage policy for certain north - of - delta cvp water service contracts , which would aim to limit maximum reductions to these supplies . title v , miscellaneous .