see also table 2 . although the 2014 farm bill provided for an increase above current funding levels , total mandatory spending for specialty crops and organic agriculture will still account for a small share of estimated total farm bill spending and will remain well below spending levels for commodity crops . mandatory spending for the major commodity crops is expected to average about $4.7 billion per year under the 2014 farm bill ( fy2014-fy2018 ) , mostly through direct price and income support . this does not reflect additional higher spending for crop insurance . the 2014 farm bill ( agricultural act of 2014 , p.l . 113-79 ) reauthorized and expanded many of the existing farm bill provisions supporting the specialty crop and certified organic sectors , and also provided for additional program funding in some cases . many provisions in title x ( "horticulture" ) fall into the categories of marketing and promotion ; organic certification ; data and information collection ; pest and disease control ; food safety and quality standards ; and local foods . conditions may vary considerably by major production region . specialized fruit and vegetable farms are more concentrated in the western united states , including california , washington , and oregon . some farms also participate in the major commodity support programs , but these tend to be more concentrated in the midwestern states . for some specialty crop producers , obtaining organic certification to sell their products as "organic" represents a viable business strategy . organic agriculture accounts for a small but growing share of the u.s. farming sector . usda reports that farm sales from organic fruit and vegetable operations total more than $1 billion annually , or about 4% of all farm - level fruit and vegetable sales in the united states . ( organic production includes certified organic fruits , vegetables , and tree nuts , as well as meat and dairy foods , and organic commodity crops. ) support for u.s. specialty crops differs in important ways from the types of traditional farm bill support for u.s. commodity crops , such as corn , soybeans , grains and other farm commodities . farm bill programs supporting commodity crop production have been in place since the 1930s , and were intended to address depression - era market conditions , address soil erosion and related production concerns associated with the dust bowl , and implement farmland conservation reforms . in contrast , farm bill support for specialty crops is relatively recent . during the past few farm bill debates , specialty crop producers argued that their sectors should occupy a larger role in farm bill policy discussions and that some of the benefits supporting major commodity producers should be extended to specialty crop and organic producers , in order to create "a broader , more equitable farm bill. several programs addressing specialty crops specifically were initially established in the specialty crops competitiveness act of 2004 ( p.l . 108-465 ) , which was enacted outside a farm bill year . many of the programs in the 2004 act were further expanded and reauthorized in the 2008 farm bill ( food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , p.l .