membership . in september 2011 , palestine submitted an application for membership to u.n. secretary - general ban ki - moon . the secretary - general subsequently submitted it to the security council for consideration . application for u.n . the council's committee on the admission of new members stated that it was "unable to make a unanimous recommendation to the security council" regarding palestine's application . the application remains pending and is unlikely to be considered by the council . the obama administration has stated that the united states would veto any proposed security council resolution recommending palestinian membership . some members of congress , however , have sought to influence u.s. policy on the issue by proposing legislation advocating or opposing the membership of various countries and entities — including israel , montenegro , kosovo , south africa , china / taiwan , and the plo . some members have also introduced legislation calling on the united nations to suspend the membership of any country that does not meet certain criteria . notably , in the mid - 1990s , congress enacted two laws to prohibit funding to the united nations or its affiliated organizations under specific conditions related to internationally recognized attributes of statehood or plo membership in the united nations: s ection 410 of the foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 1994 and 1995 ( p.l . 103-236 ) states that the united states shall not make contributions to "any affiliated organization of the united nations which grants full membership as a state to any organization or group that does not have the internationally recognized attributes of statehood" ; and s ection 414 of the foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 1990 and 1991 ( p.l . 101-246 ) states , "no funds authorized to be appropriated by this act or any other act shall be available for the united nations or any specialized agencies thereof which accords the palestine liberation organization the same standing as member states. the united states currently withholds its voluntary and assessed contributions to unesco in response to the 2011 decision by unesco members to admit palestine as a member . in fy2013 through fy2015 , the president asked congress to provide authority to waive the above - mentioned legislative restrictions ; however , many members of congress appear unwilling to do so . the obama administration has stated that the united states does not intend to withdraw from unesco despite the funding restrictions . in november 2013 , the united states lost its voting rights in the unesco general conference as a result of its withholding of assessed contributions . the 113 th congress has addressed u.n. membership primarily in the context of specific countries — with a particular focus on palestinian membership efforts . for example , the fy2014 foreign operations appropriations bill ( division k of p.l . 113-76 ) prohibits u.s. assistance to the palestinian authority if the palestinians obtain membership in the united nations or u.n. specialized agencies outside of an agreement negotiated between israel and the palestinians . the secretary of state may waive these restrictions if he certifies to the appropriations committees that doing so is in the national security interests of the united states .