carbon dioxide emissions fell over the same period . the use of coal for electricity generation complicates policy efforts to reduce u.s. greenhouse gas emissions . congress has focused on two epa regulatory proposals released in 2013 and 2014 that would limit greenhouse gas emissions from new and existing coal - fired power plants , respectively . some believe the epa efforts to regulate co 2 emissions from coal may affect both the short - and long - term future for coal - fired electricity generation in the united states . also at issue is whether tax incentives should be used to promote investment in clean coal , carbon capture and sequestration , or related technologies . generally , an efficient tax system is one that is free from incentives , where markets dictate where investments are made . there are , however , a number of exceptions to this general case . tax incentives that result in investments that reduce pollution or emissions , for example , can improve the allocation of resources in the economy . tax incentives that lead to investment in emerging technologies with spillover benefits can also improve the economy - wide allocation of resources . there are concerns regarding the structure of the clean coal tax credits , particularly the investment tax credits , where recipients are selected for and credit amounts carved out for specified technologies . another drawback to nearly any form of tax credits is the limited benefit provided to firms that do not pay taxes . for example , a tax on carbon emissions or regulations that otherwise increase the cost of carbon - intensive electricity production would make low - carbon coal options more competitive . electricity produced at facilities equipped with ccs could also benefit from clean energy production and investment credits , such as those proposed by former senate finance committee chairman max baucus . doe notes that its clean coal r&d efforts are focused on developing and demonstrating advanced power generation and carbon capture , utilization , and storage technologies for existing facilities and new fossil - fueled power plants by increasing overall system efficiencies and reducing capital costs . the term clean coal is used here for descriptive purposes only . many issues , not all financial , influence the future of clean coal in the united states . these include the high - risk nature of large , complicated , technology - intensive and as - yet commercially unproven projects that capture and sequester large volumes of co 2 . in addition to the technological challenges , issues such as liability , ownership , and long - term stewardship of the captured co 2 add risk and complexity to large clean coal projects . congress may decide to view loan guarantees and tax incentives within the broader policy context that surrounds clean coal . a question for congress to consider is why no loan guarantees have been issued for clean coal projects , despite several authorizations of appropriations and two solicitations . the most recent solicitation was issued in late 2013 , and information is not publicly available about the number of proposals that may have been submitted pursuant to the most recent solicitation .