congress can also use regular ( i.e. , non - cra ) legislative procedures to disapprove agencies' rules , but such legislation may prove even more difficult to enact than a cra resolution of disapproval ( primarily because of the lack of expedited procedures in the senate ) , and if enacted could be subject to presidential veto . finally , outside the cra , congress has regularly included provisions in the text of agencies' appropriations bills in order to influence the regulatory process . such provisions include prohibitions on the finalization of particular proposed rules , restrictions on certain types of regulatory activity , and restrictions on implementation or enforcement of certain provisions . appropriations provisions can also be used to prompt agencies to issue certain regulations or to require that certain procedures be followed before or after their issuance . the inclusion of regulatory provisions in appropriations legislation as a matter of legislative strategy appears to arise from two factors: ( 1 ) congress's ability via its "power of the purse" to control agency action , and ( 2 ) the fact that appropriations bills are usually considered "must pass" legislation . congress's use of regulatory appropriations restrictions has fluctuated somewhat over time . cra resolutions of disapproval must be presented to the president for signature or veto . for a variety of reasons , however , the cra has been used to disapprove of only one rule in the 18 years since it was enacted . perhaps most notably , it is likely that a president would veto a resolution of disapproval to protect rules developed under his own administration , and it may be difficult for congress to muster the two - thirds vote in both houses needed to overturn the veto . this report's appendix contains a table listing the upcoming proposed and final rules published in the spring 2014 unified agenda . federal regulations generally result from an act of congress and are one significant means by which statutes are implemented . the abstracts presented in the table were taken verbatim from the unified agenda entries . within the proposed and final rule sections of the table , the entries are organized by agency . in comparison to the proposed and final rules previously discussed , it is much less clear when the aca - related long - term actions are expected to occur . in each of the four long - term actions listed , the agencies said that the dates for the actions were "to be determined": an hhs / hrsa proposed rule on "340b civil monetary penalties for manufacturers" ; an hhs / hrsa proposed rule on "340b drug pricing program ; administrative dispute resolution process" ; an hhs / hrsa proposed rule on "340b ceiling price regulations" ; and a dol / ebsa "undetermined" action on "automatic enrollment in health plans of employees of large employers under flsa section 18a. as noted earlier in this report , when federal agencies issue substantive regulations they are carrying out legislative authority delegated to them by congress . therefore , congress often oversees the rules that agencies issue to ensure that they are consistent with congressional intent and various rulemaking requirements .