beneficiaries receive the higher of the two amounts . because of the way regular social security benefits and the special minimum pia are computed , the number of recipients who qualify for the special minimum pia has been decreasing . in 2017 , about 39,347 ( or about 0.6% ) of the 62 million social security recipients qualified for the minimum benefit . this report explains how the special minimum pia functions under current law and provides some historical background on minimum benefit provisions in the social security act . it then presents arguments for and against expanding the special minimum pia , discusses elements to be considered in proposals for change , and describes some specific options for increasing benefits paid to people with low earnings or low income . to be eligible for a social security retired - worker benefit , a worker generally needs 40 earnings credits ( also called quarters of coverage ) . a worker may earn up to four earnings credits per calendar year . in 2018 , a worker earns one credit for each $1,320 of covered earnings ( i.e. , earnings subject to social security payroll taxes ) , up to a maximum of four credits for covered earnings of $5,280 or more . the primary insurance amoun t ( pia ) is the benefit a worker would receive if the worker elects to begin receiving retirement benefits at the worker's full retirement age ( fra , sometimes called the normal retirement age ) . the pia is based on a summary measure of the worker's lifetime earnings , called the average indexed monthly earnings ( aime ) . to compute a worker's aime , the worker's earnings are converted into current - dollar terms by indexing each year of earnings to historical wage growth , and the sum of the highest 35 years of indexed earnings are divided by 35 to determine career - average annual earnings . this amount is then divided by 12 , to get a monthly amount . if a worker has fewer than 35 years of covered earnings ( because of time out of the labor force for family caregiving , spells of unemployment , or other reasons ) , years of no earnings are entered as zeros . next , the standard social security benefit formula is applied to the worker's aime to get the pia . two dollar thresholds , known as bend points , are used to divide the worker's aime into three segments ; in 2018 , the two bend points are $895 and $5,397 . three conversion factors — 90% , 32% , and 15% — are applied to the three different segments of the worker's aime to compute the basic monthly benefit ; 90% is applied to the $0-$895 segment , 32% to the $895-$5,397 segment , and 15% to the over - $5,397 segment . because the lower conversion factors apply to higher earnings segment , the benefit formula is progressive . that is , it replaces a higher percentage of the pre - retirement earnings of workers with low career - average earnings than for workers with high career - average earnings .