appendix a . the most recent reauthorization was p.l . the idea's 1986 reauthorization added a new part related to infants and toddlers with disabilities . known originally as part h but later changed to part c , this addition extended idea programs to infants and toddlers with disabilities from birth to their third birthdays , when children become eligible for services under part b of the idea . in 1986 , congress recognized "an urgent and substantial need" to enhance the development of infants and toddlers with disabilities and to minimize their potential for developmental delay ; reduce the educational costs to our society , including our nation's schools , by minimizing the need for special education and related services after infants and toddlers with disabilities reach school age ; minimize the likelihood of institutionalization of individuals with disabilities and maximize the potential for their independent living in society ; and enhance the capacity of families to meet the special needs of their infants and toddlers with disabilities . with the exception of two additions , the congressional findings are virtually unchanged in the current authorization of the idea . congress now recognizes "the significant brain development that occurs during a child's first 3 years of life," as a reason part c of the idea is needed , and specifies part c's intent to "enhance the capacity of state and local agencies and service providers to identify , evaluate , and meet the needs of all children , particularly minority , low - income , inner city , and rural children , and infants and toddlers in foster care. all states and eligible territories are currently participating in the part c program . in order to participate in the part c , grants to infants and families program , each state must meet the requirements contained in the current idea statute and regulations , which include but are not limited to assuring that every eligible child and family will have early intervention available to them ; designating a lead agency to administer and supervise the part c program and appointing an interagency coordinating council ( icc ) that includes parents of infants and toddlers with disabilities , early intervention service providers , and employees of relevant state agencies to advise and assist the lead agency ; and specifying the policies and procedures that will be implemented to ensure the required components of the comprehensive statewide early intervention system are enacted . early intervention ( ei ) is designed to ensure that all infants and toddlers with diagnosed disabilities or developmental delays are identified and evaluated and have an individualized plan developed to meet their and their families' unique needs . this section of the report addresses ( 1 ) criteria infants and toddlers must meet to receive services under part c of the idea , ( 2 ) how young children are identified and evaluated for early intervention services , and ( 3 ) the procedures for developing an individualized plan to provide services . procedural safeguards are provisions protecting the rights of parents of infants and toddlers with disabilities and the infants and toddlers themselves regarding appropriate early intervention services .