if not , what can be done to provide it ? the plutonium for each pit required ac . because currently - anticipated rates do not approach that level , the nuclear weapons complex has a considerable amount of excess space and mar suitable for ac . this area also recovers and purifies plutonium using high - temperature chemical processes . at issue: how much ac should be done at lanl , what is needed to make the space and mar at lanl sufficient to support that amount of ac , and how much , if any , ac should be done at other sites ? this appendix explains the tasks included in the diagrams of pf - 4 and , in so doing , explains what pf - 4 does . analytical chemistry ( ac ) analyzes plutonium samples taken from each pit at various stages in its manufacture . ac measures the isotopic composition of the plutonium and the amount of alloying materials and impurities a sample contains . none came to fruition . for example , in the fy2006 budget cycle , congress eliminated funding for the modern pit facility , which was to have a capacity between 125 and 450 ppy , and in its fy2013 budget request the administration "deferred" a facility that would have conducted operations in support of pit production "for at least five years. that facility appears unlikely to proceed . indeed , pf - 4 , which opened for operations in 1978 , is the last u.s. plutonium processing building to come online . as of june 2014 , nnsa had the capacity to manufacture about 10 non - war reserve pits per year in pf - 4 . ( war reserve ( wr ) pits are those judged acceptable for use in the nuclear stockpile . other pits are manufactured for such purposes as development or process qualification. ) however , with most work at pf - 4 halted in june 2013 , the actual manufacturing rate in june 2014 was zero for pits of any type ; work is resuming at the end of june 2014 . further , the capacity to manufacture wr pits was zero: since there was no requirement to manufacture wr pits , some processes needed to certify pits as wr had been suspended after the previous wr build of w88 pits was completed in fy2011 . nnsa anticipates manufacturing a few pits a year in the near future to prepare to manufacture wr pits . the schedule for ramping up pit production is uncertain . a department of defense ( dod ) official stated in 2013 that "there is no daylight between the department of energy and the department of defense on the need for both a near - term pit manufacturing capacity of 10 to 20 and then 30 by 2021 , and then in the longer term for a capacity of 50 to 80 per year. also in 2013 , a national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) document stated , "preliminary plans call for pit production of potentially up to 80 pits per year starting as early as fy 2030. .