the report will not be updated . this report was funded , in part , by a grant from the joyce foundation . this report provides an assessment of current and emerging water procurement and management technologies and practices related to shale energy development in the united states . water resource management issues associated with shale energy development are of concern to policy makers because shale energy represents an opportunity as well as a challenge . shale oil and natural gas present significant new energy resources , but their development also may pose risks to water quality and other water uses . the intersection of evolving technology , environmental protection , hydrocarbon energy demand , and national and geopolitical energy and trade interests provide the context for this study . shale gas and shale oil ( collectively referred to as shale energy ) , which were long considered "unconventional" hydrocarbon resources , are now experiencing significant development in the united states . shale oil and gas represent substantial fossil fuel resources for heating , electricity generation , transportation fuel , and industrial use . economical extraction relies on directional drilling and hydraulic fracturing ( "fracking" ) . this well - completion technique involves the injection of large volumes of water , along with water - conditioning chemicals and sand or other proppants , to pressurize and fracture shale formations to increase reservoir permeability . the proppant holds the fracture open , allowing gas and oil to move to the well bore . a portion of the injected water , commonly referred to as "flowback," and naturally occurring water from the shale formation itself , referred to as "produced water," then return to the surface with the oil and / or gas . for the purposes of this report , the combination of flowback and produced water , unless distinguished separately , will be referred to as "produced fluids. the term "wastewater" is also used , and includes produced fluids as described above , but may also contain other fluids produced during the drilling and development of shale energy wells . the current level of freshwater used for fracturing and the management ( reuse or disposal ) of the produced fluids from the extraction are seen by some stakeholders as limiting factors in shale energy development . shale energy development also poses the potential for contamination of surface water and groundwater resources through multiple pathways: accidental surface spills of chemicals used in hydraulic fracturing ; accidental spill of wastewaters from well operations ; improper disposal of wastewaters ; well fluids leaking from valves and casings , including uncontrolled blowouts ; and leakage and migration of gas and fluids at wells ( eg , improper well construction ) . while some of these concerns are specific to shale development , others are common to most energy development activities . however , the large volumes of fluids , chemicals , and injection pressures associated with high - volume hydraulic fracturing have posed new well development and wastewater management challenges for the industry and regulators .