bush presidency ( +1.2% ) . bush presidency is the only one of the three for which the percentage of both vacant circuit and district court judgeships increased ( albeit slightly for circuit judgeships ) from january 1 of his fifth year in office to june 30 of his sixth year . although the senate has , as of june 30 , 2014 , confirmed 78 district court nominees during president obama's second term ( compared to 32 and 53 district court nominees confirmed , respectively , as of june 30 , during the second terms of presidents g.w . bush and clinton ) , the district court vacancy rate has declined by less than two percentage points from january 1 of president obama's fifth year in office to june 30 of this sixth year . this is due , in part , to the number of relatively new district court vacancies occurring since january 1 , 2014 . of the 49 district court judgeships that were vacant as of june 30 , 2014 , 16 ( 32.7% ) became vacant after january 1 of this year . this report does not analyze or take a position on the pace by which it would be appropriate for the senate to confirm a president's judicial nominees . the percentage of vacant circuit and district court judgeships varies over the course of a presidency and is affected , in part , by the pace at which a president selects nominees for vacancies as well as the speed by which the senate considers a president's nominees . the number of vacancies that exists during a presidency might also affect the statistics discussed in the two preceding sections ( i.e. bush , and clinton , ( 1 ) the percentage of u.s. circuit and district court judgeships vacant on january 1 of a president's fifth year in office ; ( 2 ) the percentage of such judgeships vacant on june 30 of a president's sixth year in office ; and ( 3 ) the change in the percentage of vacant u.s. circuit and district court judgeships from january 1 of a president's fifth year to june 30 of his sixth year . note that a negative value in the "change" column means that the vacancy rate declined as a result of fewer judgeships being vacant on june 30 of a president's sixth year in office than on january 1 of his fifth year . table 2 reveals that the percentage of circuit court judgeships that were vacant at the beginning of a president's fifth year in office was greatest during the clinton presidency ( 12.8% ) . as of june 30 of a president's sixth year in office , the percentage of circuit court vacancies was also greatest during the clinton presidency ( 10.6% ) . for presidents clinton and obama , there was a smaller percentage of vacant judgeships on june 30 of each president's sixth year in office than on january 1 of his fifth year in office . the percentage of vacant judgeships declined the most for president obama , falling 3.3 percentage points from 8.9% to 5.6% .