was it your group ? if this is the case , then a group of no more than several thousand has appointed itself the ruler of over a billion and a half muslims. rather than debate baghdadi's credentials , most muslim critics simply reject the entire premise of an islamic state - led caliphate . in particular , they condemn the group's unilateral announcement of a caliphate without consultation or consensus in the broader muslim community . some jihadist groups , including al qaeda , also have rejected baghdadi's appointment as caliph , arguing that he is simply another military commander and is owed no special loyalty . al qaeda leaders osama bin laden and ayman al zawahiri viewed the late taliban leader mullah omar as the rightful leader of faithful muslims and pledged loyalty ( bay'a ) to him , although their views about the wisdom and legitimacy of declaring a caliphate under his leadership or al qaeda's differ from those of the islamic state . in the wake of mullah omar's death , zawahiri has pledged loyalty to his successors , first to the late mullah akhtar mansoor and then to mawlawi haibatullah akhundzada , urging other muslims to do so . the apparently limited appeal of al qaeda and islamic state demands for leadership recognition suggests that their violent agenda remains popular only among a relatively small , if dangerous , minority of the world's sunni muslims . appendix b . what stabilization assistance might be needed ? who will provide it , for how long , and on what terms ? what should be done to address short and long term risks posed by returning foreign fighters in numerous countries ? what unique challenges do foreign fighter issues pose in various places and what should the u.s. approach be ? does lasting progress against the islamic state depend on durably altering the political dynamics of iraq , syria , and other locations where the islamic state has attracted supporters ? how should the evolving is threat shape overall u.s. policy toward syria and iraq , the provision of assistance to u.s. partners there , and u.s. policies toward displaced persons and stabilization ? what effects might u.s. assistance for government security forces and select subnational actors in the fight against the islamic state have on broader and longer term security and political conditions in various countries of interest ? appendix a . emergence and organizational development roots in iraq and syria the islamic state's direct ideological and organizational roots ( figure a - 1 ) lie in the forces built and led by the late abu musab al zarqawi in iraq from 2002 through 2006 — tawhid wal jihad ( monotheism and jihad ) and al qaeda in the land of the two rivers ( aka al qaeda in iraq , or aq - i ) . zarqawi took advantage of sunni animosity toward u.s. forces and feelings of disenfranchisement at the hands of iraq's shia and kurds to advance a uniquely sectarian agenda that differed from al qaeda's in important ways . some experts attribute sunni resentment to the use by some shia of the democratic political process to monopolize political power in iraq .