appendix a . historical funding trends and staffing levels the nixon administration established epa in 1970 in response to growing public concern about environmental pollution , consolidating federal pollution control responsibilities that had been divided among several federal agencies . congress has enacted an increasing number of environmental laws , as well as major amendments to these statutes , over three decades following epa's creation . annual appropriations provide the funds necessary for epa to carry out its responsibilities under these laws , such as the regulation of air and water quality , use of pesticides and toxic substances , management and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes , and cleanup of environmental contamination . epa also awards grants to assist state , tribal , and local governments in controlling pollution in order to comply with federal environmental requirements , and to help fund the implementation and enforcement of federal laws and regulations delegated to the states and tribes . since fy2006 , congress has funded epa programs and activities within the interior , environment , and related agencies annual appropriations bill . the statutory authorization of appropriations for many of the programs and activities administered by epa has expired , but congress has continued to fund them through the appropriations process . although house and senate rules generally do not allow the appropriation of funding that has not been authorized , these rules are subject to points of order and are not self - enforcing . congress may appropriate funding for a program or activity for which the authorization of appropriations has expired , if no member raises a point of order , or the rules are waived for consideration of a particular bill . congress typically has done so to continue the appropriation of funding for epa programs and activities for which the authorization of appropriations has expired , but may opt not to fund an unauthorized program or activity . table a - 1 presents the level of fy2008-fy2014 enacted appropriations for epa by each of the agency's statutory accounts . figure a - 1 presents a history of total discretionary budget authority for epa from fy1976 through fy2014 , as reported by the office of management and budget ( omb ) in the "historical tables" accompanying the president's budget of the u.s. government , fiscal year 2015 . levels of agency budget authority prior to fy1976 were not reported by omb in the historical tables . in figure a - 1 , discretionary budget authority is presented in nominal dollars as reported by omb , and adjusted for inflation by crs to reflect the trend in real dollar values over time . epa's funding over the long term generally has reflected an increase in overall appropriations to fulfill a rising number of statutory responsibilities . epa's historical funding trends tend to parallel the evolution of the agency's responsibilities over time , as congress has enacted legislation to authorize the agency to develop and administer programs and activities in response to a range of environmental issues and concerns . in terms of the overall federal budget , epa's annual appropriations have represented a relatively small portion of the total discretionary federal budget ( just under 1% in recent years ) .