the sec has asked the d.c . circuit court of appeals to rehear the case en banc . with respect to the section 1504 rules , the d.c. district court vacated the rules . the sec has decided not to appeal the decision but , instead , to work on rules which will meet the court's objections . their goal is the transparency of all payments made by resource extraction issuers to governments . concerned about the armed conflicts in the drc and about the need for transparency of resource extraction payments , congress in the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank ) added two sections to deal with these issues . both of the sections require the issuing of regulations by the securities and exchange commission ( sec or commission ) in order to make public the involvement of u.s. companies in conflict minerals and in resource extraction payments . very briefly , section 1502 mandates the sec to issue rules requiring the disclosure by publicly traded companies of the origins of listed conflict minerals . section 1504 mandates sec rules requiring resource extraction issuers to disclose payments made to a foreign government or the federal government for the purpose of the commercial development of oil , natural gas , or minerals . the sec has issued final rules , and court cases have challenged the rules on several grounds . the sec's rules implementing sections 1502 and 1504 of dodd - frank have clearly been controversial . the d.c. district court upheld the rules for section 1502 , but , although it upheld the bulk of the rules and the sec's administrative authority to promulgate them , the d.c . circuit struck down as a violation of the first amendment the part of the rules requiring issuers to describe certain products as having been "not found to be drc conflict free. on july 29 , 2014 , the u.s. district court of appeals for the d.c . circuit , sitting en banc , overruled the panel decision in nam v. sec to the extent that the panel held that a rational basis standard of review could not be applied to the requirements because the requirements were imposed for reasons other than the prevention of consumer deception . upon rehearing the case in light of the en banc court's decision , the panel again struck the rule down under the first amendment . the sec has not yet issued a new rule . as a result of the sec's inaction , oxfam america has filed a lawsuit against the sec in the u.s. district court for the district of massachusetts . the sec has stated that complying with oxfam's timeframe demand for issuing a new rule is not achievable . the u.s. district court for the district of massachusetts has ordered the sec to publish an "expedited schedule" for issuing the rule . the final outcome concerning rules for both sections 1502 and 1504 of dodd - frank is unknown as of the date of this report . congressional hearings , news reports over the past several years , and even the 2006 film blood diamond have brought increased attention to the mining and selling of conflict minerals .