in addition , some fuels are easier to produce than others are . oil companies can meet increasing / decreasing demand for petroleum products , such as gasoline , in three basic ways . they can build or idle refineries , expand or reduce capacity or capacity utilization rates of existing refineries , or they might choose to export or import petroleum products . these three alternatives allow the industry considerable flexibility in meeting changing short - term demand requirements while still allowing for the implementation of their long - term strategy . within this framework , any individual refining company can either buy or sell a refinery to change its market position ; however , this alternative is not available to the industry as a whole . in general , the industry will choose how to meet demand requirements based on which strategy is the most profitable . no new complex refineries have been constructed in the united states since the grayville , la , facility that opened in 1977 . over 150 refineries have closed since 1982 , representing some 1.6 mb / d in lost refining capacity . some have raised questions and concerns about the role of condensates in the market . the domestic market for condensate is somewhat limited , however , and "lease" condensate ( a term applied to outer continental shelf production ) is subject to current export restrictions . since 2008 , the united states has moved from being a net importer of 1.36 mb / d of petroleum products to being a net exporter of 1.39 mb / d in 2013 . this shift from net importer to net exporter in less than five years suggests that the united states does not suffer from a shortage of refining capacity . while domestic demand was met , capacity existed to supply foreign markets . these data suggest that the refining industry has chosen to reduce the number of refineries , increase the capacity of existing refineries , and use foreign markets to meet domestic demands for various petroleum products when it is high and to optimize capacity utilization rates when domestic demand is reduced . two key vehicle and fuel regulatory standards — the coordinated corporate average fuel economy ( cafe ) / green house gas ( ghg ) vehicle emission standards and the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) — have likely affected the refining industry by reducing the consumption of petroleum fuels . compliance with the rfs may also increase the costs for some refiners , as well as present other challenges . as with any industrial facility involving potential air emissions , water use , and waste generation , certain environmental permitting and regulatory requirements apply to the construction and operation of refineries . the specific requirements , and the degree of difficulty or ease in meeting them , will depend not only on the nature of the project , but perhaps more importantly on the location of the project . congress included in the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact 2005 ) a provisions on "refinery revitalization" intended to improve permitting coordination between epa and various federal and state agencies . cracking and coking processing upgrades came at considerable investment costs .