see figure 1 . thus the average obligation rate for this time period was $330 million annually . since the expiration of the advance appropriation , requested and appropriated funding has been less than the authorized amount . for fy2014 , the president requested $250 million "to remain available until expended" for the project bioshield special reserve fund . the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l . 113-76 ) provided $255 million for project bioshield acquisitions to remain available until expended . for fy2015 , the president requests $415 million for project bioshield acquisitions . project bioshield is only one piece of the federal efforts to develop and acquire medical countermeasures to protect against cbrn attacks . homeland security presidential directive 18 ( hspd - 18 ) , medical countermeasures against weapons of mass destruction , and homeland security presidential directive 21 ( hspd - 21 ) , public health and medical preparedness , provide the overall policy framework and strategy for federal efforts to develop and acquire cbrn countermeasures . implementation of the federal countermeasure strategy requires coordinated activities by several separate agencies . the interagency working group , the public health and emergency medical countermeasure enterprise ( phemce ) , is responsible for coordinating these activities to ensure federal countermeasure needs are addressed efficiently . the phemce is headed by the hhs assistant secretary for preparedness and response and includes representatives from the fda , centers for disease control and prevention , national institutes of health , department of defense , department of homeland security , department of agriculture , and department of veterans affairs . as part of the office of the assistant secretary for preparedness and response , the biomedical advanced research and development authority ( barda ) manages and executes project bioshield contracts . the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act ( p.l . 109-417 ) established barda to develop and procure medical countermeasures against cbrn agents , pandemic influenza , and emerging infectious diseases . in addition to supporting countermeasure development through project bioshield , barda can contract with companies to develop and commercialize potential countermeasures . these contracts specify development activities for the company to perform and may extend multiple years . the barda typically uses such contracts to support advanced development of cbrn countermeasures that it has determined are not yet mature enough for a project bioshield acquisition contract . thus , barda has two separate mechanisms to support cbrn countermeasure advanced development and commercialization: countermeasure advanced development contracts and project bioshield acquisition contracts with developmental milestone payments . in theory , hhs can contribute to all phases of a countermeasure's development: basic research supported by the national institutes of health and advanced development and commercialization supported by barda . hhs can purchase countermeasures using project bioshield funds ( through barda ) or the strategic national stockpile funds ( through the centers for disease control and prevention ) . the 113 th congress has enacted two laws with important ramifications for the use and effectiveness of project bioshield: the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness reauthorization act of 2013 ( pahpra , p.l . 113-5 ) and the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 ( p.l .