multiple variables impact u.s. ghg emission levels . one approach often taken in climate change analysis is to examine several broad energy - related factors that influence ghg emission levels , including population , income — measured here as per capita gross domestic product ( gdp ) , energy intensity — measured here as energy use per gross domestic product , and carbon intensity — measured here as co 2 emissions per energy use . as illustrated in the equation below , ghg emission levels can be approximated by multiplying together these four factors . although decreases in population and / or per capita income would contribute to lowering u.s. ghg emissions , policies that would seek to directly limit these emissions drivers are essentially outside the bounds of u.s. public policy . the aeo reference case projection assumes trends that are consistent with historical and current market behavior , technological and demographic changes , and current laws and regulations . thus the most relevant factors in terms of climate change policy are energy intensity and carbon intensity , which are discussed below . accurately forecasting future ghg emission levels is a complex and challenging , if not impossible , endeavor . consequently , analysts often provide a range of emissions based on different scenarios or assumptions . as discussed above , several broad energy - related factors influence emission levels . in addition , other variables have impacts in ways that cannot be accurately predicted . the second section takes a closer look at some of the key factors that influence emission levels . eia provides annual forecasts of co 2 emissions in its annual energy outlook ( aeo ) publications . regarding its various estimates , eia states the following: the projections in the aeo are not statements of what will happen but of what might happen , given assumptions and methodologies . the third section discusses the challenges in making ghg emission projections by comparing observed emissions with preobserved emission estimates . figure 10 compares actual co 2 emissions between 1990 and 2012 with selected eia emission projections made in past years . as figure 1 illustrates , u.s. ghg emissions increased during most of the years between 1990 and 2007 , and then decreased substantially in 2008 and 2009 . although emissions increased in 2010 , levels decreased again in 2011 and 2012 , eventually reaching levels comparable to those in 1995 . by comparison , the more recent projections ( aeo 2012 and 2014 ) indicate that co 2 emissions will remain relatively flat over the next decade . in terms of the president's 2020 emissions target ( 17% below 2005 levels ) , u.s. ghg emissions in 2012 — the most recent year with available ghg emission data — were approximately 10% below 2005 levels . such variables may include technological developments , energy price fluctuations , availability of less carbon - intensive energy sources ( eg , hydroelectric , other renewables , and nuclear power ) , seasonal weather and temperature patterns , and policy changes in the united states and abroad . president obama announced a new policy target to reduce u.s. net ghg emissions by 26% - 28% by 2025 .