the refugee act of 1980 ( p.l . 96-212 ) is widely recognized as having been enacted to bring u.s. domestic law into conformity with the united states' commitments under the protocol . among other things , the refugee act amended section 101 ( a ) ( 42 ) of the ina to define refugee in largely the same terms used by the convention and protocol: the term "refugee" means ... any person who is outside any country of such person's nationality or , in the case of a person having no nationality , is outside any country in which such person last habitually resided , and who is unable or unwilling to return to , and is unable or unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of , that country because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion . the refugee act also added the current sections 207 , 208 , and 209 to the ina , which , respectively , address refugee admissions , the granting of asylum , and the adjustment of refugees' and asylees' status to that of lawfully permanent resident aliens ( lprs ) . the report provides an overview of the basis for asylum in u.s. law . it also discusses how key elements of the ina's definition of refugee have been construed and applied in gang - related asylum cases . the report briefly notes , in relevant places , related forms of relief from removal , such as withholding of removal under section 241 of the ina or the convention against torture and other cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment or punishment , but does not provide a comprehensive treatment of these topics . it is also important to note that many potentially relevant decisions — namely , those by asylum officers within u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) and immigration judges within the executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) at the department of justice ( doj ) — are not published . there are reasons to believe that uscis and eoir may be more receptive to gang - related asylum claims than the decisions by the board of immigration appeals ( bia ) and the federal courts of appeals discussed here . however , uscis and immigration judge decisions are not publicly available in the same way that published bia decisions and federal court decisions are . the ina's current protections for refugees and asylees are grounded in the 1951 convention relating to the status of refugees and the 1967 protocol relating to the status of refugees .