wotc is a nonrefundable credit . 110-28 extended the wotc for three - and - one - half years through august 31 , 2011 , raises the age limit for "designated community residents" to less than 40 years old , and clarifies the definition of vocational rehabilitation referrals . as such , an employer must have tax liability to claim the credit . since the wotc can be claimed in a tax year subsequent to the year of hire , it is possible that an employer that hires a wotc - eligible worker , but does not have tax liability in the year in which the eligible worker was hired , would be able to have the wotc applied to a subsequent tax year in which the employer has tax liability . tax - exempt organizations that employ wotc - eligible veterans may be eligible to claim a credit against the organization's payroll tax liability . the irs and eta forms must be mailed to the state's wotc coordinator within 28 days after the new hire starts working . states then verify that an individual is a member of a covered group and notify the employer that the application has been certified . states receive grants from dol to support the administrative costs of processing wotc certifications . once a new hire is certified , the employer may claim wotc as part of the general business credit . if an employer does not have tax liability in the tax year that the wotc - eligible worker was hired , the credit from the wotc — as part of the general business credit — can be carried back up to one year or carried forward up 20 years before expiring . as noted in each of the two scenarios above , the irs form 8850 must be submitted within 28 days after the eligible hire begins work . definitive data on the usage and costs of the wotc are not available . however , data from dol on workers certified for the wotc and data from the irs on wotc claims by certain entities can offer some insight into usage of the credit . dol tracks the number of individuals who are certified as eligible for the wotc , but , since not every certified worker meets the employment retention requirements , it is likely that the number of individuals on behalf of whom the wotc is claimed is lower . more granular data on the characteristics of employers that claimed the credit or the qualifying characteristics of workers on whose behalf credits were claimed are not available . the primary costs of wotc to the government are foregone tax revenue . estimates of the value of credits claimed are published each year . however , due to employers' ability to apply the wotc to prior or subsequent tax years , these estimates may not fully reflect the level of wotc - based hiring during the reference year . the u.s. employment service in the employment and training administration collects figures on the number of certifications issued to employers . the number of certifications is likely more than the number of employees for whom employers claim credits because not all eligible hires fulfill the retention requirement .