pursuant to p.l . 107-107 , the air force memorial is located at the arlington naval annex near the pentagon in arlington , virginia . the united states air force memorial ( figure 17 ) was constructed on land not covered by the commemorative works act and is not managed by the national park service or the general services administration . in june 2000 , congress authorized the american battle monuments commission to place a plaque at the vietnam veterans memorial "to honor those vietnam veterans who died after their service in the vietnam war , but as a direct result of that service , and whose names are not otherwise eligible for placement on the memorial wall. located at the northeast corner of the plaza surrounding the three serviceman statue at the vietnam war memorial , the plaque ( figure 18 ) is in memory of the soldiers who died as a result of their service in the vietnam war , after the war's conclusion . in october 2009 , in the department of the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations act , 2010 , congress authorized the placement of a plaque to honor senator robert j. dole at the world war ii memorial . the plaque was to "commemorate the extraordinary leadership of senator robert j. dole in making the memorial a reality on the national mall. located on the south side of the world war ii memorial , the dole plaque ( figure 19 ) honors the senator for his contributions to the world war ii memorial on the national mall . figure a - 1 shows a map with the location of commemorative works authorized and dedicated since 1986 . a summary of the work is provided . the report also provides information — located within text boxes for easy reference — on the statute ( s ) authorizing the work ; the authorized organization ; legislative extensions , if any ; the memorial's location ; and the dedication date . a picture of each work is also included . the other 16 authorized commemorative works are either in progress or have a lapsed authorization . table 1 lists the commemorative works authorized and dedicated since 1986 . since 1986 , 19 commemorative works have been completed within the district of columbia and its environs . these memorials honored groups of individuals , such as women who have served in the u.s. military ; veterans from world war ii as well as the korean war ; and individuals including george mason , francis scott key , and mahatma gandhi . for each memorial , a short background and a picture is included . additionally , a text box is provided that includes information on the authorizing statute ; the sponsor organization ; statutory extensions of the sponsor's authorization , if necessary ; the memorial's location ; and the date of dedication . since 1986 , three commemorative works have been authorized by congress for placement within the district of columbia , but were either exempted from a portion of the cwa or were ultimately placed outside of the area defined by the act .