the most recent change was enacted through p.l . 110-28 in 2007 , which increased the minimum wage from $5.15 per hour to its current rate of $7.25 per hour in three steps ( the final step occurring in 2009 ) . states generally have three options in setting their minimum wage policies: ( 1 ) they can set their own minimum wage provisions that differ from those in the flsa , ( 2 ) they can explicitly tie their minimum wage provisions to the flsa , or ( 3 ) they can include no specific minimum wage provisions in state law . this report begins with a brief discussion of flsa minimum wage coverage . it then provides a summary of state minimum wage laws , followed by an examination of rates and mechanisms of adjustments in states with minimum wage levels above the flsa rate ( table 1 provides summary data ) . given the generally broad minimum wage coverage of the flsa , it is likely that most workers in states with minimum wages below the federal rate are covered by the flsa rate . in 2019 , the range of state minimum wage rates is as follows: 29 states and the district of columbia have enacted minimum wage rates above the federal rate of $7.25 per hour ; 2 states have minimum wage rates below the federal rate ; 5 states have no state minimum wage requirement ; and the remaining 14 states have minimum wage rates equal to the federal rate . in the states with no minimum wage requirements or wages lower than the federal minimum wage , only individuals who are not covered by the flsa are subject to those lower rates . the appendix provides detailed information on state minimum wage policy in all 50 states and the district of columbia , including the legislation authorizing the state minimum wage and the relevant legislative language regarding the rate and mechanism of adjustment . the remainder of this report focuses on states with minimum wages above the federal rate . in states with minimum wage rates above the federal rate , variation occurs mainly across two dimensions: the rate and the mechanism of adjustment to the rate . this section ( including data in table 1 ) summarizes these two dimensions for the states with rates currently above the federal minimum . state rates range from $0.25 to $6.75 above the federal rate , with a majority of these states using some sort of inflation measure to index the state minimum wage . because federal and state minimum wages do not change in regular intervals or by regular increments , the number of states and the share of the labor force covered by higher minimum wages changes annually . in general , during periods in which the federal minimum wage remains constant , more states enact higher minimum wages and the share of the workforce for which the federal rate serves as the floor likewise decreases . when the federal rate increases , some state rates become equal to or less than the federal rate .