676 has not yet been filed . therefore , the details of any such suit remain unclear , including the identity of the defendants , the alleged injury , and the relief that may be sought . generally , the doctrine of standing is a threshold procedural question that does not turn on the merits of a plaintiff's complaint , but rather on whether the particular plaintiff has a legal right to a judicial determination on the issues before the court . the law with respect to standing is a mix of both constitutional requirements and prudential considerations . article iii of the constitution specifically limits the exercise of federal judicial power to "cases" and "controversies. accordingly , the courts have "consistently declined to exercise any powers other than those which are strictly judicial in nature. in his public comments prior to introduction of h.res . on august 25 , 2014 , kerry kircher , the general counsel , entered into a contract with bakerhostetler to serve as such outside counsel . david b. rivkin , a partner at bakerhostetler , "will be principally responsible for conducting the litigation on behalf of the [firm and] ... personally will perform a substantial portion of the services contracted for ... " unless terminated at an earlier time , the contract terminates on the earlier date "when a final appealable judgment is rendered in a united states district court ... " or at the expiration of the 113 th congress . at the time of publication , a lawsuit pursuant to h.res . thus , it has been said that "the law of article iii standing is built on a single basic idea — the idea of separation of powers. given this concern for separation of powers , the "standing inquiry [is] especially rigorous when reaching the merits of [a] dispute would force [the court] to decide whether an action taken by one of the other two branches of the federal government was unconstitutional. to satisfy the constitutional standing requirements in article iii , the supreme court imposes three required elements . first , the plaintiff must allege a personal injury - in - fact , which is actual or imminent , concrete , and particularized . second , the injury must be "fairly traceable to the defendant's allegedly unlawful conduct. third , the injury must be "likely to be redressed by the requested relief. in addition to the constitutional questions posed by the doctrine of standing , federal courts also follow a well - developed set of prudential principles that are relevant to a standing inquiry . similar to the constitutional requirements , these limits are "founded in concern about the proper — and properly limited — role of the courts in a democratic society," but are judicially created . unlike their constitutional counterparts , prudential standing requirements "can be modified or abrogated by congress.