procedures for declaration . all requests for a declaration by the president that a major disaster exists shall be made by the governor of the affected state . such a request shall be based on a finding that the disaster is of such severity and magnitude that effective response is beyond the capabilities of the state and the affected local governments and that the federal assistance is necessary . as a part of such request , and as a prerequisite to major disaster assistance under this act , the governor shall take appropriate response action under state law and direct execution of the state's emergency plan . when working openly and with federal and state cooperation , the pda can be an effective and inclusive process . as former washington state emergency management director jim mullen , and then - fema region x director susan reinertson , explained the process for a survey of flood damage in november of 2006: 'joint pda teams will visit and inspect damaged areas , document damage and talk , as needed , with homeowners and local officials,' said mullen . 'it's a partnership effort designed to provide a clear picture of the extent and locations of damage in counties that have reported the most substantial damage to primary homes and businesses. 'the pda teams look at the total scope of damage to establish if recovery is beyond the capabilities and resources of the state and local governments . the assistance authorized by the stafford act can include housing assistance , disaster unemployment assistance , crisis counseling , and other programs intended to address the needs of people . in seeking to assess the impact of a disaster on families and individuals , the factors fema considers include: concentration of damages ; trauma ; special populations ; voluntary agency assistance ; insurance coverage ; and average amount of individual assistance by state . the sria included specific instructions to fema to update the factors considered for individual assistance . one significant argument for manda ting such a review of i a factors is that these factors have not been adjusted since they first appeared in regulation in 1999 . fema is to undertake this review in cooperation with representatives of state , tribal , and local emergency management agencies . the intent of the section is to speed up the declaration process through this review . as of this date , fema has noted that it expects to begin the rulemaking process , regarding ia factors , during 2014 . the disaster declaration process , though subject to inquiry , argument , hearings , studies , and recommendations , has changed very little over time . it remains a process that can be observed and evaluated as it occurs in the area affected by the disaster , and grows opaque as it moves up through layers of fema and dhs management to the white house . by making pda information available , fema has begun to lift the veil on the decisions that are made . congress has demonstrated an interest in this process and has sought to understand its limits and its effectiveness . it serves humanitarian purposes that only the cynical academic could question .