it suggests a lack of coordination between the financial and program management of federal grants . these provisions include requiring federal awarding agencies to designate a senior agency official to oversee the audit resolution process and additional changes to audit resolution practices . because the reform of the omb grant guidance is a recent occurrence , it is unclear how the changes in guidance to federal agencies regarding federal grant closeouts and audit requirements may affect delayed closeout . in addition to consolidating the circulars , the final guidance requires federal agencies to provide grant recipients with clear performance goals , indicators , and milestones , includes a new provision on internal controls , and expands guidance on grant closeout requirements . the final guidance consolidates circulars that regulate cost principles for grant recipients , including general principles for determining allowable costs , cost allocation plans , and indirect costs . the final guidance included new provisions relating to the audit requirements . congressional interest in oversight of the financial aspects of federal grants is evident in at least six key legislative efforts to reform the federal financial management structure: the budget and accounting act of 1921 ( p.l . 67-13 ) , the single audit act of 1984 ( p.l . 98-502 ) , the chief financial officers act of 1990 ( p.l . 101-576 ) , the federal financial assistance management improvement act of 1999 ( p.l . 106-107 ) , the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 ( p.l . 109-282 ) , and the digital accountability and transparency act of 2014 ( p.l . with these laws , congress created a framework for government - wide leadership roles in federal financial management , established uniform requirements for audits of federal grants , and reformed federal financial management systems to create a financial leadership structure within federal agencies in an effort to ensure efficient management of federal funds . budget and accounting act of 1921 among other things , the budget and accounting act of 1921 , as amended and currently codified in title 31 of the u.s. code , created the general accounting office , now known as the government accountability office , to evaluate , investigate , and audit federal funds , including federal grant funds . single audit act of 1984 the single audit act of 1984 , as amended , establishes uniform audit requirements for recipients of federal grant funds . the single audit act sought to promote sound financial management , establish uniform requirements for audits of federal awards , promote efficient and effective use of audit resources , reduce the burden on state , local , and tribal governments , and ensure that federal departments and agencies rely upon and use the audit work . the act allowed grant recipients to consolidate financial reviews into a single audit rather than conduct individual reviews for each federal grant award . omb is tasked with developing policies , procedures , and guidelines for single audits . audit findings are a critical activity in the financial monitoring of federal grants and can provide information to evaluate whether grant funds were used appropriately .