there are some exceptions , however . this depends on the type of assistance being provided by the forest service . fmag assistance is not generally available in conjunction with emergency suppression assistance from the forest service , or any other federal agency engaged in suppression operations . fmags provide assistance for suppression operations on nonfederal lands , whereas suppression operations on federal lands are the responsibility of the federal agency with jurisdiction . limited exceptions may occur for declared fires on lands in which the ownership is comingled federal and nonfederal , and the costs incurred by the eligible entity are not entitled to any other type of federal reimbursement . however , fmags may be provided in conjunction with other forest service assistance programs , such as any technical and financial assistance provided through the agency's state and volunteer fire assistance programs or state and private forestry office . fmag and other federal assistance may potentially occur in conjunction when there is a cooperative agreement between federal , state , and other governmental or tribal partners to coordinate emergency wildfire protection and response activities . the cooperative agreement often delineates different geographic areas where the state government is responsible for initial suppression operations , regardless of land ownership , and vice versa , where the federal government may be responsible for providing suppression operations in lands under nonfederal ownership . the current fmag system was established by regulation in october of 2001 . these grants provide federal assistance for fire suppression activities . this authority has been delegated to the federal emergency management agency's ( fema's ) regional administrators . once issued , the fmag declaration authorizes various forms of federal assistance such as the provision of equipment , personnel , and grants to state , local , and tribal governments for the control , management , and mitigation of any fire on certain public or private forest land or grassland that might become a major disaster . this federal assistance requires a cost - sharing component such that state , local , and tribal governments are responsible for 25% of the expenses . this report discusses the most frequently asked questions received by the congressional research service on fmags . it addresses questions regarding how fmags are requested , how requests are evaluated using thresholds , and the types of assistance provided under an fmag declaration . fema assistance through fmags is a direct relationship with the states to assist the state in fighting the fire on state lands . fmags are employed so a disaster declaration may not be necessary . the forest service and other federal agencies do provide other types of assistance related to wildfire management , such as postfire recovery assistance , or assistance planning and mitigating the potential risk from future wildfires . most of these programs provide financial and technical assistance to state partners . in addition , other usda agencies administer various other programs to provide disaster recovery assistance to nonfederal forest landowners , including the emergency forest restoration program and the emergency watershed program . the cooperative agreements ( sometimes referred to as "fire compacts" ) specify how costs are to be apportioned among the partners , including provisions allowing for reimbursement , in accordance with applicable federal and state statutes .