a nomination may be withdrawn for a variety of reasons . it might , for example , be withdrawn because prospects for its confirmation are viewed as unfavorable ; there is no longer presidential support for it ; the nominee has requested the withdrawal ; or the president wishes to re - nominate the nominee to a different judgeship . ( the president does this by transmitting to the senate a message of withdrawal. ) typically , during a presidency , only a small number of circuit or district court nominations are withdrawn . under senate rule xxxi , paragraph 6 , all pending nominations ( whether in committee or on the executive calendar ) are returned to the president when the senate adjourns sine die at the end of a session or when it recesses for more than 30 days . the return of a nomination to the president marks its end point in the appointment process , with its final status that of an unconfirmed nomination . however , nominations sometimes are not returned , if the senate elects to waive the above rule . further , even when a nomination is returned , the president has the option of re - nominating ( i.e. , sending to the senate a new nomination of ) the person in question , and this option is often exercised . how far along in the confirmation process they progress will vary . some may not receive any committee consideration , while others might advance through part but not all of the committee stage ( for example , receiving a hearing without being reported ) ; still others , after being reported by committee , may be placed on the executive calendar without , however , receiving senate floor consideration , or in other cases receive floor consideration but not a vote on confirmation . a variety of factors might play a part in a nomination's failure to advance farther , including the extent of members' support for , or opposition to , the nomination and scheduling considerations and competing demands on the judiciary committee's or the senate's time ( often problematic for nominations the president sends to the senate relatively late in a congress ) . for judicial nominations that fail to be confirmed , the appointment process ends with one of three possible steps — rejection by the senate ( very rare ) , withdrawal of a nomination by the president ( occasional , but infrequent ) , and ( by far the most common occurrence ) senate return of the nomination to the president at the end of a session , at the end of the congress , or upon a recess of more than 30 days . although the appointment process is finished for such nominations , the president ( or a successor president ) is not precluded from re - nominating a person . in fact , when a circuit or district court nomination is returned , the nominee often is re - nominated and eventually confirmed . a lower court nomination , after advancing through nearly the entire confirmation process , only very rarely is then rejected by the full senate .