thus , the va can deny the claim only if the preponderance of the evidence is against the claimant . regulations provide that when reasonable doubt arises , such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant . therefore , if a claimant provides medical evidence that shows that it is as likely as not that there is a connection between an in - service injury and the claimant's current disability , the va shall award the claimant the benefits sought . another unique aspect of the va benefits system is that the standard of proof is pro - claimant . [t]his court [has] recognized that a unique standard of proof – the "benefit of the doubt" – applies in decisions involving claims for veteran's benefits . the board commits error only in failing to discuss a theory of entitlement that was raised either by the appellant or by the evidence of record . this standard is generous to veterans but respects the reality that the secretary does not have the resources to investigate sua sponte every conceivable unsupported theory of entitlement . the claimant need not show by a preponderance of the evidence that he is entitled to benefits — instead , the law provides that "[w]hen there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination , the va shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. the cavc described the standard of proof in donnellan v. shinseki : the standard of proof refers to the evidentiary threshold a litigant must satisfy in order to prevail on his claim . the cavc has stated the following: [w]e conclude that the board is not required sua sponte to raise and reject all possible theories of entitlement in order to render a valid opinion . the "benefit of the doubt" standard , which is at the farthest end of the spectrum of the various standards of proof in american legal jurisprudence , was enacted by congress in keeping with the high esteem in which our nation holds those who have served in the armed serves . the "benefit of the doubt" standard applies when the positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of a veteran's claim for benefits are in approximate balance . when such equipoise exists , the veteran must prevail on the merits of his claim . therefore , a veteran need only demonstrate that there is an approximate balance of evidence in order to prevail on his claim . a claim for veterans benefits may only be denied when the preponderance of evidence is against a claim . the va must consider those arguments even if the claimant is unaware of the potential claim . the va has a "duty to assist" the claimant throughout the claim process . the department of veterans affairs ( va ) provides an array of benefits to veterans and to certain members of their families . these benefits include disability compensation and pensions , education benefits , survivor benefits , medical treatment , life insurance , vocational rehabilitation , and burial and memorial benefits .