among other features , p.l . all of the other approved cases were for unaccompanied children apprehended in prior years . as a consequence , the orr's refugee school impact aid program would not be a major source of funding unless congress amended the law to include all , or additional classes of , unaccompanied alien children among those eligible for the assistance . it is not intended to provide a comprehensive review of all programs that could potentially serve these children . 96-422 authorized special impact aid to leas for the education of cuban , haitian , and indochinese children who had sought refuge in the united states . the first is the emergency immigrant education act ( eiea ) , which preceded the english language acquisition program . the second is the temporary emergency impact aid for displaced students program , which was enacted following hurricanes katrina and rita to provide aid to states that enrolled elementary and secondary students who were displaced as a result of the storms . this program has been of particular interest to congress because it provided aid on a short - term basis to schools and leas that experienced an unexpected influx of students . the next section of the report provides an overview of the refugee school impact aid program administered by orr , which funds activities aimed at the effective integration and education of refugee children . the last section of the report addresses the challenge of providing funds to leas and schools that are absorbing newly arriving unaccompanied children in light of the lack of local area data on the number of unaccompanied alien children that have been released from orr custody . this section of the report includes orr data on the number of unaccompanied alien children that have been released from orr custody by county and state . there are several existing federal education programs administered by ed that could be used by leas to support the education of unaccompanied alien children upon their arrival and in subsequent years . the three largest programs that are most relevant to serving this student population include title i - a grants to leas authorized under the esea , english language acquisition grants authorized under title iii - a of the esea , and part b grants to states authorized under the idea . these are not the only programs from which unaccompanied alien children could benefit or may be served , but they are some of the largest federal elementary and secondary programs , and given their aims , they may receive consideration as vehicles to provide assistance to schools and leas absorbing unaccompanied alien children . an overview of each program is provided below with a brief explanation of how the program is particularly relevant to unaccompanied alien children .