appendix a . some additional social costs and benefits of marijuana the discussion in the text reported some broader information on the magnitude of the social costs and benefits of marijuana . this appendix discusses some of the components of those social costs . relationship between marijuana and alcohol consumption one of the potential determinants of social costs of marijuana legalization is the relationship between marijuana consumption and alcohol consumption . social costs of alcohol consumption have been well documented in academic studies . if marijuana is a substitute for alcohol , then arguably marijuana has some positive spillover effects on society because marijuana consumption has fewer social costs than alcohol consumption . however , if marijuana is consumed with alcohol , then arguably marijuana results in some negative spillover effects on society . researchers have not reached a consensus on this issue . many economic studies that measure the relationship between marijuana and other substances ( i.e. , cross - price elasticity of demand ) do not capture long - term effects , could be measuring spurious relationships , or examine individuals who might not be representative of the national population . marijuana research is highly regulated in the united states . the national institute on drug abuse , the agency primarily responsible for policy research , has been quoted in media sources that it "does not fund research focused on the potential beneficial medical effects of marijuana. additionally , no study captures the effects of commercial and recreational legalization on the scale of colorado or washington because no other jurisdiction in the world has pursued such policies . this uncertainty surrounding the relationship between alcohol and marijuana use is important because it limits the plausibility that a marijuana tax could be initially levied based on the external costs to society . for example , marijuana legalization could impose significant external costs or savings on society , even if marijuana consumption has a minor effect on the demand for alcohol due to the relatively large external costs of alcohol consumption . initiatives at the state levels in colorado and washington could provide researchers with an opportunity to better understand the effects of broader legalization policies . polydrug use in addition , the social costs of marijuana legalization could vary based on the relationship between the consumption of marijuana and other illicit drugs ( commonly referred to as "polydrug use" ) . studies indicate that marijuana has a lower risk of addiction and abuse than cocaine , crack , or heroin . some claim that marijuana is a "gateway drug" to further illicit drug use . in survey data , about 10% of infrequent marijuana users in the past year report using other illegal drugs whereas the rate for "heavy" marijuana users ( 21-30 days per month ) is slightly more than 25% . driving under the influence current research on the effects of marijuana use on traffic fatalities is limited by methodological and technological shortcomings . as noted earlier , some researchers have used controlled experiments to measure the effects of marijuana use on standard driving measurements , such as ability to track driving lanes . other researchers have studied the extent to which marijuana use has been linked to actual driving fatalities .