these bills — h.r . 2359 , and the obama administration's fy2015 budget — would modify how the credit is calculated , increasing the amount of the credit for childless workers . all of these bills — except h.r . 2359 — would also modify various eligibility rules for the credit , expanding the number of taxpayers eligible to claim it . these legislative changes are summarized below in table 2 and described subsequently in this report . given the significant revisions made to the tax code by this proposal , an evaluation of the eitc in isolation would not accurately reflect how tax liabilities would change for tax filers under the proposal . there are several bills introduced in the 113 th congress that would expand the eitc for workers with qualifying children . several of these bills — h.r . 2320 , and the obama administration's fy2015 budget — would make the larger credit for families with three or more children , enacted temporarily as part of the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l . 111-5 ) , permanent . 2320 would also expand the eitc for tax filers with four , five , six , and seven or more qualifying children . 2116 also includes a provision to enable certain separated spouses with children to claim the credit . finally , s. 2162 includes a proposal that would allow dual - earner couples with at least one child to reduce their earned income if it would result in a larger credit . several bills , including h.r . 2116 , and chairman camp's tax reform proposal , include changes to the eitc that are not solely dependent on whether the eitc claimant does or does not have qualifying children . under current law , individuals who live in u.s. territories ( cnmi , american samoa , the u.s. virgin islands ( usvi ) , guam , and puerto rico ) cannot claim the federal eitc . 4117 would require the secretary of the treasury to transfer revenue to puerto rico and american samoa that would be equal to the total amount of eitc benefits puerto rican and american samoan residents could claim if they were eligible for the credit . this provision would not apply to the other u.s. territories ( including cnmi , usvi , and guam ) . puerto rico and american samoa would be required to provide the u.s. treasury with a plan for how it would distribute the aggregate funds . the legislation does not provide a method or formula that puerto rico and american samoa must use when distributing this money to puerto rican and american samoan residents . under current law , eligible eitc recipients cannot have investment income greater than $3,350 in 2014 . investment income includes interest income ( including tax - exempt interest ) , dividends , net rent , and royalties that are from sources other than the filer's ordinary business activity , net capital gains , and passive income . 2116 would repeal this limitation .