108-173 ) was passed . mma was the first of five laws that reshaped medicaid drug pricing policy . these changes had a number of goals , such as increasing the amount of rebates collected by states and the federal government and strengthening the ability of states and federal policy makers to monitor and enforce compliance . a number of recent changes were made to improve or revise earlier amendments that did not achieve the desired results . prescription drug policies are complicated in part because it is hard to isolate the effects of changes in a dynamic market with many private purchasers and sellers . for medicaid , prescription drug rebates and pricing changes are further complicated because each state has some discretion in how changes are implemented and enforced . this section provides a discussion of major legislative changes to medicaid prescription drug pricing and rebates . table 16 displays a summary of major laws with medicaid drug pricing provisions . this section discusses the following two medicaid prescription drug issues: ( 1 ) new drug prices and ( 2 ) the pending final rule implementing aca changes . in general , ffs rebates have been effective in helping to control medicaid ffs drug expenditures . overall , ffs outpatient drug expenditures have decreased and medicaid is able to buy drugs for lower prices than medicare part d plans and most other federal programs . congress has been instrumental in establishing medicaid drug authority to ensure medicaid pays some of the lowest prescription drug prices . congress authorized creation of the infrastructure to manage , monitor , and enforce prescription drug pricing . congress also extended authority for medicaid to receive rebates on drugs provided to beneficiaries in managed care , and this has resulted in the rapid movement of prescription drug coverage from ffs medicaid to medicaid managed care . these data are nominal and have not been inflation adjusted . this report will be revised as new data and information become available . a number of medicaid drug pricing terms are commonly abbreviated . table 1 displays many of the medicaid drug - related acronyms and abbreviations that appear in this report . in addition , table 2 displays a list of public laws referenced throughout the report , and table e - 1 in appendix e is a glossary of selected medicaid drug terms . medicaid is a federal - state entitlement program that pays for medical services on behalf of certain low - income individuals . the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) administers the medicaid program under authority delegated by the secretary of the department of health and human services ( the secretary ) . estimated fy2013 federal expenditures for medicaid benefits and administration were approximately $262 billion ; state expenditures were estimated to be an additional $192 billion , for a total program cost of approximately $454 billion . state medicaid programs are administered and designed by the states under broad federal guidelines . all states elect to participate in medicaid , so they are required to provide benefits to certain low - income individuals and optionally may cover other individuals . similarly , states must cover certain basic services , but may also cover additional services .