they are discussed more fully below . the last major debate on antipoverty policy occurred in the 1990s , and the overarching policy goal at the time was to reduce welfare dependency and promote work for cash assistance recipients , not explicitly to reduce poverty . that debate produced a set of policies intended to promote work . it established work requirements and time limits for recipients of aid . however , in recognition that work is sometimes not enough to move a person or family out of poverty , the 1990s also expanded policies to "make work pay" though income supports ( eitc and child care subsidies ) . these twin policies — work requirements and "make work pay" — continue today and , particularly with regard to cash welfare , are viewed as being effective in meeting their goal . the current tanf caseload ( 1.7 million families in december 2013 ) is dramatically reduced from its pre - welfare reform high ( 5.1 million families on the afdc rolls in march 1994 ) . these policies are generally limited to families with children and have focused particularly on single mothers with children , who have been the traditional target group for cash welfare programs ( i.e. , afdc and tanf ) . the policy consensus created in the mid - 1990s has been challenged by events that correspond to the deep recession of 2007-2009 and its aftermath . although tanf rolls grew only modestly during the recession and have since declined , the poverty rate — which was increasing even before the downturn — rose sharply during the recession ( see figure 1 ) . the caseload size and cost of the snap program — which also were growing before the recession — rose to record levels . five years after the end of the recession , overall unemployment rates have come down , but poverty rates and snap caseloads remain high . as noted earlier in this report , longer - term changes have occurred in both the demographic makeup of the nation and the structure of the economy , including an increasing share of the population and workforce that is foreign - born , growth of suburban poverty , a decline in manufacturing jobs and growth in the lower - paying service sector , and declining employment among youths and young adults . attention also has turned toward men , and adults without children , as populations that may need support , with a particular focus on men who have been incarcerated and may face barriers when they re - enter the workforce . current proposals to address poverty are shaped by recent trends , but also echo many of the recurring themes of past debates . for example , with regard to the question of universal versus targeted initiatives , most current proposals are focused on low - income populations , although policies supported by the obama administration and congressional democrats include some universal elements ( eg , minimum wage increase and aspirations for universal pre - kindergarten ) . the pathways out of poverty act revives the concept of direct government job - creation ( the "employment strategy" ) through new programs that would subsidize employment for low - income adults and youth .