that view still prevails . a completed offense is a prerequisite to conviction for aiding and abetting , but the hands - on offender need be neither named nor convicted . as a general rule , the defendant's aiding and abetting must come before or at the time of the offense . assistance given after the crime has occurred is a separate , less severely punished , offense — acting as an accessory after the fact . ( b ) whoever willfully causes an act to be done which if directly performed by him or another would be an offense against the united states , is punishable as a principal . although the words "commands , induces or procures" in §2 ( a ) would seem to capture crimes committed through an agent , as the 1948 report explained the language of §2 ( b ) leaves no doubt . section 2 ( b ) applies to defendants who work through either witting or unwitting intermediaries , through the guilty or the innocent . whether the intermediary is a subordinate or an undercover government agent , he may be well aware that his conduct constitutes an element of the underlying offense . on the other hand , whether the intermediary is a dupe or a facilitating governmental official , §2 ( b ) also applies even if he is unaware of the nature of his conduct . when the intermediary is an innocent party , no one but the "causing" individual need commit the underlying offense . yet there must be an underlying crime . section 2 ( b ) imposes no liability unless the actions of the defendant and his intermediary , taken together , constitute an offense . congress gave little indication of its purpose when it changed "causes" to "willfully causes," in 1951 . the amendment originated in the senate judiciary committee , after the house had passed its version of the bill . the committee report explained why it changed "is a principal" to "is punishable as a principal," but said nothing about why it added the word "willfully. there has been some speculation that the word "willfully" was added to address an observation by judge learned hand . judge hand had observed that §2 ( a ) had a mental element ( "knowing" ) , but that §2 ( b ) had no comparable element . in any event and although it seems far from certain , it appears that the courts understand "willfully" to mean a dual form of "intentionally. they believe that an individual "willfully" causes an offense when he intends the commission of conduct that constitutes a crime and then intentionally uses someone else to commit it . an individual may incur liability under §2 ( b ) even if he is unaware that the underlying conduct is in fact a crime . federal courts sometimes mention a withdrawal defense comparable to one available in conspiracy cases . in conspiracy , withdrawal is not a defense for conspiracy itself but only for the crimes committed in foreseeable furtherance of the scheme after the defendant's withdrawal .