such an outcome could jeopardize a number of u.s. interests . the democratically elected government of prime minister nawaz sharif , seated in may 2013 , has come under strident , highly visible criticism from two opposition figures and their followers: imran khan , leader of the pakistan tehreek - e - insaf ( pti ) , parliament's second - largest opposition party ; and tahir - ul - qadri and his pakistan awami tehreek ( pat ) party . hashmi went on flatly to blame khan for any imposition of martial law . the united states has taken an interest in assisting the creation of a more stable , democratic , and prosperous pakistan that is actively combating religious militancy . this has been among the most important u.s. foreign policy efforts in the post - 9 / 11 period . many americans believe that the united states has vital interests at stake in u.s. engagement with pakistan . these are related to regional and global terrorism ; efforts to stabilize neighboring afghanistan ; nuclear weapons proliferation ; links between pakistan and indigenous american terrorism ; pakistan - india tensions and conflict ; democratization and human rights protection ; and economic development . as a haven for numerous islamist extremist and terrorist groups , and as the world's most rapid vertical proliferator of nuclear weapons , pakistan presents a combination that places it at the top of many governments' international security agendas . the u.s. government has sought to help in developing pakistan's economy and boosting the effectiveness of its security forces . islamabad has been among the leading recipients of u.s. foreign assistance in the 21 st century , receiving more than $20 billion in overt transfers since 2001 . while such assistance has contributed to some successes , pakistan remains racked by militancy and terrorism , and is suffering through an extended period of inflation , unemployment , and weak economic growth . the history of democracy in pakistan is marked by ongoing tripartite power struggles among presidents , prime ministers , and army chiefs . military regimes have ruled pakistan directly for 34 of the country's 67 years of independence , and observers agree that pakistan has no sustained history of effective constitutionalism or parliamentary democracy . the country has had five constitutions , the most recent ratified in 1973 ( and significantly modified several times since ) . from the earliest days of independence , the country's armed forces have conceived of themselves as "saviors of the nation," a perception that has received significant , though limited , public support . the military , usually acting in tandem with the president , has engaged in three outright seizures of power from elected civilian governments: by general ayub khan in 1958 ; general zia ul - haq in 1977 ; and general pervez musharraf in 1999 . pakistan's most recent national election , in may 2013 , ousted the incumbent , pakistan people's party ( ppp ) - led coalition government headed by then - president asif zardari . the democratic exercise was seen by close observers as having been relatively free and fair , although accusations of vote - rigging were widespread .