relations. the chinese academic literature also blames congress's support for the dalai lama for helping him and his supporters to internationalize the issue of tibet , a development that china equates with "splittism. sections 613 , 617 , 6 20 , and 621: specific u.s. officials tasked with implementing p rovisions of the tpa . these four provisions of the tpa require specific individuals to carry out mandates , as summarized below . does congress see any need to review which individuals are required to carry out specific provisions of the tpa ? should the tasks be required of a broader set of individuals ? or should the individuals tasked in each provision remain unchanged ? in section 613 ( a ) and ( b ) ( 1 ) , the president and the secretary of state alone are required to encourage the chinese government "to enter into a dialogue with the dalai lama or his representatives leading to a negotiated agreement on tibet. the annual reported mandated by the tpa requires reporting exclusively on the president's and the secretary's steps to encourage dialogue . should this be the responsibility of the special coordinator , as indicated in the tpa , or of the president or the secretary of state ? section 614: reporting on tibet . what should be the scope of the annual report required in section 613 ( b ) of the tpa ? should it remain confined to the president and the secretary of state's efforts to encourage dialogue between the prc and representatives of the dalai lama and the status of such dialogue ? should it be expanded to cover implementation of the entire tibetan policy act of 2002 ; all activities of the special coordinator for tibetan issues ; or the full range of activities related to tibet undertaken by the u.s. government , including activities not specifically mandated by the act ? or should the report be eliminated , as proposed in h.r . 4194 , the government reports elimination act of 2014 , as introduced ? if the report is retained , should the legislation require that it be made public ? section 616 ( d ) : economic principles . fear of violating the "tibet project principles" outlined in section 616 ( d ) of the tpa appears to have dissuaded some international financial institutions and such u.s. institutions as the trade development administration from pursuing projects in tibet . does congress see a need to reevaluate the principles ? or does it believe they have served their purpose ? section 615 ( 3 ) and section 621 ( d ) ( 2 ) : elements of tibet's "distinct identity. section 621 ( d ) ( 2 ) requires the special coordinator to promote the policy of seeking to protect "the distinct religious , cultural , linguistic , and national identity of tibet" ( crs emphasis ) . section 615 ( 3 ) directs the congressional - executive commission on china to include in its annual report a description of "measures taken to safeguard tibet's distinct historical , religious , cultural , and linguistic identity" ( crs emphasis ) , adding "historical" and dropping "national. should these provisions be consistent ?