the report concludes with an outlook for u.s. policy . the increased flow of unaccompanied minors from central america to the united states over the past several years has led some policymakers to reevaluate u.s. relations with the region . as members of congress debate potential changes in policy toward central america , they might consider how u.s. policy has influenced the region in the past , the framework for u.s. engagement , and the steps the u.s. government has taken thus far to address mixed migration flows . as congress debates the administration's fy2017 budget request and other legislative options to address the foreign policy dimensions of increased migration from central america , it might take into consideration a variety of interrelated issues . these issues include the humanitarian implications of the current situation , the international humanitarian response , the capacity of central american nations to receive and reintegrate unaccompanied children deported from the united states , the capacity of central american nations to address the root causes of the exodus , and the role of mexico as a transit country . u.s. policymakers continue to face difficult decisions about how to respond to the increase in unaccompanied children and other central americans attempting to enter the united states . u.s. authorities apprehended nearly 52,000 unaccompanied minors from the region in fy2014 , straining u.s. government resources and creating a complex crisis with humanitarian implications . although u.s. apprehensions of unaccompanied children from the northern triangle declined by 45% in fy2015 , they have increased again in the first five months of fy2016 . the obama administration's initial response to the fy2014 surge was focused on efforts to deter irregular migration . it included public awareness campaigns , anti - human smuggling operations , and the establishment of an in - country refugee / parole program in the northern triangle countries . although those initiatives likely have deterred some potential migrants , the mexican government's increased immigration enforcement efforts under the u.s. - backed southern border plan appear to have played the most significant role in preventing central americans from reaching the u.s. border . mexico's increased enforcement efforts have also raised humanitarian concerns , however , as they have pushed migrants to take more dangerous routes to the united states and the m exican government has less capacity than the u.s. government to screen migrants for protection concerns . moreover , the recent increase in u.s. apprehensions suggests that the initial reductions achieved with mexico's southern border plan may not be sustainable . members of congress have expressed significant concerns about the influx of unaccompanied minors and have taken some steps designed to address the situation . this report focuses on the foreign policy dimensions of increased migration from central america . it begins by examining u.s. policy in the region , including a brief historical background , the current policy framework , and the u.s. and regional response to the surge in unaccompanied minors . the report then discusses a variety of issues congress might take into consideration as it continues to formulate policy toward central america .