but the grid is aging and in need of modernization in many areas . the average age of u.s. coal power plants , the mainstay of the industry is about 43 years , and supporting transmission and distribution systems are similarly aging . new technologies and cost structures are now making inroads into u.s. electricity markets and may eventually result in dramatic changes to the industry over the next few decades . the electricity industry is unlike most industries in that the product it produces is important to the functioning of our modern commercial society . produced using economies of scale , electricity has been a fairly inexpensive enabler of national economic activity . but the convergence of many factors — new environmental regulations , an aging electric utility infrastructure , the growing availability of cost - competitive consumer - oriented electricity technologies , and state implementation of policies to advance renewable electricity — is presenting challenges to the electric utility industry while providing consumers with increasing choices for obtaining electric power . an evolution to some version of a new utility 2.0 model capable of providing for customer choice in a clean energy future has been advocated by some as the next logical step for the electric utility industry . the electric utility industry would likely argue that before the united states can shift to utility 2.0 , the obligations of today's utility 1.0 model must be considered in plans to move forward . such obligations would include the unrecovered costs of power plants and other infrastructure , and environmental and public safety obligations related to legacy coal and nuclear power . it may well be assumed that the current electric utility model will continue to evolve . a key to the future is likely to be cost control for many electric utilities , so that utility electricity prices will be competitive with other choices . conversely , as utility customers seek to control their own costs or power - related decisions , the service choices offered to entice them to stay utility customers will probably increase , especially as the dg option becomes potentially more attractive . how some of these factors have and are expected to drive change is discussed in the following paragraphs . the preceding sections have discussed some of the new drivers for technology in the power sector . while the electric utility industry has also seen technological advances over the years , the economies of scale possible with large , central station power generation have discouraged any real change in the industry model . but with aging of this power generation infrastructure , new environmental regulations , the prospect of increased supplies of natural gas for years to come , and the potential development of economic alternative power technologies , electric utilities are facing questions about the near - term future . this section of the report will discuss how change may come to the electric utility industry , and the roles that government may possibly play . the u.s. grid has long been considered as one of the wonders of the last century . the options for electric utilities to satisfy these customers in the future may even include support services for customer self - generation beyond merely providing backup power .