competition and adaptation . al qaeda's attempt to reassert leadership within the jihadist community could place pressure on the group to accelerate the implementation of what it had previously described as long - term goals . others argue that , despite competition and conflict between the islamic state and al qaeda , their shared objectives overshadow their differences , suggesting that in the next five years the two groups could establish some degree of tactical cooperation . despite the heightened focus on the islamic state since its territorial expansion in 2014 , u.s. military and intelligence officials have remained concerned about the threat posed by al qaeda and its affiliated groups , some of which have already attempted attacks inside the united states — notably the multiple foiled airliner attacks attempted by aqap . those concerns are likely to deepen in the aftermath of the islamic state's collapse in iraq and syria and in light of aq affiliates' growth in africa and elsewhere . as policymakers examine the broad landscape of terrorist threats , they may consider whether and how the risks posed to the united states and u.s. interests from the islamic state and al qaeda differ , and how u.s. counterterrorism policy can be best positioned to address and balance both threats . this is a strikingly resilient organization. rasmussen pointed to a number of new trends since 2016 , including the "resurgence of aviation threats , reaching a level of concern that we in the intelligence community have not faced since al qaida in the arabian peninsula's printer package plot in 2010 ... both isis and al qaida - aligned groups have demonstrated a continued capability to conduct aviation attacks. director of national intelligence ( dni ) daniel coats stated to congress in early 2017 that while u.s. and global counterterrorism operations have significantly reduced al qaeda's ability to carry out large - scale attacks inside the united states , al qaeda and its affiliates "remain a significant ct [counterterrorism] threat overseas as they remain focused on exploiting local and regional conflicts. in december 2017 , rasmussen's successor lora shiao described the evolution in aq methods and organization as "evidence of its resiliency" and stated that the group "retains the intent to carry out attacks" against the u.s. and american interests . some observers have challenged these and similar assessments , arguing that successive administrations have "followed the same script , one based on false , costly assumptions" and criticizing the trump administration for adhering to "what has become the standard operating procedure in washington. many of these analyses contend that certain elements of u.s. counterterrorism strategy have the potential to exacerbate the very problem they aim to confront . specifically , they criticize what they view as a disproportionate emphasis on counterterrorism , to the detriment of more fundamental deradicalization efforts . former cia deputy director michael morell was quoted as saying that "for every 100 hours i spent in the situation room talking about how to deal with terrorists that already exist , maybe we spent 10 minutes talking about winning hearts and minds and deradicalization.