a rule of the intelligence committee was similar . calendars were to be provided to each committee member . all these topics might be further divided . for most topics , a summary of the relevant provision or provisions of any senate rule appears first . this summary is followed by an explanation and a comparison of individual committees' rules , which appear in both text and tables . relevant provisions of standing orders applicable to all committees or specific committees , which pertain to legislative or executive business , are also cited . the report is not intended to be read from beginning to end but might be used by chairs , ranking minority members , and committee staff considering amendments to rules , by committee members and their legislative staff seeking to increase their knowledge of committee rules , and by new senators and staff building procedural knowledge . the principal headings in the report are as follows: " subcommittees " " committee meetings " " quorum requirements " " open and closed meetings " " hearing procedures " " oversight " " referral of legislation " " markup procedures " " voting in committee " " reports " " nominations " " foreign relations committee's treaty procedures " " committees' other , related responsibilities " " committee records . a large responsibility of senate committees , not shared with house committees , is their consideration of presidential nominations to executive and judicial positions . under the constitution , the advice and consent authority belongs exclusively to the senate . the foreign relations committee has the unique responsibility among all congressional committees to review treaties submitted by the president and report on them to the senate . under the constitution , the senate solely gives its advice and consent to the ratification of treaties . once the president submits a treaty to the senate , the treaty remains on the committee's calendar , pursuant to committee rule , from congress to congress until action is taken to report the treaty to the senate or to recommend its return to the president or until the senate has discharged the committee from further consideration of the treaty . proceedings on treaties that were reported to the senate but not acted on terminate at the end of a congress ; they resume at the convening of the next congress as if no proceedings had occurred earlier . under the committee's rule , the committee should conduct a public hearing as soon as possible after receiving a treaty from the president . except in extraordinary circumstances , under the committee rules , treaties reported to the senate should be accompanied by a written report . a senate rule requires that all committee hearings , records , data , charts , and files be kept separate from the congressional office records of the chair . committee records are the property of the senate , and all committee members and all senators may have access to them . ( rule xxvi , paragraph 10 ( a ) . ) a rule directs the secretary of the senate to obtain the noncurrent records of each senate committee and transfer them for preservation to the general services administration , subject to orders of the senate .