campus program . this doj , office on violence against women ( ovw ) program provides grants to ihes to adopt comprehensive response to sexual assault , domestic violence , dating violence , and stalking . ferpa ( p.l . 93-380 ) guarantees students access to their education records , while limiting the disclosure of those records to third parties . ferpa privacy protections that extend to an alleged perpetrator , therefore , may conflict at times with the title ix rights afforded to an alleged victim of sexual violence . as noted above , an educational institution is required under title ix to take steps to preserve a complainant's confidentiality if so requested . an alleged perpetrator , however , has the right to review the complaint if it is an educational record within the meaning of ferpa . under such circumstances , an educational institution must provide the alleged harasser with access to the information contained in the complaint but should , to the extent possible , avoid revealing the complainant's name or other identifying information . the supreme court has stated that due process "is a flexible concept that varies with the particular situation," and has made it clear that "something less than a full evidentiary hearing is sufficient prior to adverse administrative action. ultimately , the degree of procedural protection that is due depends on the nature of the individual and governmental interests at stake and varies significantly in the civil and criminal context . it is also important to note that the due process clause applies only to governmental actors , not private entities . thus , public ihes must provide due process protections to students who are subject to disciplinary proceedings , but private ihes are not subject to the same requirement . although it is possible that state statutory or common law due process protections may apply in the private setting , the relationship between private ihes and their students is generally governed by contract law . under this arrangement , a student who accepts an offer of admission to an ihe agrees to abide by a school's rules and policies regarding attendance . such rules and policies , which are generally established at the institution's discretion , may or may not include certain procedural protections for students who violate the school's code of conduct . thus , a private ihe is under no obligation to provide due process rights when sanctioning students unless it has specified that it will do so . however , ed's title ix guidance does clarify that if an educational institution provides procedural rights to one party , such as the right to present witnesses or have an attorney present , then these rights must be available to both parties . likewise , although title ix does not require schools to have a process for appealing disciplinary decisions , the guidance recommends that schools adopt such a process and notes that if an appeals process is provided , it must be made available to both parties . another issue that has arisen under title ix involves questions about whether the current remedies are sufficient .