indeed , . this results from 18 u.s.c . 2 , which visits the same consequences on anyone who orders or assists in the commission of a federal crime . this secondary liability is much like that which accompanies conspiracy , and the rationale is the same for both: society fears the crimes of several more than the crimes of one . at common law as a general rule , felonies were punishable by death . an individual might be guilty of a felony as a principal in the first degree , a principal in the second degree , an accessory before the fact , or an accessory after the fact . a principal in the first degree was he who by his own hand committed the crime . a principle in the second degree was "he who [was] present , aiding , and abetting the fact to be done. an accessory before the fact was "one , who being absent at the time of the crime committed , doth yet procure , counsel , or command another to commit a crime. an accessory after the fact was one who , "knowing a felony to have been committed , receive[d] , relieve[d] , comfort[ed] , or assist[ed] the felon. the common law erected several procedural barriers for the benefit of accessories in felony cases , apparently to shield them from the death penalty . when the first congress convened , it outlawed as capital offenses piracy and related murders and robberies . at the same time , it merged the concepts of principal in the second degree ( those who aided and abetted ) and accessory before the fact ( those who commanded and counseled ) in piracy cases , condemning to death anyone who "knowingly and wittingly aid[ed] and assist[ed] , procure[d] , commanded[ed] , counsel[ed] or advise[d] any person or persons , to do or commit any murder or robbery , or other piracy aforesaid , upon the seas. the revised statutes , the first official codification of federal law , carried the piracy provision forward with slight modifications . it remained for the 1909 codification of federal criminal law to extend coverage beyond a few individual offenses like piracy to the general coverage now found in 18 u.s.c . the commission , established in 1897 to recommend a proposed united states penal code , urged from the beginning the elimination of the common law distinctions between principals and accessories before the fact . congress acted on its recommendation in 1909 . congress carried the 1909 provision forward in its 1948 recodification . it added ยง2 ( b ) , however , to "remove[] all doubt that one who puts in motion or assists in the illegal enterprise or causes the commission of an indispensable element of the offense by an innocent agent or instrumentality , is guilty as a principal even though he intentionally refrained from the direct act constituting the completed offense. three years later , it made the final adjustments to ยง2 as part of a general , housekeeping cleanup of the u.s. code . ( a ) whoever commits an offense against the united states or aids , abets , counsels , commands , induces or procures its commission , is punishable as a principal .