circuit . additionally , osha can seek appeal of an oshrc order . petition for review of an oshrc order , whether by an adversely affected party or osha , must be filed within 60 days of the oshrc order . filing a petition for review of an oshrc order does not stay the order ; the order remains in effect until a court of appeals vacates it . on review , the courts of appeal find oshrc's findings of facts conclusive if the facts are supported by substantial evidence . the alj then issues a written decision . any party adversely affected by the alj's decision can then petition to oshrc for further review . the osh act contains express limitations on its applicability . for example , section 4 ( b ) ( 1 ) of the act provides that the act does not apply "to working conditions of employees with respect to which other federal agencies … exercise statutory authority" over occupational safety and health regulations and standards . congress apparently intended this language to prevent regulatory inefficiency by precluding osha from duplicating worker safety efforts in areas already regulated by other agencies . to that end , health and safety regulations of other agencies that apply to a workplace hazard preempt osha's regulations regarding that hazard . the osh act further expressly limits its applicability by allowing states to control occupational safety and health regulation through state plans . if osha approves of a state plan , which requires , among other things , that the plan provide health and safety protection that is at least as adequate as the protections provided by osha , then the state plan requirements , and not osha's standards and regulations , will apply . finally , the osh act applies only to employment performed in u.s. states and territories , generally does not apply to federal , state , or local government employment , and only applies to employers with employees ( i.e. , it does not apply to self - employed people ) . the osh act contains two primary enforcement provisions , each of which furnishes a unique obligation upon employers . first , section 5 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the act , the so - called "general duty clause," requires all employers , regardless of industry , to provide workplaces that are free of potentially harmful hazards . second , the act mandates employer compliance with osha's workplace safety standards , some of which are industry specific . the general duty clause and osha's workplace safety standards are treated the same for purposes of complaints , inspections , and citations . that is , employers are equally bound to comply with the general duty clause and applicable osha standards and both are similarly enforced through complaints , inspections , and citations . osha bears the burden of showing that an employer has violated the general duty clause or an osha standard by a preponderance of the evidence . additionally , employers cannot be held liable for violations of the general duty clause or an osha standard unless they had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation's existence .