this provision limits the government's power to restrict speech . in 1976 , the supreme court issued its landmark campaign finance ruling in buckley v. vale o . from these general principles , the court concluded that contributions and expenditures facilitate an interchange of ideas , and cannot be regulated as mere conduct unrelated to their underlying act of communication . the court in buckley , however , afforded different degrees of first amendment protection to contributions and expenditures . contribution limits are subject to more lenient review , the court found , because they impose only a marginal restriction on speech and will be upheld if the government can demonstrate that they are a "closely drawn" means of achieving a "sufficiently important" governmental interest . on the other hand , expenditure limits are subject to strict scrutiny because they impose a substantial restraint on speech . that is , limits on expenditures must be narrowly tailored to serve a compelling governmental interest . therefore , in buckley and its progeny , the court has generally upheld limits on contributions , finding that they serve the governmental interest of protecting elections from corruption , while invalidating limits on independent expenditures , finding that they do not pose a risk of corruption . importantly , the court's recent case law has announced that only quid pro quo corruption or its appearance constitute a sufficiently important governmental interest to justify limits on contributions and expenditures . quid pro quo corruption involves an exchange of money or something of value for an official act . although the supreme court's campaign finance jurisprudence has shifted over the years , the basic buckley framework has generally been applied when determining whether a campaign finance limit violates the first amendment . this report discusses current supreme court and other case law evaluating the constitutionality of limits on contributions and expenditures in various contexts . first , it examines contribution limits , covering base limits , aggregate limits , limits on candidates whose opponents self - finance , minors , and super pacs . as noted above , the court has generally upheld limits on contributions , but the report examines exceptions to this general rule . it also examines a recent case that distinguishes between judicial and political elections in upholding a ban on the personal solicitation of contributions by judicial candidates . then the report discusses expenditure limits , including limits on expenditures by candidates , political parties , and corporations and labor unions . the court has determined that limits on expenditures are subject to strict scrutiny review , and accordingly , has found them to be unconstitutional . throughout the history of its campaign finance jurisprudence , the u.s. supreme court has found that limits on contributions are afforded less rigorous scrutiny under the first amendment than limits on expenditures . as a result , with some notable exceptions , the trend of the court has been to uphold limits on contributions , but invalidate limits on expenditures . its most recent rulings , however , have announced that only quid pro quo corruption or its appearance constitute a sufficiently important governmental interest to justify limits on both contributions and expenditures .