notably , p.l . 110-378 required hhs to promulgate regulations that specify performance standards for public and nonprofit entities that receive bcp , tlp , and sop grants . ( see the appendix for an overview of standards that have been proposed by hhs. ) separately , hhs / acf awarded fy2015 funding for three cooperative agreements to implement demonstration projects to provide coordinated case management and direct victim assistance to domestic victims of a "severe form of trafficking in persons. case management can include service plan development , counseling , monitoring and developing services , monitoring and evaluating client progress , and ensuring clients' rights are protected . see figure 1 for further detail . the runaway and homeless youth program also supports a toll - free hotline so that runaways can learn about services in their communities ; grants for services in rural communities ; research and evaluations ; and training and technical assistance . the program is administered by the family and youth services bureau ( fysb ) in the u.s. department of health and human services' ( hhs ) administration for children and families ( acf ) . the reconnecting homeless youth act of 2008 ( p.l . 110-378 ) most recently reauthorized the runway and homeless youth program through fy2013 ( september 30 , 2013 ) . the law amended multiple provisions including those that address funding for the program , requirements for grantees that receive bcp and tlp grants , and accountability of programs and activities authorized under the runaway and homeless youth act . the law further required hhs to periodically submit to congress an incidence and prevalence study of runaway and homeless youth , as well as the characteristics of a representative sample of these youth . hhs must consult with the u.s. interagency council on homelessness ( usich ) in developing the study . the law also directed the government accountability office ( gao ) to evaluate the process by which organizations apply for bcp , tlp , and sop , including hhs's response to these applicants . congress and the obama administration have taken steps in recent years to address preventing and ending youth homelessness . two notable efforts include an hhs report to congress on ending youth homelessness and a strategy put into place by the u.s. interagency council on homelessness to end youth homelessness by 2020 . the 2003 reauthorization of the runaway and homeless youth act ( p.l . 93-415 ) required hhs , in consultation with usich , to prepare a report to congress on promising strategies to end youth homelessness . hhs submitted the report to congress in 2007 . it explained that there was little information in the research literature about the effectiveness of interventions for homeless youth , and that the few studies on interventions were not based on rigorous experimental or quasi - experimental research designs . for this reason , the report incorporated information about interventions in related fields for high - risk youth , including family interventions to prevent child abuse and neglect , interventions to reduce juvenile violence , and interventions that support successful transitions from juvenile detention and foster care .