how should such a program be funded ? through base budget funding or overseas contingency operations funding - designated ( oco ) funds not subject to budget caps ? how long should authority for such a program be available and on what terms ? what reporting or notification requirements should apply ? how might this program affect other defense or foreign assistance priorities ? is there sufficient public support for a potentially long - standing commitment ? will dod exercise its waiver authority to exempt this program from terrorism , human rights , and other constraints in u.s. law ? under what circumstances might waivers of such legislation be necessary ? how might the executive branch's use of any waiver provisions provided affect perceptions of u.s. foreign policy abroad or the effectiveness of u.s. assistance in syria and in other places ? what assistance should be provided to third countries in relation to a syria train and equip program if any ? what contributions should be expected or required of foreign partners if any ? how effective is this process ? how much and what types of training and equipment will be sufficient to accomplish stated u.s. objectives or achieve the stated purposes of authorizing language ? what support or protection , if any , should the united states provide to trainees upon their return to syria ? on what terms , on what authority , at what cost , and with what potential implications for u.s. policy toward syria and more broadly ? how might the "train and equip" mission expand in size , geographic scope , depending on different scenarios ? what risks might such expansion pose ? how much might this level of effort cost and how long might it take to reach these goals ? what conditions might potential partners and trainees place on participation and support for the program ? with what implications for its potential success and for u.s. policy toward syria ? how effective have other "train and equip" programs been in other contexts ? what lessons learned from those efforts should be applied to a syria - related effort ? how should success in the syria case be defined and assessed ? programs designed to achieve different purposes may present different potential policy risks and rewards and may entail different material and financial costs . members of congress , administration officials , syrians , and other observers continue to debate the purposes , scope , scale , costs , and implications of the currently authorized syria train and equip program and proposals for its modification . proposals that call for syrians civilians and trainees to be defended from attack or for u.s. assist in the stabilization of and provision of essential services in territory under opposition control may be of much broader scope , cost , or duration than the currently authorized program . as events in syria during 2015 have illustrated , the scope of opposition - held territory may conceivably expand or contract to include more or less of syria than at present , with follow - on effects for potential costs , benefits , risks , or rewards for the united states . reporting requirements included in p.l .