only the federal government may enforce the provisions under the ffdca . this section begins with an explanation of the primary jurisdiction doctrine and the factors a court considers when applying this doctrine . then , this section examines the role of the primary jurisdiction doctrine in cases where consumers have brought misleading and deceptive labeling claims against a defendant's use of the term "natural" on ge foods labels . several bills have also been introduced in the 114 th congress that address labeling of ge foods . the genetically engineered food right - to - know act would amend the ffdca to classify any food as misbranded that has been ge or contains one or more ge ingredients , unless such information is clearly disclosed . the bill would exempt any food that ( 1 ) is served in restaurants or other similar eating establishments , ( 2 ) is a medical food , ( 3 ) would be subject to such requirement solely because it was produced using a ge vaccine , or ( 4 ) would be subject to such requirement solely because it includes the use of a ge processing aid or enzyme . the bill defines "genetically engineered" food as a material intended for human consumption that is an organism produced through the intentional use of ge , or the progeny of intended sexual or asexual reproduction ( or both ) of organisms that are the product of ge . the safe and accurate food labeling act of 2015 would establish different certification programs and labeling requirements under the oversight of both the fda and the usda . under the bill , the fda may require that the labeling of food produced from , containing , or consisting of a ge plant display a statement to inform consumers of a difference between food so produced and a comparable non - genetically engineered food . under this proposed requirement , the fda may require such labeling if the agency has determined that there is a material difference between the two foods and the disclosure of such difference is necessary to protect public health or to prevent the label from being false or misleading . additionally , the bill would amend the plant protection act to create a notification program requiring those who plan to introduce into interstate commerce ge plants for the use of food to notify the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) , who must then evaluate the food under the premarket consultation process described above . the bill would then require the entity to submit the evaluation to the secretary of agriculture . the bill's section 201 would establish a voluntary ge food certification program within the usda to govern label claims with respect to the use or non - use of ge in the production and process of food . section 301 of the bill would amend section 403 of the ffdca to deem a food misbranded if its labeling contains an express or implied claim that food is "natural" unless the claim uses terms that have been defined by regulations promulgated by the fda . the bill also contains several provisions that would impact a state's regulation of ge food labeling .