appendix a . comparison of is aumf proposals from the 114 th congress as discussed in the main text of this report , there have been several new proposals for authorizations to use military force against the islamic state during the 114 th congress , both from members of congress and the president ( see table a - 1 ) . table b - 2 , below , provides a breakdown of these seven proposals by type of provision . 4208 contain identical provisions , and are treated as one proposal in the table . 29 contain substantially similar provisions , but some are not identical , and thus the resolutions are treated separately . appendix b . comparison of is aumf proposals from the 113 th congress near the end of the 113 th congress , a number of members proposed several new authorizations to use military force against the islamic state: the analysis provided below compares similar types of provisions included in is aumf proposals from the 113 th congress and issues related to those provisions . table b - 2 provides a breakdown of seven out of eight of these proposals by type of provision . treatment of s.j.res . 47 is included in the section entitled " calls for a new aumf and congressional action in the 113th congress " in the main text of this report . take a vote. as in previous statements , however , president obama did not link enactment of a new is aumf to the source of current presidential authority to direct the use of military force against the islamic state , and indicated that military action against the group would continue regardless: "[t]he american people should know that with or without congressional action , isil will learn the same lessons as terrorists before them. in general , language in a new aumf targeting the islamic state and other groups ( is aumf ) could either broaden the purpose of military force to include unspecified u.s. national security interests , or narrow the scope of authorization to specific objectives related to the administration's stated goal of "degrading and ultimately destroying" the islamic state . congress could limit the is aumf's geographic scope , authorizing force only in iraq and / or syria . with continued uncertainty surrounding the iraqi government , congress might include authorization to use u.s. armed forces in iraq in furtherance of political stability objectives . provisions in any is aumf targeting the islamic state might address the possible effect that targeting the islamic state in syria and iraq could have on the ongoing conflict in syria . congress might also include a prohibition on the use of appropriated funds for the use of military force outside the scope of the specified authorization . proposals for a new is aumf might contain provisions to limit presidential authority to use military force against the islamic state as to scope and duration , and in some cases to sunset or repeal the existing authority in the 2001 and 2002 aumfs . president obama stated that an is authorization should provide the flexibility to carry out "not just our strategy [for the military campaign against the islamic state] over the next two or three months , but our strategy going forward.