both decisions are currently being appealed . the wyndham district court granted the hotel chain's motion for immediate appeal of the ruling to the u.s. court of appeals for the third circuit ( third circuit ) to consider the commission's authority to bring data security cases . the ftc's administrative action against labmd was stayed by the commission pending a congressional hearing investigating the firm , triversa , a key player in the ftc's case . separately , labmd has asked the u.s. court of appeals for the eleventh circuit ( eleventh circuit ) for the third time to dismiss the administrative action . both cases are the subject of a great deal of interest from congress , businesses , trade groups , corporate law firms , and legal scholars . outside of government , there has been an academic debate over the scope of the ftc's authority respecting data security . some scholars have argued that specific legislation is needed to give the ftc express authority to take action , under well - defined regulations against companies that experience data security breaches . other information privacy law scholars counter that the "ftc enforcement has certainly changed over the course of the past fifteen years , but the trajectory of development has followed a predictable set of patterns . these patterns are those of common law development. this report will discuss the ftc's legal authority under section 5 of the ftc act in relation to data security , and the two aforementioned cases . ftc v. wyndham worldwide corp . is widely viewed as an important case to test the authority of the ftc to respond to data breaches , and it could have far - reaching implications for the liability of companies whose computer systems suffer a data breach . after a data breach occurred involving the personal information of wyndham hotels and resorts' customers in 2012 , the ftc filed suit against the hotel chain and three of its subsidiaries , alleging that wyndham's privacy policy misrepresented the security of customer information and that its failure to safeguard personal information caused substantial consumer injury . specifically , the ftc alleged that wrongly configured software , weak passwords , and insecure computer servers led to three data breaches by at wyndham hotels from 2008 to 2010 , compromising more than 619,000 payment card accounts and transfer of customers' payment card account numbers to russia . the ftc alleged that the computer intrusions led to more than $10.6 million in fraud losses . the agency ultimately alleged that wyndham's security practices were "unfair and deceptive" in violation of section 5 of the ftc act . rather than settle the case as other companies facing ftc complaints have done , wyndham contested the allegations and argued , among other things , that the ftc had exceeded its statutory authority to assert an unfairness claim in the data security context . wyndham relied on the supreme court's ruling in food and drug administration v. brown & williamson tobacco corp. , which held that the food and drug administration ( fda ) could not utilize its general authorities with respect to drugs to mandate disclaimers on tobacco packaging because of the lack of explicit legal authority over tobacco products .