it is not intended to comprehensively evaluate all authorities in the dpa . the information provided below is reviewed in table a - 2 for select provisions of the dpa . table a - 1 also provides a list of additional materials , information , and resources on various topics of the dpa that may be of use to congress . 13603 , national defense resources preparedness . finally , this report provides a brief overview of issues congress may consider in its oversight of executive branch use of dpa authorities , as well as the implementation of changes made in the most recent reauthorization . in addition to formalizing the executive branch's policies and procedures for using dpa authorities , these regulations could also serve an important function by offering an opportunity for private citizens and industry to comment on and understand the impact of dpa authorities on their personal interests . since its enactment , the house committee on financial services , the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs , and their predecessors have exercised legislative oversight of the defense production act . the statutory authorities granted in the various titles have been vested in the president , who has delegated some of these authorities to various agency officials through e.o . as an example of the scope of delegations , the membership of the defense production act committee ( dpac ) , created in 2009 and amended in 2014 , includes the secretaries of agriculture , commerce , defense , energy , labor , health and human services , homeland security , the interior , transportation , the treasury , and state ; the attorney general ; the administrators of the national aeronautics and space administration and of general services , the chair of the council of economic advisers ; and the directors of the central intelligence agency and national intelligence . in order to complement existing oversight , given the number of agencies that currently use or could potentially use the array of dpa authorities to support national defense missions , congress may consider reestablishing a select committee with a purpose similar to the former joint committee on defense production . there is also an appendix discussing how dpa authorities changed as a result of the last major reauthorization of the law that included reforms ( p.l . 113-172 , to reauthorize the defense production act , to improve the defense production act committee , and for other purposes ) . this section provides summaries of the major authorities granted to the president in the three remaining active titles of the dpa . each summary describes how the dpa authorities are delegated to cabinet officials or other offices of the u.s. government in the issued executive order ( e.o. ) 13603 , national defense resource preparedness . congress may consider whether to add more extensive notification and reporting requirements on the use of all or specific authorities in the dpa . these reporting or notification requirements could be added to the existing law , or could be included in conference or committee reports accompanying germane legislation , such as appropriations bills or the national defense authorization act .