appendix a . health care legislation for vietnam veterans appendix b . diseases and conditions presumed / not presumed to be service - connected with exposure to agent orang . second , which veterans have been presumptively exposed to agent orange ? these questions have been resolved by two lines of cases . other veterans who have an agent orange - related disease or condition are entitled to these benefits if they can prove they were exposed to agent orange during active duty service . however , there are some exceptions to this general requirement ( see text box on "presumption of exposure to agent orange in veterans who served in korea" ) . furthermore , only veterans who served in vietnam are entitled to retroactive benefits . as discussed under the " blue water veteran litigation " section , some veterans of the vietnam era who served aboard deep - water naval vessels off the coast of vietnam — referred to as "blue water navy" veterans — have been pressing congress and the judicial system to expand the definition of service in vietnam , thereby qualifying this group to receive disability compensation for diseases or conditions presumed to be associated with agent orange . these veterans contend that they were exposed to agent orange while on board vessels anchored offshore , either directly through contact with aircraft that sprayed agent orange or while handling drums of agent orange or by drinking distilled water . in late 2009 , the va asked the institute of medicine ( iom ) to conduct a study and prepare a report on whether vietnam - era veterans who served in the waters off vietnam ( "blue water navy" veterans ) or who served on boats or ships that operated on the inland waterways and delta areas of vietnam ( "brown water" navy veterans ) experienced a comparable range of exposures to agent orange as the veterans who served on the ground . in 2011 , iom announced that it was unable to determine whether "blue water navy" veterans were exposed to agent orange . iom's report stated: the committee was unable to state with certainty that blue water navy personnel were or were not exposed to agent orange and its associated [2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo - p - dioxin] tcdd . owing to a lack of data on environmental concentrations of agent orange and agent orange – associated tcdd and an inability to reconstruct likely concentrations , as well as the dearth of information about relative exposures among the ground troops and brown water navy personnel and blue water navy personnel , it is impossible to compare actual exposures across these three populations . furthermore , the committee concludes that because of the small number of studies and their limitations , there is no consistent evidence to suggest that blue water navy vietnam veterans were at higher or lower risk for cancer or other long - term adverse health effects associated with agent orange exposure than shore - based veterans , brown water navy veterans , or vietnam veterans in other branches of service . the committee's judgment is that exposure of blue water navy vietnam veterans to agent orange - associated tcdd cannot reasonably be determined .