appendix a . funding prohibitions proposed in h.r . 5171 as reported but not retained in p.l . 113-235 a number of epa regulatory actions and related issues were the focus of considerable debate regarding epa's fy2015 appropriations . more than a dozen provisions directed at epa were included in the general provisions in title iv of h.r . 5171 as reported by the house appropriations committee , including several that would have prohibited or restricted the use of appropriated funds . as noted earlier in this report ( see " funding restrictions / prohibitions " ) relatively few of the prohibitive provisions proposed in the house committee reported bill were retained in the consolidated and further appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l . the proposed provisions , if enacted , generally would have restricted or prohibited the use of funds as appropriated in the bill ( and in some cases "other acts" ) to carry out certain epa regulatory actions across the various environmental pollution control statutes . the funding prohibitions proposed in h.r . 5171 but not retained in p.l . 113-235 would have impacted various ongoing and anticipated epa activities , including epa's proposed standards for reducing ghg emissions from existing and new ( or substantially modified ) stationary sources and a proposed rule intended to clarify jurisdictional issues and the definition of navigable waters under the clean water act . other provisions proposed in the house committee reported bill would have limited any epa activities that would address lead - based paint removal , the definitions of the terms ''fill material'' or ''discharge of fill material" under the clean water act , and financial responsibility with respect to superfund cleanup . an amendment adopted during the markup would have prohibited epa from using funds to finalize a rule entitled "administrative wage garnishment" ( 79 federal register 37704 et seq. , july 2 , 2014 ) . descriptions of selected provisions included in h.r . 5171 but not retained in the consolidated and further appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l . 113-235 ) are presented below . the following bulleted list is a summary of the language included in the house - reported bill , not an analysis of each , which is beyond the scope of this report . section 429 ( waters of the united states ) would have prohibited the use of funds made available in "this act" ( referring to the bill as proposed ) or any other act for any fiscal year to develop , adopt , implement , administer , or enforce a change or supplement to a rule or guidance documents pertaining to the definition of waters under the federal water pollution control act ( 33 u.s.c . ยง1251 , et seq .

 ) , including the provisions of the rules dated november 13 , 1986 , and august 25 , 1993 , relating to said jurisdiction and the guidance documents dated january 15 , 2003 , and december 2 , 2008 .