magistrates. initially the magistrate judges were assigned a somewhat circumscribed role , but over the last several decades , congress has expanded the role of magistrate judges to include the power to decide various motions , hear evidence , and try both criminal and civil cases . with the ever burgeoning federal docket , magistrate judges have been deemed "nothing less than indispensable" in the federal judicial process . however useful they may be , there appears to be some conflict in vesting authority to resolve federal questions in judicial officials not cloaked with life tenure and salary protections . instead , magistrate judges are selected by district court judges and can be removed for good cause or if the judicial conference "determines that the services performed by his office are no longer needed. the supreme court's first encounter with the first magistrates act came about in wingo v. wedding . in that case , the court addressed whether the act permitted magistrate judges to hold evidentiary hearings in habeas corpus proceedings without the defendant's consent or whether district court judges were required to do so personally . the court , speaking through justice brennan , parsed the statute in a way to avoid potential article iii problems . the high court did this by construing the term "additional duties" in the act to not include the authority of a magistrate to hold evidentiary hearings , but instead allowing the magistrate simply to propose to the district court judge whether such a hearing should be held . two years later in mathews v. weber , the court was tasked with interpreting whether "additional duties" could be read to permit referral of social security benefit cases to a magistrate judges for preliminary review of the administrative record and preparation of a recommended ruling . while the court again avoided the potential article iii issues , it echoed the adjunct theory by observing that a district judge is free to follow or wholly reject a magistrate's recommendation and that the "authority — and the responsibility — to make informed , final determination ... remains with the judge. as a statutory matter , because the district judge was still free to follow or wholly ignore the magistrate's recommendation , the court upheld the magistrate's "preliminary - review function" as one of the "additional duties" permitted under the act . in the 1980 case united states v. raddatz , the court finally addressed head - on the constitutional issues surrounding that magistrates act that were left unresolved in previous cases . in raddatz , the defendant challenged both the magistrates' statutory and constitutional authority to hear motions to suppress evidence in a criminal proceeding . under the act , magistrate judges could "hear and determine" any pretrial matter before it , except for any certain dispositive motions , including motions to suppress evidence in criminal cases .