these regulations become final in 2016 . this report documents the scheduled timeline for action on selected fsma provisions , as specified in the enacted law , and fda - reported actions taken to date . fsma focused on fda - regulated foods and amended fda's existing structure and authorities , in particular the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca , 21 u.s.c . under a february 2014 agreement between fda and the center for food safety , the agency agreed to a new court - ordered schedule requiring that final fsma regulations be issued by mid - 2016 . this schedule further pushed back the implementation dates for final fsma regulations beyond the dates originally mandated by congress in the enacted law . in late 2014 , an fda official indicated that full implementation of fsma would likely take another 10 years , the amount of time needed to "reasonably expect all the rules to be working. fda's operational strategy for implementing the fda food safety modernization act ( fsma ) was released in may 2014 and describes "the next phase of fsma implementation by outlining broadly the drivers of change in fda's approach to food safety and the operational strategy for implementing that change , as mandated and empowered by fsma. full implementation of the most fsma regulations will be phased in over the next several years , mostly to provide flexibility to farms and food businesses to comply with the new requirements , as provided for in the enacted law . in addition , in september 2016 , fda further extended the compliance dates for many regulated facilities , especially small and very small businesses , within the main core regulations including preventive controls for human and animal food , produce safety standards , and the foreign supplier verification program ( fsvp ) for food imports . when the law was enacted , fda has identified five key elements of fsma: preventive controls — fsma provides fda with a legislative mandate to require comprehensive , prevention - based controls across the food supply . as examples , the act requires mandatory preventive controls for food facilities and mandatory produce safety standards , and also gives fda the authority to prevent intentional contamination . inspection and compliance — fsma provides fda with the ability to conduct oversight and ensure compliance with new requirements and to respond when problems emerge . §§301 et seq. ) response — fsma provides fda with the ability to respond to problems when they emerge . examples include giving fda mandatory recall authority for all food products ; expanding fda's authority to administratively detain products that are in violation of the law ; giving fda the authority to suspend a facility's registration , effectively prohibiting the company from selling any products within the united states ; establishing pilot projects so fda can enhance its product tracing capabilities ; and requiring additional recordkeeping by facilities that "manufacture , process , pack or hold" foods designated as "high - risk. imported food safety — fsma provides fda with the ability to help ensure that food imports meet u.s. food safety standards .