lastly , p.l . 114-125 extended the moratorium on taxing internet access permanently , and temporarily extended the grandfather clause provision through june 30 , 2020 . the moratorium on internet access taxes established by itfa and its subsequent extensions prohibits states or their political subdivisions from imposing any new taxes on internet access services . internet access service is defined as "a service that enables users to access content , information , electronic mail , or other services offered over the internet and may also include access to proprietary content , information , and other services as part of a package of services offered to consumers. the sale and purchase of internet access services is exempt from taxation under itfa ; however , costs related to acquired services , such as an internet service provider ( isp ) leasing capacity over fiber , are not covered by the moratorium and thus potentially subject to taxation . internet access is often bundled with other services such as voice or video service . in these situations , if the isp can reasonably separate the charges related to internet access from the other service charges , the internet access charges remain exempt from taxation ; otherwise the internet access charges can be taxed . the moratorium on taxing internet access affects consumers of the internet , isps , and state and local governments . one of the most significant effects of itfa is that state and local governments cannot impose their sales taxes on the monthly payments that consumers make to their isp , such as comcast or at&t , in exchange for access to the internet . the moratorium prohibits taxes on internet access services regardless of whether the tax is imposed on the consumer or the provider . the moratorium affects state and local governments by limiting the activities that can be taxed , reducing their potential tax base , which may reduce state and local revenues . it also established the advisory commission on electronic commerce . the moratorium includes a grandfather clause allowing states that already had "imposed and enforced" a tax on internet access to continue enforcing those taxes . the evolution of the internet , its interaction with telecommunication services , and disputes over state autonomy have led to a number of changes in the law with its successive extensions . the internet tax nondiscrimination act ( p.l . 107-75 ) , enacted in 2001 , was the first extension of itfa . itfa was first extended through december 11 , 2015 , as part of the 2016 continuing appropriations act ( p.l . an 11-day extension of itfa was then passed as part of p.l . 114-100 through december 22 , 2015 . shortly thereafter , itfa was extended through october 1 , 2016 , as part of the 2016 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l . one estimate suggests that the moratorium on internet access taxes could reduce potential state and local revenues by as much as $6.5 billion each year . it should be noted that this estimate assumes that all states and local governments would impose their sales tax on internet access services . this revenue estimate is further discussed below in the " state revenues and autonomy " section .