rests. in the least dangerous branch , professor alexander bickel proposed a solution to the countermajoritarian difficulty , a solution that has deep roots in the high court's constitutional jurisprudence and has been the inspiration for many members of the judiciary when approaching difficult constitutional questions . bickel argued that when the supreme court is faced with a difficult question of constitutional law , the court need not as a matter of course exercise the power of judicial review and serve in either a legitimating or countermajoritarian role . instead of validating a law or striking down a piece of legislation , bickel noted that the court " may do neither " and simply "stay[] its hand. the supreme court can opt for the third route by practicing the so - called "passive virtues," a set of tools , such as the justiciability doctrines and the court's discretionary certiorari power , with which the court can return an unsettled constitutional problem to the political realm for resolution . for bickel , by employing the "passive virtues" and exercising judicial review only when constitutional principles are sufficiently clear for resolution , the court can avoid unnecessary entanglement in controversial and sensitive constitutional issues , protecting the judiciary from potential backlash by the political branches and preserving the court's role as the protector of established constitutional principles . at the same time , the use of the "passive virtues," according to bickel , encourages constitutional dialogue within the other branches and the public and allows the court to better gauge what is the appropriate constitutional principle animating a particular issue . put another way , for professor bickel , the value of the "passive virtues" can be summarized in a short quote from justice louis brandeis: "the most important thing we do is not doing. professor cass sunstein's work on "judicial minimalism" is often seen as the modern continuation of professor bickel's work . in contrast to bickel's focus on a court's silence in response to a controversial constitutional question , however , sunstein's approach to constitutional adjudication is geared toward the type of response the supreme court should provide when it reaches the merits of the constitutional question that has been presented to the court . specifically , professor sunstein advocates for "judicial minimalism" — that is , in deciding cases , judges should "say[] no more than necessary to justify an outcome , and leav[e] as much as possible undecided.... " in particular , courts , according to sunstein , should strive to make rulings that are both narrow — decisions that are no broader than necessary to resolve the case at hand — and shallow — decisions that avoid questions of basic principle and reach "concrete judgments on particular cases , unaccompanied by abstract accounts about what accounts for those judgments. sunstein , echoing bickel , justifies his theory of minimalism on two separate grounds . first , professor sunstein argues that minimalism reduces burdens on the judiciary in trying to reach a decision .