similar patterns occurred for females . in the first seven months of fy2014 , the number of females in the 16-17 age bracket increased , whereas the number of males decreased ( figure 7 ) . the median age of unaccompanied children by year , sex , and top country ( table 3 ) present the age trends a bit more starkly . the median age of females has dropped from 17 years in fy2011 — the year that was the median age across all groups of children — to 15 years in the first seven months of fy2014 . the median age for females in fy2013 was 13 years . when viewed by country , the median age decreased for all three and fell to 15 years for honduran children during the first seven months of fy2014 . this report focuses on the demographics of unaccompanied alien children while they are in removal proceedings . it discusses the characteristics of these children by nationality , age , and sex and explores these trends over the past few years . it further builds on a set of congressional research service ( crs ) reports examining the issues surrounding unaccompanied alien children . much attention has been focused on the top countries of origin for the unaccompanied children . over the past four years , orr had unaccompanied children in its custody from 87 different countries , ranging from 41 to 50 different countries each fiscal year . nevertheless , el salvador , guatemala , and honduras have consistently accounted for the overwhelming majority of all unaccompanied children in orr custody ( table 1 ) . while the most notable increase in unaccompanied children over the past three fiscal years and the first seven months of fy2014 was from honduras ( 980% ) — as it steadily increased in overall rank from fourth in fy2011 to first through the first seven months of fy2014 — even the smallest increase in unaccompanied children in orr custody of the three countries ( el salvador ) was notable: 463% from fy2011 through the first seven months of fy2014 ( figure 1 ) . not all apprehended unaccompanied children are transferred to orr , as some are voluntarily returned to their home countries . although mexican children generally make up a sizeable number of the unaccompanied alien children apprehended by cbp officers , only a portion of them end up in orr custody . for example , cbp apprehended 11,577 mexican unaccompanied children in the first eight months of fy2014 , and only 494 mexican unaccompanied children were placed in orr custody during the first seven months of fy2014 . age is a key factor to qualify as an unaccompanied alien child under the law . the homeland security act of 2002 defines an unaccompanied alien child as an individual who has no lawful immigration status in the united states , has not yet reached the age of 18 , and has no parent or legal guardian in the united states or no parent or legal guardian in the united states who is available to provide care and physical custody .