the ncaa has said that it will appeal the ruling . also , on august 7 , 2014 , the ncaa division i board of directors adopted a new governing structure for division i colleges and universities . among other changes , five conferences — consisting of 65 private and public colleges and universities — will be allowed to adopt new rules affecting student athletes . the five conferences are the atlantic coast conference ( acc ) , big ten , big 12 , pac - 12 , and southeastern conference ( sec ) . ( northwestern university is a member of the big ten conference. ) under new authority , the conferences will be allowed to increase the maximum grant - in - aid up to the full cost of attendance . the conferences will also be allowed to provide student - athletes with multi - year scholarships , offer health insurance coverage , pay for disability insurance , cover the cost of transportation for high school students and their parents to visit campus , change the limits on the amount of time devoted to sports , increase the amount of academic support , or allow athletes to earn money from activities not related to sports . to vote for a rule change , each of the 65 schools will have one vote . in addition , 15 student - athlete representatives — three from each of the five conferences — will be able to cast votes . the first votes on rule changes could be held in january 2015 . the ncaa could reconsider the rule changes if at least 75 division i schools request a vote to override the changes . the rule changes could be suspended if at least 125 schools request a vote on the changes . schools must request a vote within 60 days of the date that the rule changes were adopted by the board of directors . college sports teams that bring in more in revenues than it costs to run the program , the "revenue sports" teams , help support "non - revenue sports," such as golf , tennis , swimming , baseball , softball , and others . the principal revenue sports are football and men's basketball . division i football is divided into two subdivisions . the football bowl subdivision ( fbs ) has 128 teams ; the football championship subdivision ( fcs ) has 126 teams . northwestern university is one of 17 private , four - year colleges and universities in the fbs . another 46 private colleges and universities participate in the fcs . both the fbs and fcs are further divided into different conferences , leagues , or associations . division i men's basketball has 346 teams . 115 schools that compete in division i men's basketball are private four - year colleges or universities . the 128 fbs schools must support at least 16 varsity sports teams . the schools can award financial aid to as many as 85 football players , with each player able to receive up to a full scholarship . the 126 fcs schools must sponsor at least 14 varsity sports teams and can award up to the equivalent of 63 full football scholarships , divided among no more than 85 players .