in fact , the underlying legal obligation technically remains in effect . however , the irs does not appear to impose a new legal obligation on any parties , but , rather , the irs seems to notify the public of its intent to not enforce these provisions against employers during 2014 . a court would likely find that such a statement is a guidance document , because it merely notifies the public on how the agency plans to perform a discretionary function — enforcement discretion . however , in other circumstances , an agency's declaration of a delay or enforcement policy could require notice and comment procedures . the irs promulgated the notice without undergoing notice and comment rulemaking procedures . in february 2014 , the irs announced final regulations implementing the employer mandate from the affordable care act . in those regulations , the irs provided for "transition relief" from the employer mandate tax for certain employers — that is , qualifying employers would not have to pay the tax . in order to be eligible for transition relief , employers must certify that they have met certain requirements established by the agency . this has led to numerous questions regarding how courts treat administrative delays of regulatory programs . this report will discuss the general legal principles applicable to judicial review of administrative delays in two different contexts: ( 1 ) delays in meeting a specific statutory deadline for implementing rules or completing particular adjudications , and ( 2 ) delays in the enforcement of a provision of law on the public at large . the report will then address whether the procedures outlined in the administrative procedure act ( apa ) apply to these delays . the first type of agency delay — delays in meeting a specific statutory deadline for implementing rules or completing particular adjudications — arises when congress has enacted a statute that expressly requires an agency to take a specific action by a specific date . for example , the aca includes a number of mandatory rulemaking provisions that require agencies to issue certain substantive rules by certain dates . an agency's failure to meet this type of statutory deadline is generally assessed pursuant to a multi - factor balancing test established in telecommunications research & action center v. fcc , discussed further below . the second type of delay occurs when an agency delays the enforcement of a statutory prohibition or requirement that congress has imposed on third parties . an agency generally implements this delay by announcing that , as an enforcement policy , the agency will not pursue or punish non - compliance with the law for a certain period of time . the underlying law takes legal effect and conduct in violation of that law remains unlawful , but the agency — in an exercise of its enforcement discretion — does not take action in response to violations of the provision until after a certain date . for example , although a provision in the aca requiring that health plans meet certain minimum coverage requirements became effective in january 2014 , the center for medicaid services has announced that it will not enforce these requirements for certain plans for at least one year .