104-66 , as amended . 31 et seq . the usgs organic act of march 3 , 1879 , as amended , establishes the united states geological survey . this act directs the director of the usgs to classify the public lands and examine the geological structure , mineral resources , and products within and outside the national domain . this act establishes the office of the director of the united states geological survey under doi . the director of the usgs is appointed by the president by and with the advice and consent of the senate . a section by section breakdown of the act follows: § 31 . director of united states geological survey ( a ) establishment of office; appointment and duties; examination of geological structure , mineral resources , and products of national domain; prohibitions in respect to lands and surveys the director of the united states geological survey , which office is established , under the interior department , shall be appointed by the president by and with the advice and consent of the senate . this officer shall have the direction of the united states geological survey , and the classification of the public lands and examination of the geological structure , mineral resources , and products of the national domain . the director and members of the united states geological survey shall have no personal or private interests in the lands or mineral wealth of the region under survey , and shall execute no surveys or examinations for private parties or corporations . ( b ) examination of geological structure , mineral resources , and products outside national domain the authority of the secretary of the interior , exercised through the united states geological survey of the department of the interior , to examine the geological structure , mineral resources , and products of the national domain , is expanded to authorize such examinations outside the national domain where determined by the secretary to be in the national interest . report on resource research activities once every five years the national academy of sciences shall review and report on the resource research activities of the survey . biological research activity of survey ; review and report by national academy of sciences beginning in fiscal year 1998 and once every five years thereafter , the national academy of sciences shall review and report on the biological research activity of the survey . 661 et seq . the fish and wildlife coordination act of 1934 authorizes the secretary of the interior to prepare plans to protect wildlife resources , conduct surveys on public lands , and accept funds or lands for related purposes ; authorize the investigation and reporting of proposed federal actions that affect the development , protection , rearing , and stocking of all species of wildlife and their habitat ; and conduct actions to minimize impacts on fish and wildlife resources . the usgs ecosystems program area conducts studies that address these authorities . the migratory bird treaty act of 1918 , as amended , implements four international treaties that affect migratory birds common to the united states , canada , mexico , japan , and the former soviet union .