generally , there are three ways that an oig can be vested with law enforcement authority . oig special agents regularly conduct undercover operations and surveillance . the types of investigations conducted by oig special agents include criminal activities such as fraud in farm programs ; significant thefts of government property or funds ; bribery and extortion ; smuggling ; and assaults and threats of violence against usda employees engaged in their official duties . first , and most commonly , an oig can be vested with law enforcement explicitly pursuant to section 6 ( e ) ( 3 ) of the ig act of 1978 , as amended ( 5 u.s.c . ( ig act ) appendix , section 6 ( e ) ( 4 ) ; hereinafter referred to as the ig act ) . second , an oig can be vested with law enforcement authority by the attorney general pursuant to criteria articulated in several provisions of section 6 ( e ) of the ig act of 1978 . third , an oig can be vested with law enforcement authority pursuant to statute outside of the ig act of 1978 , as is the case with six federal entities described below . the department of justice's bureau of justice statistics maintains a census on federal law enforcement officers , which includes data on the number of federal employees who are authorized to carry firearms . the most recent report available states that 33 oigs had a total of 3,501 agents who were authorized to carry firearms in september 2008 . additionally , the report states that no law enforcement officers within an oig were assaulted or injured in 2008 . the procurement pertained to the oig's effort to replace automatic firearms with new semi - automatic firearms . on may 19 , 2014 , mr. paul feeney , deputy counsel at the oig , sent the following response to questions about the procurement: the inspector general act of 1978 authorized oig to , among other duties , pursue criminal activity , fraud , and abuses impairing usda's program and operations . the criminal investigation responsibilities and impact of oig are quite extensive — from fiscal year 2012 through march 2014 , oig investigations pertaining to usda operations have obtained over 2,000 indictments , 1,350 convictions , and over $460 million in monetary results . oig special agents are authorized to make arrests , execute warrants , and carry firearms . regarding the need for weapons' procurements , and for defensive vests , usda oig's investigations division conducts hundreds of criminal investigations each year , some of which involve oig agents , usda employees , and / or members of the public facing potentially life threatening situations . it also provides resources that add context to what some oigs say is a need for law enforcement authority in their offices . each federal agency , including oigs , has a unique mission , and , therefore , a unique purpose for its law enforcement authority . in some cases , especially when congress and the public demonstrate concern about the agency's weapons procurement , an agency may release a public statement detailing its law enforcement authority and its need to acquire weapons or ammunition .