adoption of the common core state standards is optional . it can mean anything from lesson plans to textbooks to frameworks that can be generated at the state or local level or purchased off the shelf . this flexibility has led to the development of different accountability systems in each state . as discussed above , states are required to adopt and implement two types of academic standards as a condition of receiving title i - a funding . these include content standards and performance ( or achievement ) standards . in general , content standards specify what students are expected to know and be able to do . performance standards are explicit definitions of what students must know and be able to do to demonstrate proficiency . according to ed , "achievement standards further define content standards by connecting them to information that describes how well students are acquiring the knowledge and skills contained in academic content standards. in neither case are standards synonymous with curricula , method of instruction , or classroom materials . there is not a single , broadly agreed upon definition of curriculum . in general , however , the development and use of curriculum is part of the process for operationalizing state standards . according to ed , "a curriculum aligned with the state's standards is necessary for students to achieve and demonstrate proficiency on a state's tests. thus , according to ed , while standards and curriculum are different concepts , the alignment of standards and curriculum is needed for students to demonstrate proficiency on state assessments , which must be aligned with the standards . critics of the common core state standards have expressed concern that adoption and implementation of these standards and aligned assessments will result in national standards and national assessments . despite grassroots efforts to develop the common core state standards and actions by the obama administration to support the standards and the development of assessments aligned with these standards , the end result will not yield a single set of national standards in reading and mathematics or a single set of assessments in these subject areas . for example , states that adopt the common core state standards are permitted to add additional standards of their own choosing to the common core state standards . thus , each state adopting and implementing the common core state standards could continue to have a unique set of state standards that share common elements with other adopting states . as a result of the rtt common assessment competition , there will be at least two different assessments linked to the common core state standards , and based on a recent survey conducted by education week , it appears that at least 17 states are planning to use something other than the assessments being developed by parcc and smarter balanced . in addition , even among the states that are still planning to use tests developed by one of the two consortia , some states are planning on using a consortium - developed test only for some but not all grade levels tested . the common core state standards are also not synonymous with a national curriculum .