app . ( 3 ) nothing in this subsection shall restrict the authority of the president under the constitution , the international emergency economic powers act ( 50 u.s.c . 1701 et seq .

 ) , or the national emergencies act ( 50 u.s.c . 1601 et seq. ) to prohibit exportation of the oil . ( 4 ) the secretary of commerce shall issue any rules necessary for implementation , including any licensing requirements and conditions , of the president's national interest determination within 30 days of the date of such determination by the president . the secretary of commerce shall consult with the secretary of energy in administering the provisions of this subsection . ( 5 ) if the secretary of commerce finds that anticompetitive activity by a person exporting crude oil under authority of this subsection has caused sustained material crude oil supply shortages or sustained crude oil prices significantly above world market levels and further finds that these supply shortages or price increases have caused sustained material adverse employment effects in the united states , the secretary of commerce may recommend to the president who may take appropriate action against such person , which may include modification or revocation of the authorization to export crude oil . ( 6 ) administrative action with respect to an authorization under this subsection is not subject to sections 551 and 553 through 559 of title 5 , united states code . appendix b. statutory limits on cook inlet exports energy policy and conservation act of 1975 ( p.l . 94-163 §103 ) domestic use of energy supplies and related materials and equipment sec . ( a ) the president may , by rule , under such terms and conditions as he determines to be appropriate and necessary to carry out the purposes of this act , restrict exports of — ( 1 ) coal , petroleum products , natural gas , or petrochemical feedstocks , and ( 2 ) supplies of materials or equipment which he determines to be necessary ( a ) to maintain or further exploration , production , refining , or transportation of energy supplies , or ( b ) for the construction or maintenance of energy facilities within the united states . what is the interplay between overseas exports and the maritime shipping industry ? what are the expectations for capital investment by developers to support export production and how might they affect the nation's overall oil and gas supplies ? what are the environmental impacts of increased production for export ? how might international trade agreements influence the u.s. government's ability to tailor its oil and natural gas export policies by region ? as congress continues its oversight of the nation's energy resources , understanding these issues may be important . appendix a. statutory limits on taps oil exports trans alaska pipeline authorization act of 1973 ( p.l .