the defense intelligence agency . the national geospatial - intelligence agency . why not just hire more civilians ? we have , but it takes years to train and develop intelligence analysts and case officers . in the interim , contract personnel have filled the gap , in many cases with decades of priceless experience . congressional overseers have long recognized that contractors provide a wide range of services for the ic ( just as they do for the military ) from transportation , construction , and support services , to intelligence collection , analysis and private security . contractors provide a surge capability , quickly delivering critical support capabilities tailored to specific intelligence needs . because contractors can be hired when a particular need arises and released when their services are no longer needed , contractors can be less expensive in the long run than maintaining a permanent in - house capability . unfortunately , critics argue that contractors can also compromise the credibility and effectiveness of the ic and undermine operations . concerns over government reliance on contractors often focus on cost , accountability , and workforce issues . most recently , the ssci study of the cia's detention and interrogation program has renewed debate over which activities performed by contractors are "inherently governmental. according to the ssci study's finding 13 , "the psychologists carried out inherently governmental functions , such as acting as liaison between the cia and foreign intelligence services , assessing the effectiveness of the interrogation program , and participating in the interrogation of detainees held in foreign government custody. section 328 requires the usdhs / i&a to provide appropriate congressional committees with an assessment of the usefulness of memoranda of understanding signed between federal , state , local , tribal , and territorial agencies to improve intelligence - sharing within and separate from the joint terrorism task force ( jttf ) . jttfs are operated by the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) and are based in 104 cities nationwide . although they have been in existence since 1980 , 71 have been created since 9 / 11 . their primary purpose is to co - locate counterterrorism - related resources to enhance coordination and collaboration . according to the fbi , they consist of "small cells of highly trained , locally based , passionately committed investigators , analysts , linguists , swat experts , and other specialists from dozens of u.s. law enforcement and intelligence agencies. the fbi describes a jttf's duties as follows: "chase down leads , gather evidence , make arrests , provide security for special events , conduct training , collect and share intelligence , and respond to threats and incidents at a moment's notice. section 328 was prompted by april 2013 bombing of the boston marathon . a 2014 report collectively issued by four igs ( the igs for the dni , cia , doj , and dhs ) found that the fbi , cia , dhs , and national counterterrorism center ( nctc ) generally shared information and followed procedures appropriately , but improvements could be made .