these youth are known as served youth . most of the 19-year - old youth who were in foster care also received at least one independent living service . therefore , the data for these two groups are similar . in total , 7,536 youth participated in the survey at age 19 ( this is compared to 15,597 who participated at age 17 ) . those who did not participate had declined to participate , were considered to be on runaway or missing status ; could not be otherwise located ; were incapacitated or incarcerated ; or were deceased . figure 2 includes data on selected outcomes for youth in foster care and those who are no longer in foster care . slightly more than half of the 19-year - old youth participants were male . the largest share of youth were white ( 42% ) , followed by black ( 31% ) and hispanic ( 19% ) youth . youth were asked about their outcomes across six areas — financial self - sufficiency , educational ( academic or vocational ) training , positive connections with adults , homelessness , high - risk behaviors , and access to health insurance . about one - third of youth were working full - time and / or part - time at age 19 ; however , youth in foster care were more likely to be working part - time and youth not in foster care or not receiving any independent living service were slightly more likely to be working full - time . approximately 30% of youth had completed an apprenticeship , internship , or other type of on - the - job training in the past year . ( for comparison , approximately 13% of these youth were working full - time and / or part - time and 20% had completed employment - related skills training when they were surveyed at age 17 ) . the 19-year - old youth were about equally likely to receive social security benefits , either supplemental security income ( ssi ) or social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) ( 12% to 14% ) , regardless of foster care status or receipt of independent living services . ( about the same share of these youth was receiving social security at age 17. ) youth not receiving any independent living services were slightly less likely to report receiving other ongoing financial support ( 11% versus 13% - 17% ) . youth who were in foster care at age 19 did not qualify for public supports such as financial assistance , food assistance , and public housing . the other groups of 19-year - old youth — those not in care , those receiving at least one independent living service ( and not in care ) , and youth not receiving any independent living services ( and not in care ) — were equally likely to receive such public supports . overall , youth were most likely to have a high school diploma ( 56% ) or its equivalent . educational outcomes were notably distinct for follow - up youth at age 19 depending on whether or not they were in foster care or whether they received an independent living service .