other types of assistance are not expressly prohibited . however , section 149 ( i ) provides that nothing in this section shall be construed to constitute a specific statutory authorization for the introduction of united states armed forces into hostilities or into situations wherein hostilities are clearly indicated by the circumstances . this language seems intended to preclude reading the provision as authorizing assistance in the form of a direct combat role . on the other hand , nothing in the 2015 cr prohibits the expenditure of funds for airstrikes against is targets in iraq or syria . if these operations are separately authorized by the 2001 aumf or the 2002 iraq aumf , then perhaps the availability of any funds in the 2015 cr that are permitted for use in support of operations under these authorizations , coupled with knowledge of their interpretation by the executive branch , could be construed to suggest congressional acquiescence to the executive's characterization of a connection between operations against the islamic state and other operations which congress had already authorized . the report will be updated as warranted by events . many of the legal issues discussed in this report concerning congressional oversight of u.s. military action are addressed in greater detail in crs report r41989 , congressional authority to limit military operations , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] . further discussion regarding u.s. operations against the islamic state in iraq and syria can be found in crs report r43612 , the "islamic state" crisis and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] et al . ; iraq crisis and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] et al . ; and crs report rl33487 , armed conflict in syria: overview and u.s . response , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] . until recently , the executive branch cited only to the president's independent authority under article ii of the u.s. constitution as the legal basis for the military action taken against the islamic state . some observers and lawmakers questioned whether some or all of these actions are lawful without congressional authorization , and some wonder whether or at what point further military action would require express congressional approval . while the executive has recently claimed that the 2001 aumf and 2002 iraq aumf provide statutory authorization for military action against the islamic state , questions remain as to whether the president possesses independent authority to order the use of force against the group even if these statutes are deemed to be inapplicable or are subsequently repealed or narrowed by legislation . the constitution divides authority between congress and the president on matters of war and the use of military force . under article i , section 8 , congress has the power to declare war , tax and spend for the common defense , provide for the army and navy , make rules regulating the armed forces , and make rules concerning captures . additionally , congress has authority to make all laws "necessary and proper" for carrying out not only its own powers under article i , section 8 but also all of the powers vested by the constitution in the executive and judicial branches as well .