, dual compensation ) . prior to the enactment of phased retirement , the situation of dual compensation arose in the context of current federal retirees who returned to work in federal service ( i.e. postal service employees ) . according to the office of personnel management ( opm ) , which administers phased retirement , "the main purpose of phased retirement is to enhance the mentoring and training of the employees who will be filling the positions or taking on the duties of more experienced retiring employees. unlike existing waivers for dual compensation in the situation of reemployed annuitants , phased retirement is designed as a human resources instrument to allow eligible employees to reduce their work hours before they separate from federal service and make up for the reduced salary through receipt of prorated retirement benefits . phased retirement also provides agencies with another tool to transfer knowledge to newer employees through mentoring . as explained in opm's final rule for phased retirement , published on august 8 , 2014: phased retirement is designed to assist agencies with knowledge management and continuity of operations in the short term... . phased retirement is simply another tool to enable agencies to manage their workforce , promote best practices , and encourage experienced employees to spend some time mentoring the next generation of experts . not all current federal employees may be eligible to apply for phased retirement . federal law and regulation set out several types of requirements for participation in phased retirement related to employment status , retirement eligibility , and mentoring . currently , phased retirees are authorized to work 50% of their previous work schedules and receive 50% of their previous federal salaries . in general , a phased retiree is classified as a part - time employee . section 100121 of p.l . 112-141 , the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 , enacted july 6 , 2012 ) provides the authority for a new phased retirement option for certain employees covered by the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) or the federal employees' retirement system ( fers ) , the retirement plans that cover most of the civilian federal workforce . under phased retirement , an eligible federal employee may work a reduced - hour schedule and simultaneously receive a prorated federal retirement benefit ( or annuity ) under csrs or fers . for eligible federal employees , phased retirement is a voluntary option that requires approval from their employing federal agencies . employees participating in phased retirement generally must also engage in mentoring activities ( except for u.s . phased retirement allows certain federal employees who are otherwise eligible for retirement under csrs or fers to work a reduced schedule while receiving a reduced salary as well as a prorated percentage of their retirement benefits . 112-141 , federal law generally prohibited the concurrent receipt of a federal salary and a federal pension ( i.e. , reemployed annuitants ) . over the past several decades , congress has provided authority for waivers in some circumstances to the general reduction in pay usually required for dual compensation . these waivers accomplish several policy goals , including hiring for highly skilled or difficult - to - fill positions .