these developments are discussed below . regulators and law enforcement authorities have taken a number of enforcement actions against dark pool owners for violations of laws or regulations . this section describes some examples of such actions , including a 2014 civil suit by the new york attorney general against barclays , one of the largest dark pool operators , and some enforcement actions undertaken by the sec and finra . on june 25 , 2014 , new york attorney general eric schneiderman filed a civil action with the state supreme court against one of the largest dark pool operators , the u.k. - based financial firm barclays . the lawsuit charged , under new york state law's martin act , that barclays falsified marketing material related to the extent and type of hft in its dark pool . another charge was that the firm falsely claimed that it was able to "restrict" hft firms from interacting with its other clients but noted that it did not actually monitor such things . referencing the case , some observers reiterated the fact that institutional investors are often attracted to dark pools because they have offered some protection against their large orders being spotted before they are fully executed . they then noted that if an hft firm becomes aware of such an institutional stock order early on , the firm could then jump in and acquire the stock ahead of the institutional investor , potentially raising the investor's costs . speaking about some of the possible implications of the barclays suit , justin schack , rosenblatt's managing director of market structure analysis , reportedly observed: "the problem isn't that [hft] firms are participating in dark pools . that's pretty widely known , it's not necessarily bad and it's happening in most of the major ones.… [the troubling allegation is] that the broker lied to clients about the presence of a big hft firm. in addition , columbia law professor john c. coffee jr. has decried the fact that the people who actually understand the workings of dark pools is probably only in the hundreds . in congressional testimony , white has attempted to assure congress of the adequacy of the agency's oversight of dark pools . she said that the agency has "taken a data - driven , disciplined approach to addressing complex market structure issues , such as high - frequency trading and dark pools , [and is] implementing a powerful new analytical tool called midas [the market information data analytics system , a market analysis system that combines advanced technologies with empirical data that is designed to give the sec added insight into securities markets]. the sec and finra are both involved in probes of dark pools and their owners with respect to possible violations of securities laws . some observers have noted that "the sec has proven a willingness to prosecute dark pool operators for various violations , such as failing to provide the kind of anonymity and discretion that traders expect. regulatory probes may lead to such cases . the sec reportedly first fined a dark pool owner in 2011 .