dhs's u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) began accepting requests for consideration of daca on august 15 , 2012 , and issued its first approvals in september 2012 . prior to that , from june 15 , 2012 , to august 15 , 2012 , dhs's immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) granted deferred action under the daca process in some cases . more than 580,000 requests for consideration of daca have been approved through june 2014 . individuals granted deferred action under the daca process may request renewal of their deferral for another two years , in accordance with uscis procedures . answers to frequently asked questions about daca and the renewal process are provided below . the daca recipient must satisfy the following criteria: the individual did not depart from the united states on or after august 15 , 2012 , without first obtaining advance parole ; the individual has continuously resided in the united states since submitting his or her latest approved daca request ; and the individual has not been convicted of a felony , a significant misdemeanor , or three or more misdemeanors , and is not a threat to national security or public safety . to request a renewal of deferred action under daca , an individual must file the following three forms with dhs / uscis ( the same forms as required for an initial daca request ) : form i - 821d , consideration of deferred action for childhood arrivals form i - 765 , application for employment authorization form i - 765ws , worksheet the forms are available on the uscis website , http: / / www.uscis.gov . an individual requesting a daca renewal does not have to submit any documents that he or she previously provided to uscis in connection with an approved daca request . the individual does have to submit any new documents related to removal proceedings or criminal history . uscis will request additional documentation from the individual , if needed . an individual who was granted deferred action under daca by ice should file the same three forms to request a renewal as an individual who was initially granted deferred action under daca by uscis ( see " what forms and other materials does an applicant for daca renewal have to file ? unlike those initially granted deferred action by uscis , however , individuals who were initially granted deferred action by ice and are requesting a renewal should submit documentation evidencing that they satisfy the threshold criteria for daca ( see " what are the eligibility requirements for consideration of daca ? there is a total fee of $465 , consisting of a form i - 765 filing fee of $380 and biometric services fee of $85 ( the same as for initial daca requests ) . uscis advises daca recipients to request a renewal 120 days before the expiration date of their current period of deferred action . requests submitted more than 150 days before the expiration date may be returned by uscis for later resubmission . the decision on a request to renew daca , like on an initial daca request , is discretionary . uscis makes determinations about renewals on a case - by - case basis .