according to u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) legal guidance issued in 2009 , an eligible sij would include the following . [an unauthorized child] who has been declared dependent on a juvenile court ; whom a juvenile court has legally committed to , or placed under the custody of , an agency or department of a state ; or who has been placed under the custody of an individual or entity appointed by a state or juvenile court . accordingly , petitions that include juvenile court orders legally committing a juvenile to or placing a juvenile under the custody of an individual or entity appointed by a juvenile court are now eligible . the tvpra of 2008 also revised the "specific consent" provisions in the ina , transferring the authority from the u.s. department of homeland security ( dhs ) to the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , the federal department that also has custody of unaccompanied alien children . subsequently , uscis field guidance required that juveniles in the custody of hhs obtain "specific consent from hhs to juvenile court jurisdiction where the juvenile court order determines or alters the juvenile's custody status or placement. the process of becoming an sij and ultimately an lpr includes multiple steps , as the child petitions for sij status after the juvenile court decision and then applies to adjust to lpr status . in response to concerns that the process was taking too long , the law requires uscis to adjudicate sij petitions within 180 days of filing . the law also states that the foreign national may not be denied sij status if he or she "ages out" because the determination is based upon the individual's age when the petition was filed . to promote efficiency , the otherwise mandatory personal interview may be waived for juveniles under 14 years of age who are seeking sij status , or when it is determined that an interview is unnecessary . a juvenile seeking sij status must demonstrate that an administrative or judicial proceeding has resulted in a determination that it would not be in the juvenile's best interest to be returned to the child's or the parent's previous country of nationality or country of last habitual residence . to pre - empt uscis adjudicators from reconsidering the court's determination of abuse , abandonment , or neglect , t he field guidance states that the adjudicators "should f ocus on eligibility for adjustment of status and should avoid questioning a child about the details of the abuse , abandonment or neglect suffered. the law makes clear that a juvenile seeking sij status , at any stage of the sij process , cannot be required to contact the individual ( or family members of the individual ) who allegedly abused , abandoned , or neglected the juvenile . uscis also must complete background checks , including biometric information clearances and name - checks of the juvenile . juveniles seeking sij status are exempted from many of the inadmissibility grounds of the ina . generally , foreign nationals in the united states without authorization , including unauthorized children , are barred from most federal public assistance benefits and programs .