each of these three types of authority is subject to certain constraints . for example , exercises of statutory authority must be consistent with the terms of the delegation ( although the executive branch could have some discretion in interpreting the statute ) . similarly , the executive's exercise of prosecutorial or enforcement discretion could be limited by specific statutory mandates that the executive take particular actions ( eg , detaining certain aliens pending removal proceedings ) . the express adoption of a policy that constitutes an abdication of a statutory duty could also be found to be impermissible , although it might be difficult for a court to assess whether an alleged failure to enforce the law constitutes an "abdication. likewise , agencies' interpretations and applications of statutes must conform to the "unambiguously expressed intent of congress. it also establishes criminal penalties for certain immigration violations . on the other hand , the ina expressly or impliedly confers some discretionary authority on the executive branch in matters of immigration enforcement . for example , the ina authorizes immigration officials to grant certain types of benefits or relief to qualifying aliens who lack lawful immigration status . moreover , the ina permits immigration officials to waive certain statutory restrictions that might otherwise render an alien ineligible to receive particular immigration benefits . the exercise of these discretionary authorities may enable some unlawfully present aliens to remain in the united states — through asylum , temporary protected status , cancellation of removal , or some other means — rather than being removed . in other cases , however , aliens who have entered or have stayed in the united states in violation of ina requirements may be permitted to remain in the country and , in some cases , legalize their status , not as the result of the exercise of expressly delegated authority , but as a result of the executive branch's independent discretion in enforcing the law . article ii of the constitution specifically tasks the executive to "take care that the laws be faithfully executed," and the executive branch has historically been seen as having some discretion in determining when , against whom , how , and even whether to prosecute apparent violations of the law . for example , immigration officials m ay opt to give a lower priority to the removal of certain categories of unlawfully present aliens because the removal of other categories ( eg , those convicted of serious crimes ) has been deemed a higher priority in light of resource constraints and other considerations . congressional enactments could , however , be seen as limiting the executive's discretion not to take particular actions ( eg , by mandating that certain aliens be detained pending removal proceedings ) . the express adoption of an executive policy that is "in effect an abdication of ... statutory duty" could also be found to be impermissible , but it might be difficult for a court to assess whether an alleged failure to enforce the law constitutes an abdication . the executive branch's discretion to interpret applicable statutes when congress has not spoken to the precise question at issue may also afford immigration officials some flexibility in determining how ina requirements apply to a particular alien or category of aliens .