appendix a . text of section 1208 of the national defense authorization act for 1990 ( p.l . 101-189 ) sec . transfer of excess personal property ( a ) transfer authorized - ( 1 ) notwithstanding any other provision of law and subject to subsection ( b ) , the secretary of defense may transfer to federal and state agencies personal property of the department of defense , including small arms and ammunition , that the secretary determines is - - ( a ) suitable for use by such agencies in counter - drug activities ; and ( b ) excess to the needs of the department of defense . ( 2 ) personal property transferred under this section may be transferred without cost to the recipient agency . ( 3 ) the secretary shall carry out this section in consultation with the attorney general and the director of national drug control policy . ( b ) conditions for transfer - the secretary may transfer personal property under this section only if - - ( 1 ) the property is drawn from existing stocks of the department of defense ; and ( 2 ) the transfer is made without the expenditure of any funds available to the department of defense for the procurement of defense equipment . ( c ) application - the authority of the secretary to transfer personal property under this section shall expire on september 30 , 1992 . appendix b . text of 10 u.s.c . ยง2576a , "excess personal property: sale or donation for law enforcement activities" ยง2576a . excess personal property: sale or donation for law enforcement activities ( a ) transfer authorized . ( 1 ) notwithstanding any other provision of law and subject to subsection ( b ) , the secretary of defense may transfer to federal and state agencies personal property of the department of defense , including small arms and ammunition , that the secretary determines is - - ( a ) suitable for use by the agencies in law enforcement activities , including counter - drug and counter - terrorism activities ; and ( b ) excess to the needs of the department of defense . ( 2 ) the secretary shall carry out this section in consultation with the attorney general and the director of national drug control policy . ( b ) conditions for transfer . the secretary of defense may transfer personal property under this section only if - - ( 1 ) the property is drawn from existing stocks of the department of defense ; ( 2 ) the recipient accepts the property on an as - is , where - is basis ; ( 3 ) the transfer is made without the expenditure of any funds available to the department of defense for the procurement of defense equipment ; and ( 4 ) all costs incurred subsequent to the transfer of the property are borne or reimbursed by the recipient . ( c ) consideration . subject to subsection ( b ) ( 4 ) , the secretary may transfer personal property under this section without charge to the recipient agency . ( d ) preference for certain transfers .