concerns addressed in p.l . 113-183 have been at the forefront of a variety of congressional hearings , round tables , and other events held by congressional committees or caucuses over the past five years . the following list , arranged chronologically , illustrates these activities but is not necessarily exhaustive . in october 2010 , the senate caucus on foster youth , co - chaired by senators grassley and landrieu , issued a white paper that drew on its series of meetings with foster youth and other stakeholders to discuss policy and practice changes that could improve outcomes for children in foster care . among a wide range of policy options , the white paper discussed restricting the use of another planned permanent living arrangement ( appla ) , requiring states to make youth aware of their rights while in foster care , improving access to appropriate social and extracurricular activities , and improving data collection on children in foster care . more recently , the house ways and means subcommittee on human resources and the senate finance committee convened hearings and roundtables to review some of these same issues as well as on improvements for collecting child support . in march 2012 , the house ways and means subcommittee on human resources held a hearing that focused on implementation legislation to ensure u.s. compliance with an international treaty on recovering child support and making improvements to the child support enforcement ( cse ) program . in april 2012 , the senate finance committee convened a roundtable discussion that focused on a number of issues pertaining to the well - being of children in foster care , including the need to normalize the experiences of foster children and improve permanency for older youth in care . in february 2013 , the house ways and means subcommittee on human resources held a hearing concerning increasing adoptions out of foster care . witnesses from various private organizations discussed the importance of achieving permanency for older children or those with other factors making them harder to place and emphasized the importance of pre - adoption training as well as post - adoption services . in february 2013 , the senate finance committee held a roundtable discussion entitled , "child support enforcement: addressing immediate and future challenges for child support enforcement agencies. the committee heard a number of recommendations to improve collection and delivery of payments and services to custodial and noncustodial parents . in april 2013 , the senate committee on finance held a hearing to consider reauthorization of the adoption incentives program , to extend funding for family connection grants and , more broadly , to consider the kinds of changes necessary to make further improvements in the provision of foster care . in may 2013 , the house ways and means subcommittee on human resources held a hearing to discuss efforts to ensure that children in foster care can have the same experiences as their peers generally .