this report describes certain features of shop exchanges . each description includes information about how the feature is implemented in sb - shop and ff - shop exchanges . each description also includes information about the timing of implementation . the report concludes with a discussion about the current and future place of shop exchanges in the broader context of the private health insurance market . beginning in 2016 , all states must define small employer as 100 or fewer employees . ( information about the definitions and methods employers must use to determine size is below. ) beginning in 2017 , states have the option to allow large employers to use a shop exchange . small employers may be able to purchase coverage through one or more shop exchanges . a small employer may purchase coverage through a shop exchange that services its principal business address or through each shop exchange that services employees' primary worksites , if employees work at multiple worksites and those worksites are not all in the service area of one shop exchange . in order for an employee to be eligible to obtain coverage through a shop exchange , a shop - eligible employer must offer the employee coverage . statute and regulations require that exchanges , both shop and individual , carry out certain consumer assistance functions . some functions require that exchanges provide direct support to consumers . for example , exchanges must provide for the operation of a call center that addresses the needs of consumers who have questions about shop exchanges and individual exchanges . exchanges are also expected to provide indirect support to consumers by implementing consumer assistance personnel programs . exchanges must establish navigator programs and certified application counselor ( cac ) programs , and exchanges have the option to implement a program for non - navigator consumer assistance personnel . under these programs , individuals are trained to help consumers make informed decisions about their insurance options and help consumers access shop and individual exchange coverage . however , consumer assistance personnel may not enroll small employers or individuals in coverage . pursuant to state law , exchanges may also allow insurance agents and brokers to help small employers and individuals obtain coverage through exchanges . unlike consumer assistance personnel , agents and brokers may enroll individuals and small employers in coverage through exchanges . see the " role of agents and brokers in enrollment process " section of this report for specific information about how agents and brokers can enroll small employers in coverage obtain through shop exchanges . to enroll in coverage offered through a shop exchange , both employers and employees must submit applications to the shop . the shop exchange must verify the information submitted and determine employers' and employees' eligibility . enrollment in a shop exchange is not limited to a specified open enrollment period , except in certain circumstances . specific circumstances aside , a shop must allow employers to enroll any time during a year , and the employer's plan year must consist of the 12-month period beginning with the employer's effective date of coverage . each shop exchange must establish uniform enrollment timelines for employers and employees .