coal industry . the united mine workers of america ( umwa ) represents more than 73,000 coal miners . automotive industry . the bankruptcy of the general motors corporation ( old gm ) in 2009 was the fourth - largest bankruptcy in u.s. history , and it was accompanied by a period of federal aid to the automotive industry . two distinctive features of the old gm bankruptcy were that federal financing was important to the ultimate outcome ( and subsequent retiree benefits ) and that the outcome was associated with a particularly strong labor union — the united auto workers ( uaw ) . the report also focuses on the delphi corporation , an automobile parts supplier whose salaried retirees attempted to receive the benefits that hourly uaw retirees received . hourly uaw hourly employees at delphi had received contractual promises regarding their benefits from old gm in the pre - bankruptcy period . salaried workers at delphi had received no such contractual promises . to facilitate increasing their benefits , salaried retirees formed their own labor association , the delphi salaried workers association ( dsra ) . congress has periodically passed legislation covering retiree benefits for coal miners since at least the 1940s . in october 1992 , passage of the coal act protected health benefits for some retired coal miners . in 2006 , trust funds covering health insurance for retired miners received federal assistance . various proposals dealing with pensions and health benefits provided by bankrupt coal employers have been advanced over the last several years . these proposals were influenced by the july 2012 bankruptcy of the patriot coal corporation , an employer with coal mines in west virginia . these three case studies are not necessarily representative of all chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings of large , unionized firms . indeed , as case studies , they are not necessarily representative of all bankruptcy proceedings of large , unionized firms in industries in which congress has become involved . nevertheless , they do provide some evidence of how the federal government deals with retiree benefits in industries in which competitive pressures have changed . this report begins with a discussion of whether bankrupt firms can invalidate previous commitments covering retiree pensions and health insurance . it next discusses the specific protections accorded to retiree pensions and health insurance benefits . certain types of pensions are guaranteed by a quasi - public agency , but no such guarantee exists for retiree health insurance . the report concludes with brief case studies of the bankruptcies of old gm , delphi , and patriot . the retired employee is eligible for cobra continuation coverage for life , and his or her spouse and dependents are eligible for continuation coverage for 36 months . this continuation coverage , however , is contingent upon the employer maintaining a health insurance plan for active employees . two additional congressionally authorized programs have provided retiree funding in the past few years but have expired . first , section 1102 of the aca authorized $5 billion in funding for the early retiree reinsurance program ( errp ) . the errp reimburses employers for especially high health insurance claims incurred by early retirees . the early retirees themselves do not receive any reimbursements from this program .