in addition , p.l . 104-193 clarified the definition of a child's home state and made several revisions to ensure that the full faith and credit laws could be applied consistently with uifsa . it clarifies 28 u.s.c . ยง1738b by stipulating that a state court may modify a child support order issued by a court of another state if the court of the other state no longer has continuing , exclusive jurisdiction of a child support order because that state is no longer the residence of the child or an individual contestant and the parties have not consented in a record or in open court that the court of the other state may continue to exercise jurisdiction to modify its order . it also makes minor changes to the definitions section of 28 u.s.c . 113-183 provides further clarification ( as noted above ) of under what conditions a state could modify a child support order . 113-183 makes the amendments to 28 u.s.c . title iii of p.l . 113-183 includes provisions that would implement the convention . although there are several other provisions in title iii related to the cse program , this report focuses solely on the provisions that are related to improving the enforcement of child support in international cases . 113-183 requires the secretary of hhs to use the authorities provided by law to ensure the compliance of the united states with any multilateral child support convention to which the united states is a party . according to cbo this provision is expected to reduce federal direct spending by $1 million across 11 years ( fy2014-fy2024 ) . the convention will not affect intrastate or interstate child support cases in the united states . it will only apply to cases where the custodial parent and child live in one country and the noncustodial parent lives in another country . 113-183 gives other countries participating in the convention access to the federal parent locator service ( fpls ) . the fpls is an assembly of systems operated by ocse to assist states in locating noncustodial parents , putative fathers , and custodial parties for the establishment of paternity and child support obligations , as well as in the enforcement and modification of orders for child support , custody , and visitation . under the program , the irs , operating on request from a state filed through the secretary of hhs , intercepts tax returns and deducts the amount of certified child support arrearages . the money is then sent to the state cse agency for distribution . 113-183 amends section 466 ( f ) of the ssa to read as follows: "in order to satisfy section 454 ( 2 ) ( a ) , each state must have in effect the uniform interstate family support act , as approved by the american bar association on february 9 , 1993 , including any amendments officially adopted as of september 30 , 2008 by the national conference of commissioners on uniform state laws. ( emphasis added ) this means that for a state to receive federal cse funding , each state's uifsa must include verbatim any amendments officially adopted as of september 30 , 2008 , by the nccusl .