fda warning letters are informal and advisory . a warning letter may communicate the fda's position on a certain issue but does not commit the agency to taking any further enforcement action . thus , the fda has concluded that a warning letter does not qualify as a final agency action subject to judicial review under the administrative procedure act . courts generally agree with this interpretation of the legal status of warning letters . in holistic candlers and consumers ass'n v. fda , the d.c . generally , federal courts lack jurisdiction over agency actions committed under the agency's discretion as granted by law , including , for example , most of the statutory enforcement authorities discussed in this report . private citizens do not have the right to sue to enforce the ffdca . section 310 ( a ) states that "all ... proceedings for the enforcement , or to restrain violations , of this [act] shall be by and in the name of the united states. the letter would also request the recipient to institute corrective action ( s ) and to return a written response to the agency's warning letter . the fda generally includes a warning in the letter that failure to correct the violation promptly may result in additional enforcement action . circuit found that the agency's warning letters requesting that the addressee take prompt action to correct certain ffdca product violations did not qualify as final agency action , and thus could not serve as the basis for the addressee's legal claim against the agency . circuit further articulated that in order for any agency action to be "final" the action must mark the beginning of the agency's decision - making process , and that the action must be one from which "legal consequences will flow. according to the court , an fda warning letter is not final because it provides firms with an opportunity to take voluntary corrective action before the fda decides to initiate any enforcement action . additionally , the court concluded that "legal consequences" cannot arise from warning letters due to their informal and advisory nature . similarly , the ninth circuit in biotics research corp. v. heckler emphasized the point that fda regulatory letters do not constitute final administrative determinations subject to judicial review due to the absence of any commitment on behalf of the fda to follow the correspondence with additional enforcement actions . the recall process permits the fda to enforce the adulteration and misbranding provisions of the ffdca by encouraging industry participants to remove the product and correct the violation . this section addresses this fda recall enforcement authority by first analyzing the various triggers of the recall process and then by examining the fda recall process itself . the fda conducts inspections of regulated facilities in order to oversee a firm's compliance with the ffdca and corresponding regulations . the ffdca requires all food facilities to register with the fda and to renew such registration biennially so that the agency may effectively oversee all areas of food production .