indeed , the d.c . circuit has held in the criminal context that "it is well settled that the question of whether and when prosecution is to be instituted is within the discretion of the attorney general . former assistant attorney general theodore olson argued that by providing an individual , who was not under the president's control , with the authority to initiate and conduct criminal prosecutions , the law constituted an unconstitutional congressional intrusion into the president's enforcement power . the court rejected this argument , determining that the law was consistent with the appointments clause ; did not impermissibly expand the judicial function ; did not infringe upon the president's removal power ; and finally did not violate the separation of powers . with respect to the separation of powers , the court determined that the law neither "'impermissibly undermine[s]' the powers of the executive branch , [n]or 'disrupts the proper balance between the coordinate branches [by] prevent[ing] the executive branch from accomplishing its constitutionally assigned functions.' in reaching this conclusion , the court placed great weight on the fact that the independent counsel provisions did not "involve an attempt by congress to increase its own powers at the expense of the executive branch. congress retained no powers of "control of supervision. rather its role was limited to receiving reports and exercising oversight . although the law clearly "reduce[d] the amount of control or supervision" exercised by the president over the "investigation and prosecution of a certain class of alleged criminal activity," it did not do so in an impermissible manner . furthermore , the president retained an adequate "degree of control over the power to initiate an investigation" because the independent counsel could be appointed only at the request of the attorney general , and — "most importantly" — the attorney general retained the power to remove the counsel for "good cause. as a result , the court concluded: notwithstanding the fact that the counsel is to some degree 'independent' and free from executive supervision to a greater extent than other federal prosecutors , in our view these features of the act give the executive branch sufficient control over the independent counsel to ensure that the president is able to perform his constitutionally assigned duties . justice scalia's dissent in morrison adopted a much stronger view of executive enforcement powers , holding that the investigation and prosecution of crimes was a "quintessential" and "exclusive" executive function . scalia would have invalidated the independent counsel provisions , and expressly rejected the majority's conclusion that "the ability to control the decision whether to investigate and prosecute the president's closest advisers , and indeed the president himself , is not 'so central to the functioning of the executive branch' as to be constitutionally required to be within the president's control. he went on to assert that: we should say here that the president's constitutionally assigned duties include complete control over investigation and prosecution of violations of the law , and that the inexorable command of article ii is clear and definite: the executive power must be vested in the president of the united states .