areas administered by other agencies are not subject to the cwa . responsibility for overseeing the design , construction , and maintenance of such works was delegated to the secretary of the interior or the administrator of the gsa , the national capital planning commission ( ncpc ) , and the u.s. commission of fine arts ( cfa ) . additionally , the cwa restricts placement of commemorative works to certain areas of the district of columbia based on the subject's historic importance . pursuant to the cwa , locating a commemorative work on federally owned and administered land in the district of columbia requires the federal government to maintain the memorial unless otherwise stipulated in the enabling legislation . in some cases , however , authorized memorials are ultimately sited on land that falls outside of cwa jurisdiction and outside the boundaries of the district of columbia and its environs . for example , the air force memorial was authorized by congress for placement on land owned and administered by either nps or gsa in the district of columbia . memorial organizers , however , chose a site near the pentagon in arlington , va , that is owned and administered by the department of defense . consequently , the department of defense , not the nps or gsa , is responsible for maintenance . this report highlights in - progress works and memorials with lapsed authorizations since the passage of the cwa in 1986 . the report provides information — located within text boxes for easy reference — on the statute ( s ) authorizing the work ; the sponsor organization ; statutory legislative extensions , if any ; and the memorial's location or proposed location , if known . a picture or rendering of each work is also included , when available . the cwa divides areas administered by the nps and the gsa in the district of columbia and its environs into three sections for the placement of memorials: the reserve , area i , and area ii . for each area , the standards for memorial placement are specified in law , and congressional approval of monument location is required . of the 37 commemorative works authorized for placement in the district of columbia since 1986 , 19 ( 51% ) have been completed and dedicated , 12 ( 32% ) are in progress , and 6 ( 16% ) have lapsed authorizations . several factors may affect a memorial foundation's ability to complete a memorial . these include settling on a desired site location , getting design approval , and raising the funds necessary to design and build a commemorative work . since the passage of the commemorative works act ( cwa ) in 1986 , congress has authorized 37 commemorative works to be placed in the district of columbia or its environs ; 32 of these have been sited on land governed by the cwa . of these works , 12 are in progress and 6 have lapsed authorizations . table 1 lists commemorative works authorized by congress since 1986 that are in progress or whose authorization has lapsed . currently , 12 commemorative works are in various stages of development .