provincial government . whether or not the keystone xl is approved , it appears canadian federal government officials will also continue to argue for the approval of the cross - canada pipelines . beyond the debates about the proposed keystone xl pipeline's impacts on oil sands production and greenhouse gases , some stakeholders have expressed a broader concern about whether the approval or denial of the project could set a precedent for u.s. energy policy . they argue that while many of the decisions that may affect the development of the oil sands will ultimately be made by the market and the national and provincial governments of canada , the choice of whether or not to approve the permit for the project is an opportunity for the u.s. government to signal its future direction . some stakeholders have pushed for a national energy policy that moves the united states away from a reliance on fossil fuels . they see the decision to build the proposed pipeline as a 50-year - long commitment to a carbon - based economy and its resulting ghg emissions . some observers contend that with meaningful action on climate policy slowed or stalled in congress , the courts , and , to some extent , the regulatory agencies ( i.e. , local , state , and federal environmental and land - use agencies ) , the sole remaining outlet to leverage a low - carbon energy policy is case - by - case action on such items as infrastructure permits . some of these stakeholders have actively opposed the permit for the project believing that it may set a precedent . if the pipeline is allowed to go forward , they say , it may be the case that no future infrastructure project would be held accountable for its incremental contribution to cumulative ghg emissions . others recognize that the project could affect u.s. energy policy by setting a precedent and sending a signal , but they reach a different conclusion . many regard the project as one element of a revitalized energy production sector in north america and urge that u.s. policy should support investment in such infrastructure for economic and national security reasons . in this view , since canadian oil sands will be developed regardless of the transportation mode used , the public policy interest lies in supporting north american energy suppliers rather than those overseas . the executive branch has exercised permitting authority over the construction and operation of "pipelines , conveyor belts , and similar facilities for the exportation or importation of petroleum , petroleum products" and other products at least since the promulgation of executive order 11423 in 1968 . executive order 13337 amended this authority and the procedures associated with the review , but did not substantially alter the exercise of authority or the delegation to the secretary of state in e.o . however , the source of the executive branch's permitting authority is not entirely clear from the text of these executive orders . generally , powers exercised by the executive branch are authorized by legislation or are inherent presidential powers based in the constitution . 11423 makes no mention of any authority , and e.o .