in those cases , the reagan and george h.w . bush administrations , respectively , granted indefinite voluntary departure ( ivd ) and employment authorization to certain immediate relatives of aliens who had legalized their status pursuant to irca . it is anticipated that the report will be updated to reflect further developments . other reports discuss related issues , including crs report r43782 , executive discretion as to immigration: legal overview , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r42924 , prosecutorial discretion in immigration enforcement: legal issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r43708 , the take care clause and executive discretion in the enforcement of law , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report r43747 , deferred action for childhood arrivals ( daca ) : frequently asked questions , by [author name scrubbed] . following the president's televised speech , executive branch agencies and , in two cases , the white house announced dozens of specific actions as to immigration . these actions can be broadly divided into the same three categories noted by the president in his speech: ( 1 ) border security , ( 2 ) the current unlawfully present population , and ( 3 ) future legal immigration . as of november 24 , 2014 , the president has not issued an executive order regarding these immigration - related actions ; nor has he given any indication that he will issue such an order . with the exception of several specific actions announced in two presidential memoranda , all other actions to date—including the granting of deferred action to some unlawfully present aliens—have been announced in intra - agency memoranda or fact sheets made available by executive agencies after the president's televised address . nonetheless , aliens granted deferred action could potentially be eligible for certain benefits—or things sometimes perceived as benefits—because aliens granted deferred action are seen as "lawfully present" ( or "legally residing" ) in the united states . this is , in part , because one congress cannot bind future congresses . thus , despite prwora's restrictions upon the receipt of public benefits by aliens who are not included within its definition of "qualified aliens," subsequent congresses have enacted legislation that provides for aliens' receipt of public benefits that is inconsistent with—and does not use the language of—prwora . this is arguably consistent with prior actions in the field of immigration and , particularly , prior exercises of discretion in enforcing federal immigration law . the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) of 2010 similarly permits persons who are "lawfully present" to participate in certain health care programs established under the act . however , while lawfully present for purposes of aca has generally been construed in the same way as lawfully residing for purposes of chipra , those granted deferred action through daca have been deemed ineligible for certain benefits under aca . ( as of the date of this report , the administration does not appear to have formally addressed how aliens granted deferred action through the november initiatives will be treated for purposes of aca. )