persons attempting to board an aircraft who are matched to an identity on the no fly list are not allowed to board . although the current number and identity of persons on the no fly list is not a matter of public record , some recent news reports claim that more than 80,000 people are currently on the list . however , some persons have claimed that their alleged placement on the list was the result of an erroneous determination by the government that they posed a national security threat . the tsa is responsible for prescreening all potential commercial airline travelers before they board an aircraft . substantive due process encapsulates the notion that the due process clause "provides heightened protection against government interference with certain fundamental rights and liberty interests. courts have found that placement on the no fly list can potentially implicate procedural and substantive due process rights . however , because claims alleging substantive due process violations are somewhat underdeveloped as of yet , this report primarily examines procedural due process claims , which have received more extensive analysis by federal courts . properly balancing the important national security interest of preventing terrorist attacks with the civil liberties of travelers prevented from boarding a plane is a complicated and delicate matter . operation of the government's no fly list implicates a wide variety of statutory and constitutional issues . a number of lower courts have ruled that a previous version of the government's redress procedures was unconstitutional . pursuant to this responsibility , tsa uses the "no fly" list to identify individuals who pose a threat to aviation safety . in some cases , it has been reported that persons have been prevented from boarding an aircraft because they were mistakenly believed to be on the no fly list , sometimes on account of having a name similar to another person who was actually on the list . the department of homeland security ( dhs ) operates a redress process for travelers who wish to contest their right to board an aircraft , but this procedure has been challenged in federal court as violating the fifth amendment right to due process . after an adverse ruling in a federal district court case in 2014 , the executive branch revised the process . this report provides an overview of the operation of the government's watchlists , examines some of the legal issues implicated by challenges to the no fly list , and describes recent case law on the matter . the fifth amendment of the u.s. constitution provides that no person shall be "deprived of life , liberty , or property , without due process of law. this protection extends to u.s. citizens and noncitizens who have sufficient ties to the united states . courts have developed two major legal doctrines concerning the protection of rights and liberty interests under the due process clause — procedural and substantive due process . "procedural due process imposes constraints on governmental decisions which deprive individuals of 'liberty' or 'property' interests within the meaning of the due process clause of the fifth or fourteenth amendment. as explained below , the particular procedures required may vary according to the situation .