the facilities in benghazi were permanent structures . ( see figure 1 below. ) congress has not enacted a stand - alone state department appropriation prior to the start of the fiscal year since 1995 and has not passed a stand - alone foreign relations authorization law since 2002 . both could have been legislative vehicles for debate regarding administration of foreign affairs , including diplomatic / embassy security funding and priorities . instead , congress has provided ongoing security funding within continuing resolutions ( crs ) that have delayed by several months the full - year appropriation eventually provided . funding within a cr is usually based on the previous year's funding levels . base funding ( also referred to as regular or enduring appropriations ) is available to u.s. facilities worldwide . total security funding includes the base funding plus supplemental and / or overseas contingency operations ( oco ) funding for diplomatic / embassy security that has been available primarily for iraq , but also for afghanistan and pakistan . furthermore , if spending was not in the previous - year's appropriation ( as was the case with benghazi in 2012 ) , it would not be funded by a cr . only after the final appropriation is passed by congress and signed into law by the president would state department officials know what level of funding they can allocate on a daily / weekly / monthly basis over the 275 worldwide diplomatic posts ( or 1,600 work facilities ) and over the remainder of the fiscal year . congress provides funding for diplomatic / embassy security within the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations . the bulk ( typically more than 90% ) of the funding is provided by two subaccounts: worldwide security protection ( wsp ) , within the diplomatic and consular programs ( d&cp ) account , and worldwide security upgrades ( wsu ) within the embassy security , construction , and maintenance ( escm ) account . funds within both of these accounts are typically available until expended . other appropriations are within the subaccounts diplomatic security ( ds ) and counterterrorism ( both within d&cp ) , and diplomatic security ( ds ) within the border security program ( bsp ) . a brief description of each follows: wsp , the largest component of security - related funding within department of state appropriations , supports numerous security programs addressing the security of life , property , and information , including a worldwide guard force protecting overseas diplomatic missions and residences , as well as domestic facilities . in fy2015 , for the first time , many ds - related salaries and related costs from ds and other bureaus have been requested under wsp rather than in diplomatic and consular programs as part of what the department calls a security realignment initiative . wsu , within escm , provides funding for bricks and mortar - type of security . it funds the department of state's portion of the capital security cost sharing program that combines with funds from other agencies represented overseas for planning , design and construction of secure new embassy compounds . it also funds ongoing security activities and security - related maintenance .