enforcement is expressly left to the president . the icwpa also applies to the employees of a contractor of any of the aforementioned agencies . an employee seeking to bring a complaint or disclose information to congress under the icwpa is subject to two limitations: ( 1 ) the complaint or information must be related to an "urgent concern" as defined in the act ; and ( 2 ) the employee must first bring the complaint or disclose the information to the agency head through the proper agency channels . under the icwpa , ic employees and contractors can disclose to congress only complaints and information that are "with respect to an urgent concern. under the act , an "urgent concern" can be one of three things . first , it can be a "serious or flagrant" abuse , problem , violation of executive order or law , or deficiency in funding , agency administration , or agency operations involving classified information . second , an urgent concern can be a false statement to , or willful withholding from , congress on an issue of material fact relating to intelligence activity funding , administration , or operation . third , an urgent concern can include adverse personnel action stemming from disclosure under the icwpa . a complaint or information that is not regarding one of these three "urgent concerns" is not covered by the icwpa . however , disclosures within this third category fall within title vi only if they do not result in the sharing of information that is classified under an executive order for national security reasons . title vi's protections against adverse security or information access determinations also differ from its protections against adverse personnel actions because it provides mechanisms for enforcing the former ; whereas enforcement of the latter is left to the president's discretion as mentioned above . title vi directed the president to select , within 180 days of the statute's enactment ( july 7 , 2014 ) , an agency or department responsible for ensuring that intelligence agencies have adequate procedural protections that they must follow before taking action that adversely affects an employee's security clearance or information access . within this time frame , the president must also select an agency or department responsible for developing procedures that agencies must follow for employee appeals of adverse security clearance or information access decisions to the icig or agency inspector general . title vi permits an employee 90 days from the adverse security clearance or information determination to use these appeal procedures . the appeal procedures that must be established under title vi must allow the icig or agency inspector general to engage in a fact - finding investigation and report the investigation results to the agency head within 180 days of the employee's appeal . during the investigation , the employee must be allowed , "to the fullest extent possible," to present relevant evidence . the icig or agency inspector general cannot find that a prohibited security clearance or information access determination occurred if the agency demonstrates that the employee's disclosure was not a contributing factor in the determination .