appendix a . state participation in race to the top , common core state standards , and esea flexibility package table a - 1 provides state - by - state information on whether a state applied for a race to the top ( rtt ) state grant and , if so , under which phase ( s ) the state applied . it also provides information on whether a state received a rtt state grant award and under which phase the award was granted . the table also includes information on the date on which the state adopted the common core state standards , if applicable . finally , the table details the date on which the state applied for the esea flexibility package and the date on which the application was initially approved , if applicable . appendix b . selected acronyms used in this report arra: american recovery and reinvestment act ayp: adequate yearly progress ccssi: common core state standards initiative ccsso: council of chief state school officers ed: u.s. department of education ela: english / language arts elp: english language proficiency esea: elementary and secondary education act dodea: department of defense education activity gepa: general education provisions act ihe: institution of higher education lea: local educational agency nclb: no child left behind act nga: national governors association parcc: partnership for the assessment of readiness for college and careers sea: state educational agency rtt: race to the to . they were then submitted to the validation committee . in september 2009 , the ccssi announced the members of a validation committee that was "tasked with reviewing and verifying the standards development process and the resulting evidence - based college - and career - readiness standards. the second phase of work on the standards began in november 2009 with the announcement of the work group that would develop the k - 12 ela and mathematics standards that would be aligned with the college - and career - readiness standards . the k - 12 work group was composed of individuals with varied expertise and experience in areas such as assessment ; curriculum design ; early childhood education ; child development ; and elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education . the work group developed multiple drafts of the standards that were shared with a wide range of stakeholders including states , content experts , teachers , professional organizations , civil rights groups , and members of the higher education community . on march 10 , 2010 , the draft k - 12 ela and mathematics standards were posted for public comment . nearly 10,000 people provided feedback on the drafts . based on this feedback , subsequent revisions were made to the standards . following these revisions , the validation committee met to review the standards . the final common core state standards were released on june 2 , 2010 . adoption of the standards is optional .