this program targets funding under the community facilities program . essential facilities include those that support public safety infrastructure and provide community health care . section 6013 reauthorizes rural cooperative development grants . this provision permits multi - year grants ( up to three years ) for awards to rural cooperative centers . it provides a 20% set - aside for rural centers working with socially disadvantaged communities when the appropriation level exceeds $7.5 million . the provision also establishes minimum levels of downstream transmission capacity . section 6201 reauthorizes the distance learning and telemedicine loan and grant program , which provides funding for end - user telecommunications equipment . the provision also emphasizes library connectivity as an objective of program funding . funding is authorized at $75 million each year for fy2014 through fy2018 , subject to annual appropriations . section 6003 reauthorizes the rural water and wastewater circuit rider program , which provides technical assistance to rural water systems . funding is authorized at $20 million annually ( fy2014-fy2018 ) , subject to annual appropriations . section 6007 reauthorizes the emergency and imminent community water assistance grant program , which provides funding to rural communities facing threats to the provision of potable water . funding is authorized at $30 million annually through 2018 , subject to annual appropriations . section 6008 reauthorizes water systems for rural and native villages in alaska . funding is authorized at $30 million annually through 2018 , subject to annual appropriations . section 6009 reauthorizes grants to nonprofit organizations for the construction and refurbishing of household well water s ystems . the program targets well systems for low - income individuals in rural areas . authorized funding was reduced from $10 million to $5 million each year for fy2014 through fy2018 , subject to annual appropriations . section 6210 provides $150 million in mandatory funding for pending water and wastewater loan and grant applications . this would be a one - time expenditure designed to remove some of the current backlog of applications . section 6005 reauthorizes tribal college and university essential community facilities through 2018 . it provides an appropriation of $40 million each year for fy2014 through fy2018 . section 6023 reauthorizes the rural microentrepreneur assistance program . funding is authorized at $3 million annually through fy2018 . the program provides loans and grants to third - party organizations to assist small businesses that cannot otherwise get credit at reasonable terms . the third - party entities provide expertise to the small businesses in developing and implementing innovative projects . section 6015 reauthorizes the appropriate technology transfer for rural areas program ( attra ) . the program supports a cooperative agreement between the rural business - cooperative service and the university of arkansas to provide information and technical support for sustainable and organic agricultural production . authorizes $5 million annually through fy2018 , subject to annual appropriations . section 6203 reauthorizes the value - added agricultural market development program . this provision targets funding for "mid - tier value chains" which are local and regional supply networks linking independent producers with businesses and cooperatives . it also reserves 10% of the value - added products grants for projects benefitting beginning or socially disadvantaged farmers and ranchers .