this report opens with an overview of the policy issues . it follows with a summary of each of the various visa categories available for temporary professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers as well as an analysis of the trends in the use of these various visas over the past two decades . the policy of authorizing foreign students to work in the united states for at least a year following graduation is discussed next . over 90% of employment - based lprs are adjusting from a temporary visa category to lpr status within the united states , rather than newly arriving from abroad . because the ina requires most foreign nationals seeking to qualify for a nonimmigrant visa to demonstrate that they are not coming to reside permanently , these adjustment of status statistics prompt further explanation on the exceptions noted in the law . the labor market tests for employers hiring temporary foreign workers are also summarized . the rules regarding federal taxation of professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers are explained . the report concludes with a discussion of the avenues for professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers to become legal permanent residents ( lprs ) in the united states . temporary visas for professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers have become an important gateway for high - skilled immigration to the united states . over the past two decades , the number of visas issued annually for all temporary employment - based admission has more than doubled from just over 400,000 in fy1994 to over 1 million in fy2015 . as figure 1 shows , the total number of temporary employment - based visas issued in fy2007 and fy2008 surpassed 1 million and subsequently fell during the 2007-2009 recession . while the total visa numbers include some unskilled and low - skilled workers , the visas for managerial , skilled , and professional workers depicted in figure 1 clearly dominate the trends . in fy2014 and fy2015 , visas for managerial , skilled , and professional workers surpassed the prior peak year of fy2007 ( 885,232 ) as they reached 929,129 and 984,360 , respectively . the data presented in figure 1 understate the trends in professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers because the state department does not issue visas to nonimmigrants who change status within the united states . for example , a foreign national who is in the united states as a student may convert status to a temporary foreign worker nonimmigrant without going abroad to obtain a new visa . for comparison , the department of homeland security office of immigration statistics estimated that there were approximately 1.1 million temporary workers and long - term exchange residents living in the united states in january 2012 ; and the state department reported that there were 937,366 visas issued to temporary employment - based workers and their families in fy2012 . the foreign labor certification program in the u.s. department of labor ( dol ) is responsible for ensuring that foreign workers do not displace or adversely affect the working conditions of u.s. workers . under current law , dol adjudicates labor certification applications ( lca ) for permanent employment - based immigrants .