these include the following: 1 . lima , peru , april 28 , 2011 . the heads of state of chile , colombia , mexico , and peru agreed on the declaration of lima establishing the pacific alliance with the goal of advancing towards the free flow of goods , service , capital , and people . panama was invited to participate in the process as an observer . merida , mexico , december 4 , 2011 . the presidents of the four pacific alliance countries agreed to sign a pacific alliance treaty within six months . cartagena , colombia , march 15 , 2012 ( vía teleconference ) . during this conference , costa rica was included as an observer . antofagasta , chile , june 6 , 2012 . the four countries formally entered into a framework agreement establishing the pacific alliance . the framework agreement is a legal instrument creating the institutional basis of the initiative , defining its objectives , and establishing the requirements for future negotiations and participation of other countries in the region . cádiz , spain , november 17 , 2012 . mexico announced the exemption of visa requirements for colombians and peruvians for up to 180 days . australia , canada , spain , new zealand and uruguay were welcomed as observers . santiago , chile , january 26 , 2013 . the four heads of state agreed that the negotiations that were underway at the time would be concluded by june 30 , 2013 . cali , colombia , may 23 , 2013 . the four countries invited costa rica to become the alliance's first new member . the alliance also announced an agreement to remove tariffs on 90% of the goods traded within the bloc and completed negotiations on trade facilitation and customs cooperation provisions . over 450 business representatives from 14 countries attended the summit . cartagena , colombia , february 10 , 2014 . presidents of pacific alliance countries signed the additional protocol of the framework agreement for the pacific alliance . the additional protocol immediately eliminated 92% of tariffs between members , and gradually will phase out the remaining 8% of tariffs over a seven - year period . punta mita , mexico , june 19 - 20 , 2014 . the four presidents signed the declaration of punta mita , by which they seek to strengthen the objectives and guidelines of the alliance , including the free movement of goods and services , capital and people . they announced the approval to incorporate the mexican stock exchange into the common stock exchange , the latin american integrated market , or the mercado integrado latinoamericano ( mila ) , which is expected in the fourth quarter of 2014 . other highlights of the summit included the signing of an inter - institutional agreement for a work and holiday program , the launch of a scholarship program , and the announcement of a plan for promoting small businesses through financing , investment , and support networks . two new countries were admitted as observers: belgium and trinidad and tobago . paracas , peru , july 1-3 , 2015 . mexico handed over the pro tempore presidency of the pacific alliance to peru .