environmental preference . natural gas , while also a fossil fuel , generally produces lower emissions per vehicle mile than diesel and heavier oil . energy diversity and security . increased use of domestic natural gas for transportation may mean that less oil will be imported . the united states might be more insulated from global petroleum price volatility if more forms of transportation were based on natural gas . growth potential . only 2.9% of u.s , natural gas production is currently used in transportation , mainly to move gas through the pipelines , and expanded use of natural gas vehicles would likely lead to increased demand for natural gas . technology improvements such as hydraulic fracturing and directional drilling have led to massive growth in natural gas production from shale formations . annual natural gas production in the united states has increased by roughly one - fourth since 2006 ( figure 1 ) . oil - based gasoline and diesel fuel continue to remain the fuels of choice in both the domestic and commercial transportation sectors . however , u.s. demand for finished petroleum products has fallen 12% from its all - time peak in 2005 , due in part to greater use of natural gas for many purposes . measured by btus , a barrel of oil has historically cost several times as much as a comparable unit of natural gas ( figure 2 ) . u.s. natural gas prices fell by half between 2008 and 2014 as increasing supplies from shale formations became available . the competitive price advantage that natural gas now demonstrates could be eroded if crude oil prices fall or natural gas prices rise . several different technologies can be used to harness natural gas as a vehicle fuel . some of them require pressurized systems to burn the fuel in a gaseous state , and others convert natural gas to a liquid . still others process natural gas into a variety of liquid fuels suitable for powering internal - combustion engines . the increased use of natural gas as a transportation fuel in any form would require substantial changes in vehicles and fueling infrastructure . new vehicles would need to be developed on a large scale , in some cases requiring new technologies . new fueling stations would be required to make fuel widely available . vehicle manufacturers , fleet owners , vehicle buyers , and service station operators would all need to make significant investments . the required investments differ with the type of technology employed . future consumer and commercial interest in natural gas vehicles hinges on the relative price of petroleum to natural gas , refueling infrastructure , environmental concerns , federal and state incentives , and the price of natural gas vehicles relative to traditional gasoline vehicles . perhaps the most important one is the long - term relationship of gasoline and diesel prices to fuels using natural gas . the success of all alternative fuel vehicles — whether electric , ethanol , natural gas , or hydrogen — is premised on rising prices for gasoline and other vehicular petroleum products . methanol and ethanol flex - fuel vehicles are to some extent casualties of falling petroleum prices in the 1990s and later .