appendix a . acronyms used in this report appendix b. per - meal or per - snack reimbursement rates for child nutrition programs this appendix lists the specific reimbursement rates discussed in the earlier sections of the report . reimbursement rates are adjusted for inflation for each school or calendar year according to terms laid out in the programs' authorizing laws . each year , the new rates are announced in the federal register . 1751 et seq .

 ) ) ; school breakfast program ( sbp ) ( child nutrition act , section 4 ( 42 u.s.c . 1773 ) ) ; child and adult care food program ( cacfp ) ( richard b. russell national school lunch act , section 17 ( 42 u.s.c . 1766 ) ) ; summer food service program ( sfsp ) ( richard b. russell national school lunch act , section 13 ( 42 u.s.c . 1761 ) ) ; and special milk program ( smp ) ( child nutrition act , section 3 ( 42 u.s.c . the programs provide financial support and / or foods to the institutions that prepare meals and snacks served outside of the home ( unlike other food assistance programs such as the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , formerly the food stamp program ) where benefits are used to purchase food for home consumption ) . though exact eligibility rules and pricing vary by program , in general the amount of federal reimbursement is greater for meals served to qualifying low - income individuals or at qualifying institutions , although most programs provide some subsidy for all food served . participating children receive subsidized meals and snacks , which may be free or at reduced price . forthcoming sections discuss how program - specific eligibility rules and funding operate . this report describes how each program operates under current law , focusing on eligibility rules , participation , and funding . this introductory section describes some of the background and principles that generally apply to all of the programs ; subsequent sections go into further detail on the workings of each . unless stated otherwise , participation and funding data come from usda - fns's "keydata reports. this section discusses the school meals programs: the national school lunch program ( nslp ) and the school breakfast program ( sbp ) . principles and concepts common to both programs are discussed first ; subsections then discuss features and data unique to the nslp and sbp , respectively . in addition to the school meals programs discussed above , other federal child nutrition programs provide federal subsidies and commodity food assistance for schools and other institutions that offer meals and snacks to children in early childhood , summer , and after - school settings . this assistance is provided to ( 1 ) schools and other governmental institutions , ( 2 ) private for - profit and nonprofit child care centers , ( 3 ) family / group day care homes , and ( 4 ) nongovernmental institutions / organizations that offer outside - of - school programs for children .