the salient features of the contemporary system are detailed below . the electors are collectively known as the electoral college ; although this phrase does not appear in the constitution , it gained currency in the early days of the republic , and was recognized in federal law in 1845 . any person may serve as an elector , except senators and representatives , or any other person holding an office of "trust or profit" under the united states . article ii , section 1 of the constitution empowers the states to "appoint [electors] , in such manner as the legislature thereof may direct.... " this grant of authority provides the constitutional basis claimed for the npv initiative . in practice , all states currently provide for popular election of their electoral college delegations . candidates for the office of elector are nominated by political parties and other groups on the presidential ballot in each state . in most cases , the candidates for the office of elector are nominated by the state party committee or the party's statewide convention . the winning presidential nominees must gain a national majority of 270 or more electoral votes , out of the 538 total , in order to be elected . if no ticket of candidates attains a majority , then the house of representatives elects the president , and the senate the vice president , in a procedure known as contingent election . the electoral college has no continuing existence ; its sole purpose is to elect the president and vice president . each state is allocated a number of electors equal to the combined total of its u.s. senate and house of representatives delegations . the district of columbia is also allocated three electors . at present , the total is 538 , reflecting the combined size of the senate ( 100 members ) , the house ( 435 members ) , and the district of columbia electors . presidential electors assemble on the first monday after the second wednesday in december following the general election . they meet in their respective states , not collectively , and cast separate votes by ballot for the president and vice president . after the electors vote , the results are sent by the states to congress and various other federal authorities . on january 6 of the year following a presidential election , congress meets in a joint session to count the electoral votes and make a formal declaration of which candidates have been elected president and vice president . a range of factors contributed to the emergence of the national popular vote initiative in the first decade of the 21 st century . a major source was frustration by reform advocates after three decades of failed attempts to secure congressional approval for a direct popular election amendment . a more immediate spur was the contentious and disputed presidential election of 2000 , which is regarded as having been a major factor contributing to the development of the npv proposal . as noted previously , the npv initiative was the ultimate result of the various studies and proposals offered following the presidential election of 2000 .