arizona had adopted s.b . 1070 in 2010 in an attempt to deter unauthorized aliens from settling in the state by requiring that state and local police check the immigration status of all persons whom they stop , arrest , or detain . 1070 also made it a state crime to engage in certain conduct thought to facilitate the presence of unauthorized aliens within the state . the federal government sought to enjoin enforcement of s.b . 1070 on the grounds that it was preempted by federal law . arizona responded , in part , by alleging that federal policies and practices as to immigration enforcement ran afoul of various provisions of the constitution and federal statute . in particular , arizona alleged that federal officials had violated the invasion and domestic violence clauses , as well as the tenth amendment , by , respectively , failing to protect arizona from "invasion" by aliens unlawfully entering the united states and "refusing" to reimburse the state for the "costs and damages associated with illegal immigration in arizona. arizona also alleged that federal officials had failed to comply with statutory mandates to achieve and maintain "operational control" of the arizona - mexico border , pursue and effectuate the removal of unauthorized aliens who are found within the interior of the united states , and reimburse states for the costs of detaining "criminal aliens" pursuant to the state criminal alien assistance program ( scaap ) . the federal government challenged arizona's standing to raise all of these claims other than that as to reimbursement pursuant to scaap . however , the reviewing federal district court "presum[ed]" that arizona had standing because ( 1 ) the federal government did not question whether "illegal immigration" constituted an injury in fact ; ( 2 ) arizona had alleged facts indicating that unauthorized aliens' conduct and choices in crossing into arizona were directly influenced by federal policies and practices ; and ( 3 ) ordering the federal government to "deploy ... temporary measures" to secure the border would provide arizona "some relief. arizona did not fare as well on the merits of its arguments . the reviewing federal district court first found that arizona's claims as to the invasion clause and the tenth amendment were precluded by the litigation in the mid - 1990s , or , alternatively , settled in the federal government's favor by ninth circuit precedent . the court similarly found that arizona's remaining constitutional claim — alleging a violation of the domestic violence clause that had not been raised in the mid - 1990s litigation — was also settled by ninth circuit precedent finding that the clause applies only to "insurrections , riots , and other forms of civil disorder," and not "ordinary crimes. the court also viewed the domestic violence clause as implicating nonjusticiable political questions . the reviewing federal district court then found that arizona's various statutory claims involved actions that were committed to agency discretion by law and , thus , were not subject to review by the courts .