as discussed in the " i . background " section , there is an exemption from the individual mandate for individuals whose contribution to health coverage is more than 8% of household income . aca specifies that this contribution is calculated for certain individuals as the annual premium for the lowest cost plan available on an exchange in the state , minus any allowable premium tax credit . accordingly , if an individual is not allowed the premium credit , coverage becomes more expensive , and the unaffordability exemption may kick in , meaning that the individual does not have to obtain coverage under the individual mandate . it has been predicted that eliminating the premium tax credits in states with federally run exchanges would exempt more individuals from the individual mandate , and would make coverage unaffordable for many of these individuals . commentators have also noted that if the supreme court invalidates the irs rule , this could have a debilitating effect on the federally run exchanges . this report provides background on relevant provisions of aca . it then answers questions concerning the litigation and potential implications of the court's decision in king . thus , it is argued that the population in these plans could become skewed toward sicker , more expensive enrollees , and this may lead to a rise in premiums in affected exchanges . the absence of premium tax credits in states with a federally facilitated exchange could also affect the application of the employer mandate . as discussed in the " i . background " section , aca specifies that liability for the excise tax under the employer mandate is generally triggered when one or more of an employer's full - time employees is allowed a premium tax credit through a health insurance exchange . accordingly , if credits are not available in states with federally run exchanges , large employers may not be subject to penalties if they fail to offer affordable coverage to employees . if the court finds that premium tax credits are not available in federally run exchanges , the question arises what states would have to do to in order for their exchange to be "established by the state under section 1311" for purposes of the credit . current law and regulations articulate what steps a state must take in order for the federal government not to set up an exchange within the state . as part of aca's intended goal of improving accessibility to health coverage , the act provides for the establishment of "exchanges," structured marketplaces for the sale and purchase of health insurance . section 1311 of aca specifies that each state must establish an american health benefit exchange that is either a state governmental agency or a nonprofit entity , in order to provide health coverage to qualified individuals and employers . however , a separate section of aca , section 1321 , generally provides that if a state does not elect to establish an exchange , or if the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) determines that an electing state will not have an operational exchange , or has not taken certain specified actions , the secretary must establish and operate such exchange within the state .