, to have information about the risk it is taking on ) . see the text box for more details . when market reforms were implemented under the aca , some of them were new to certain insurance markets ; others had been in place in some capacity due to either state or federal laws . for example , guaranteed issue requires that an insurer accept every applicant for coverage as long as the applicant agrees to the terms and conditions of the insurance offer ( eg , the premium ) . in the early 1990s , some states passed laws requiring guaranteed issue in their small - group markets , with fewer states adopting types of guaranteed - issue laws in their non - group markets . in 1996 , congress passed the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ; p.l . 104-191 ) , which requires guaranteed issue in the small - group market in all states . the aca extends these efforts by requiring , as of 2014 , that all non - grandfathered non - group and group plans ( except those that are self - insured ) offer coverage on a guaranteed - issue basis . table 1 provides a brief overview of the market reforms in the aca . by january 1 , 2014 , every state had to establish a health insurance exchange . the aca exchanges are marketplaces in which individuals and small businesses can shop for and purchase private health insurance coverage . exchanges are intended to simplify the experience of providing and obtaining coverage . they are not intended to supplant the private market outside of exchanges . plans offered through an exchange must be , for the most part , qualified health plans ( qhps ) . in general , to be a qhp , a plan has to offer the essential health benefit ( ehb ) package and meet certain standards related to marketing , choice of providers , and plan networks . to facilitate the purchase of private insurance , the exchanges have two parts . one is the individual exchange , in which individuals can buy non - group insurance for themselves and their families . the other is the small business health options program ( shop ) exchange , designed to assist qualified small employers and their employees with insurance purchases . for shop exchange eligibility in 2016 and beyond , a small employer is one with 50 or fewer employees , but states may elect to define a small employer as one with 100 or fewer employees . in 2017 , a state will have the option to allow large employers to use the shop exchange , regardless of how the state defines large employer . individuals purchasing non - group coverage through an exchange may be eligible to receive financial assistance in the form of premium tax credits and cost - sharing reductions . small employers purchasing small - group coverage through a shop exchange may be eligible for small business health insurance tax credits . since january 1 , 2014 , the aca has required that most individuals maintain health insurance coverage or pay a penalty for noncompliance .