expenses . the use of resources ( assets ) by a company in the process of providing products or services to a customer , including spending cash . income ( loss ) . the excess of revenue over expenses . loss results from higher expenses than revenue . operating income . gross profit less all operating expenses . operating income is pretax income . operating income is not a line item listed on the financial statements in figure 1 - figure 6 . net income ( net loss ) . the difference after deducting all expenses , including taxes , from revenues . net loss is the difference between revenue and expenses , including taxes , when expenses exceed revenue . loss carry forward . the carrying forward or back of a net operating loss ( nol ) in the current year to determine taxable income in future or previous years . balance sheet — categories assets . cash and any economic resources of a company that generate future cash inflows or reduce future cash out - flows . liabilities . obligations of a company to outsiders or claims against the company's assets . owners' equity . matching . the recording of revenue and related expenses in the same period . this assumption is based on a cause - and - effect relationship: expenses are incurred in generating the revenue , thus they should be recorded in the same period . relevance . the capacity for information to make a difference in a decision . the information should have both confirming and predictive values . confirming value should help the users of the financial information confirm or correct any past predictions they have made . predictive value should help users of financial information forecast future trends for a business . materiality . the degree to which an omission or a misstatement of financial information will affect the judgment of someone using the information . conservatism . the practice of using the lower estimated value when two estimated amounts are likely for an asset . conversely , for a liability , the practice of clearly stating the amount likely to be paid in the future . comparability and consistency . allow users to compare and analyze financial information from one period to the next . comparability and consistency can be ensured by applying similar accounting principles to like items from one period to the next . financial statements income statement . summarizes and communicates all the revenues that a company has earned during a specific period of time less all the expenses incurred in generating that revenue , usually for a quarter or a year . balance sheet . communicates the financial position of a company at a specific point in time , such as at the end of a quarter or a year . it is divided into assets , liabilities , and owners' equity ( stockholders' equity ) . statement of changes in owners ' equity . for large businesses with multiple shareholders , this is often called the statement of changes in stockholders' equity . it shows the changes in owners' equity of the business entity during the same period of time as measured by the income statement .