, fraud ) . this may be of particular interest to policymakers seeking to reduce eitc errors because the strategies to reduce "honest mistakes" versus "fraud" differ . insofar as these errors are due to taxpayer ( or paid tax preparer ) confusion with the eitc eligibility rules , the most effective policy response may be to simplify these rules and create greater uniformity for all child - related tax benefits in conjunction with increasing taxpayer education on eitc eligibility . this may be particularly relevant for eitc claimants given that about one - third of the eitc claimants in a given year did not participate in the program the previous year and may be unfamiliar with the complex eligibility requirements of the credit . for example an offsetting error occurs when a child claimed in error by taxpayer a could have been correctly claimed by taxpayer b , but taxpayer b did not claim that child . this report does not provide a detailed overview of the credit . for example , if tax filers overclaimed $10 billion of the eitc ( net of amounts never paid or recovered ) , but $2 billion of the credit was never claimed by eligible claimants , the net amount of the credit paid in error would be $8 billion . when underclaims are large in relation to overclaims , improper payment amount may overstate the cost of eitc errors to the treasury . when underclaims are relatively small compared to overclaims , improper payment amounts may be accurate approximations of the cost of eitc errors to the treasury . currently , there are no publicly available estimates of underclaims and offsetting errors . the irs does estimate that 21% of eligible eitc claimants do not claim the credit . however , an estimate of the amount of eitc dollars underclaimed by these 21% of eligible recipients is not currently available . this report examines findings from the 2014 irs study . the report first briefly defines and compares two common measures of eitc noncompliance: improper payments and overclaims . next , the report provides an overview of the major factors leading to eitc noncompliance identified in the 2014 study on this issue , as well as challenges the irs may face in their efforts to reduce each type of error . these factors include claiming ineligible children as qualifying children for the credit , income reporting errors , and filing status errors . finally , the report describes the role of paid preparers in eitc noncompliance . for more information on eligibility for and calculation of the eitc , see crs report r43805 , the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) : an overview , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed . this report discusses two measures of eitc noncompliance: improper payments and overclaims . although these two measures of eitc noncompliance are related , they do differ . the majority of the net tax gap — $291 billion — is associated with the individual income tax .