, the hardship cannot be to the alien ) . there are special rules for battered alien spouses and children . specifically , the attorney general may cancel the removal of a battered alien spouse or child who is inadmissible or deportable and adjust the alien's status to lpr if the alien has been physically present in the united states for a continuous period of at least three years immediately preceding the date of such application ; has been a person of good moral character ; is not inadmissible on criminal or security grounds , or deportable for marriage fraud , criminal offenses , false documents , or security grounds ; and has not been convicted of an aggravated felony ; and establishes that the removal would result in extreme hardship to the alien , the alien's child , or the alien's parent . extreme hardship is evaluated on an individual basis , taking into account the particular facts and circumstances of each case . to establish extreme hardship , an applicant must demonstrate that deportation would result in a degree of hardship beyond that typically associated with deportation . an alien may concede removability ( i.e. , accept stipulated removal ) rather than undergoing the standard removal proceeding . in addition , an alien may be subject to one of several types of streamlined removal procedures , which generally include more - limited opportunities for relief and review than the standard removal process ( see " streamlined removal processes " ) . foreign nationals who are not subject to mandatory detention may be released on bond or their own recognizance . an alien who is eligible to be released on bond may request a bond redetermination hearing before an immigration judge to have the bond lowered , or to be given bond if it was denied by dhs . during the bond hearing , the alien must prove that he or she is not a flight risk or a danger to society . bond hearings are not considered part of the removal process . the standard removal process under ina §240 is a trial - like proceeding in which an attorney from dhs presents the government's case for why the alien should be removed and an immigration judge from the department of justice's executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) determines whether the alien should be removed . the standard removal process is only one of several ways aliens may be removed from the united states . until fy2013 , the majority of aliens apprehended along the southwest border were not subject to the standard removal procedures or expedited removal ( see " statistics on removals and returns " ) ; instead , the majority of these aliens were allowed to either undergo voluntary departure or withdraw their applications . voluntary departure and withdraw of application are often referred to as types of returns rather than removals . in addition , some aliens within the country accept voluntary departure either as an alternative to having a judge render a decision regarding their removability or at the conclusion of their removal proceeding . there are two sets of statistics regarding removals and returns of aliens from the united states .