part 383 . small businesses or individuals are subject to a maximum penalty of $1,100 . notwithstanding this limit , small businesses and individuals are subject to higher maximum penalties for discrimination ( $11,000 per violation ) and for engaging in unfair or deceptive practices ( $2,500 per violation ) . if oaep believes enforcement action is appropriate , it would seek a civil penalty and consent order . a consent order typically relates the facts of the case to law and regulation , sets forth the penalty the violator has agreed to pay , and incorporates language ordering the air carrier to cease and desist from further violations . if the air carrier refuses to settle , the case may go to an enforcement hearing before a dot administrative law judge . dot also may request injunctive relief from a federal district court , although this is unusual . since the economic deregulation of the domestic airline industry in 1978 , the federal government no longer has control over airlines' prices or routes . contracts of carriage , the legally binding rules airlines post on their websites and apply to passengers , are not subject to federal review or approval . however , a contract of carriage that conflicts with federal laws or regulations may not be enforceable by the airline . the intense price competition of recent years has prompted airlines to respond by "unbundling" their offerings and charging separately for services that once were included in the price of a ticket . among these charges are fees for checked baggage , early / priority boarding , and seat change on a flight . such ancillary fees have become major causes of consumer complaints . carriers' treatment of passengers booked on delayed or canceled flights is also a leading cause of complaints . following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , coverage for such attacks , and for "war risks," became difficult , if not impossible , for airlines to purchase from private insurers . in response , congress passed expansions of the faa aviation war risk insurance program . the amended statute ( 49 u.s.c . ยง44301 et seq. ) required that faa offer war risk insurance to u.s. airlines , with the premiums based on the cost of such coverage prior to the september 11 terrorist attacks . the federal coverage under the program was relatively expansive , with coverage provided after the first dollar of losses and with a broad definition of what constitutes a war risk loss . the expansion of the program was limited in time , but was extended several times over the years , often as part of appropriations legislation . the last instance was in the continuing appropriations resolution , 2015 , which extended the expanded program until december 11 , 2014 . up until 2014 , most u.s. airlines purchased the faa coverage and generally supported the existing program against proposed changes . in 2014 , the number of air carriers purchasing insurance and the premium volumes dropped . this movement away from government insurance occurred against a backdrop of increased private insurance capacity and lower prices , despite several large aircraft losses involving war risks in 2014 .