other provisions . other provisions in h.r . 4159 sought to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in stem education and employment . for example , section 217 would have directed nsf to develop written guidance for institutions of higher education on best practices for identifying cultural or institutional barriers to the recruitment , retention , and promotion of underrepresented populations in stem degree programs and academic stem careers . 4159 also included provisions to reauthorize the regional innovation program and federal loan guarantees for innovative technologies in manufacturing , which were established by the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 . the bill's doe title would have authorized certain office of science research programs ( eg , high energy physics , fusion energy ) and would have reauthorized and amended arpa - e . section 204 would have created a new advanced research projects agency - education ( arpa - ed ) at the department of education . stem education . 4159 was referred to both the house committee on education and the workforce , as well as the house committee on science , space , and technology . 4159 contained a number of stem education provisions . examples include provisions that would have ( 1 ) established a government - wide stem education coordinator within the ostp and ( 2 ) directed ostp to develop guidance for federal agencies on increasing opportunities for federal scientists and engineers to participate in stem education activities . funding for the targeted accounts . 4159 would have authorized appropriations to nsf , nist , and the office of science from fy2015 through fy2019 . explanatory materials associated with h.r . 4159 do not mention the doubling path policy or the targeted accounts ; rather , they highlight provisions authorizing year - over - year increases for nsf , nist , and the office of science . in addition to authorizing overall appropriations for doe's office of science , h.r . 4869 would have authorized certain office of science research programs ( eg , high energy physics , fusion energy ) ; addressed various issues at the national laboratories ( eg , technology transfer , early - stage technology demonstration , etc .

 ) ; and amended the arpa - e statute . additionally , the bill would have authorized certain doe activities in crosscutting r&d , nuclear energy r&d , energy efficiency and renewable r&d , and fossil energy r&d . legislation disposition . 4869 was not enacted . the subcommittee on energy , house science , space , and technology committee sought to mark up a committee print of doe - rda on june 11 , 2014 ; however , the markup was adjourned before full consideration after some of the minority members expressed concern about process . 4869 was formally introduced two days later , on june 13 , 2014 . 4869 was sponsored by the chairman of the subcommittee on energy , house committee on science , space , and technology and co - sponsored by members of the majority , including the chairman of the full committee . it had no house minority co - sponsors .