interests. as of january 2015 , a cyber - related incident directed at the united states has never been used as justification for inclusion on the state sponsors of terrorism lists . it could be argued that current laws relating to the state sponsor of terrorism lists may be viewed as sufficiently broad and ambiguous to allow for the inclusion of cyber - based incidents as a designation criterion . conversely , it might be argued that the laws supporting the state sponsor of terrorism designation were focused on physical acts of politically motivated violence and amendments to existing legislation would be required to include unauthorized cyber - based intrusions of networks owned by u.s. entities   as a viable criterion . however , changing current legislation to include cyber - related incidents as acts of terrorism could lead to calls for designating other governments as state sponsors of terrorism . for instance , on may 19 , 2014 , the u.s. department of justice indicted five chinese military hackers for computer hacking and economic espionage directed at six american victims in the u.s. nuclear power , metals , and solar products industries . in discussing the details related to this indictment , u.s. department of justice attorney general eric holder stated "this is a case alleging economic espionage by members of the chinese military and represents the first ever charges against a state actor for this type of hacking. a suggestion to add the government of china to the state sponsors of terrorism lists does not appear to have been voiced after this incident . since 2003 , the state department's annual report on global terrorist activities has stated that north korea has not been conclusively linked to any terrorist acts since the 1987 kal bombing . some observers have questioned the basis for the state department's claims . they point to several pieces of evidence and reports , which generally fall in five categories . for more on north korea's relationship with the iranian , syrian , and libyan ballistic missile and nuclear programs , see crs report r43480 , iran - north korea - syria ballistic missile and nuclear cooperation , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] . p roliferation of weapons of mass destruction , including: u.s. government statements that north korea helped syria build the al kibar nuclear reactor , which israel destroyed in 2007 , and could have been used to produce plutonium for nuclear weapons . three seizures — in october 2009 , november 2009 , and april 2013 — of shipments of north korean chemical protective suits , gas indicator ampoules , and gas masks to syria , which had an active chemical weapons program . press reports that north korea and iran are cooperating in developing nuclear capabilities or nuclear weapons . u.s. officials have stated publicly that there is no nuclear cooperation between iran and north korea . u.s. government statements that north korea provided nuclear materials to libya in the early 2000s .