appendix a . recent legislative proposals appendix b . recent executive branch initiative . nevertheless , methane is a valuable resource . its dual nature as both pollutant and commodity has offered a unique opportunity for control , and many strategies have attempted to capitalize on the economics of recovery . whether a given control strategy is effective and cost - efficient for a given industry depends upon a number of factors , including ( 1 ) the nature and extent of the emissions , ( 2 ) the technology available for capture , and ( 3 ) the market price for the recovered products . this position has been supported by many members of congress as well as the obama administration . methane , however , when released or allowed to escape into the atmosphere ( commonly referred to as "vented" and "fugitive" emissions , respectively ) , has adverse impacts on human health , safety , and the environment . the u.s. occupational safety and health administration lists methane as both an asphyxiant and an explosive , as increased concentrations in local settings can jeopardize worker safety . further , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) classifies methane as both a precursor to ground - level ozone formation ( commonly referred to as "smog" ) and a potent greenhouse gas ( ghg ) , albeit with a shorter atmospheric life than co 2 . methane's effect on climate change is up to 34 times greater than that of co 2 when averaged over a 100-year time period and even greater when considered over the first 20 years after it is emitted . an increase in emissions may counteract some of the environmental benefits that the u.s. economy has to gain by switching from coal or oil to natural gas and other sources of methane . for these reasons , some stakeholders , including some members of congress , have called for increased controls on methane emissions in several sectors of the economy , including oil and natural gas production and transportation , coal mining , industrial processes , and agriculture . in many cases , efforts to control air pollution can compete against the economic considerations of the affected industries . however , in methane's case , its dual nature as both a commodity and a pollutant provides a unique set of incentives . under certain conditions , the value of fugitive methane and other byproducts that can be recovered and sold at market may be able to offset the cost of their capture . further , the value of these recovered products during oil and gas extraction could contribute to increased royalty payments to state and federal governments . the difficulty , however , is that methane emissions are not always easy to capture . methane , unlike some other pollutants ( eg , sulfur dioxide or co 2 ) , is not commonly emitted in a concentrated stream from industrial processes . rather , it is released into the atmosphere through dispersion , leaks , vents , accidents , and ruptures . in this way , methane emissions are most similar to those of other volatile organic compounds ( vocs ) , both in manner and control .