in both these cases , it is not optimal to provide these services in an ed . hospitals that fail to do so can be excluded from the medicare program . as a consequence of emtala , hospitals with eds must provide emergency care , which may be un - or under compensated ( i.e. , the hospital may not recover any or all of the cost of treatment ) . specifically , more than 40% of all ed visits are for individuals who are uninsured or enrolled in medicaid , two types of patients where hospitals provide care that is un - or under compensated . eds provide a disproportionate amount of health care to the u.s. population . specifically , the 4% of physicians who staff eds are the treating physician in 28% of all acute care visits , and these visits disproportionately involve patients with more dangerous or worrisome symptoms , such as chest pain , respiratory complaints , and abdominal pain . from 1992 to 2012 , the number of ed visits grew faster than the u.s. population . this occurred for a number of reasons , including the immediate access to diagnostic resources that eds provide and community - level declines in access to primary or behavioral health care , which have occurred at the same time as population - level increases in rates of chronic conditions ( see table 1 ) . eds also provide a significant amount of care to safety net populations . eds handle two - thirds of acute care visits for the uninsured and one half of the acute care visits of people enrolled in medicaid or the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) . in some cases , eds are the appropriate site for care , but , in other cases , non - emergent patients seek care in an ed because they lack an alternative source of care . this occurs for a number of reasons , including the patients' insurance status , their relationship to a regular provider , and their ability to secure a timely appointment with that provider . the use of eds to provide nonemergency care can be costly to payers because services provided in an ed are generally more expensive than those provided in community - based settings . ed services are more expensive , because , for example , eds have higher fixed costs ( in terms of space and staffing ) , its physicians may order additional tests or laboratory work , and because hospital charges are generally higher than those charged by physician's offices . as a result of increased ed use and declining financial support for providing this volume of care , the institute of medicine , in a series of three reports published in 2006 , declared that ed care was "at a breaking point. subsequent work by the government accountability office ( gao ) confirmed that these challenges persisted and found that eds were crowded , that they diverted ambulances because they were unable to accept new patients , and that patients often experienced long waits for care .