appendix a . aviation restructuring initiative ( ari ) as part of the army's downsizing and reorganizational efforts , the army plans a major force structure change for its aviation units , as described in the following section: the aviation restructure initiative allows us to eliminate obsolete air frames , sustain a modernized fleet , reduce sustainment costs , and efficiently organize ourselves to meet our operational commitments and imperatives . disproportionate reductions come from the active component aviation . we will inactivate and eliminate three complete combat aviation brigades from the active component . we will move all luh – 72s from the active component to fort rucker in order to train pilots across all three components . noting that there are several different ways for analysts to measure relative cost of the rc , the study suggests these different approaches can lead to different conclusions . relative cost is also sensitive to assumptions made by the analyst . using the "traditional approach" of comparing component end strength to appropriations , the report suggests that the cost advantages of the rc are most prominent for strategic depth achieved by placing capabilities in the rc . these capabilities serve as an "insurance policy" for unanticipated missions and the cost of this insurance is lower if these capabilities are in the rc instead of the ac . the report also suggests that cost - effectiveness for the ac and rc is maximized when capabilities are actually used . in the ac , full - time services are cost - effective when used on a full - time basis , while the fixed - costs of part - time rc personnel are spread out over more days if rc personnel are "busy. on the other hand , the approach detailed by klerman "suggest[s] that , for brigade combat teams , there are unlikely to be significant cost savings from placing operational capabilities in the rc instead of the ac . rather , the baseline estimates suggest that the costs are roughly identical ... the implication is that any rebalancing of operational units should be done for reasons other than cost. potentially contentious issues: rand's findings were based on army data from september 2001 and the study completion date in 2011 . it can be argued the army's missions during this time period were somewhat atypical and ran the gamut from brief force - on - force combat , to security assistance , to counterinsurgency . the data collected and analyzed by rand , while useful , is directly relevant only in predicting utilization of forces should these types of operations be conducted on a similar scale and scope in the future . remaining cost differences are sufficiently small that some might argue that they are not commensurate with the rc's lower combat effectiveness. ... this analysis suggests that the shift to a rotational scenario has substantially increased the relevant cost of the reserves . the standard economic argument would suggest the appropriate reaction would be twofold . first , decrease demand for the solution whose relative cost has risen sharply ; that is , use the rc in fewer roles ( eg , only as a deeper reserve ) . second , decrease supply ( i.e.