therefore , states are generally immune to lawsuits by individuals . although congress attempted to abrogate states' eleventh amendment immunity in the ada , there are constitutional limits on the circumstances under which congress may effect such abrogation . in garrett v. university of alabama , the supreme court held that congress did not effectively abrogate states' eleventh amendment immunity to title i employment discrimination cases . the definition of terms used in the ada is the starting point for determining the rights granted and legal duties imposed by the ada . section 12117 of the ada provides that the powers , remedies , and procedures provided for in sections 705 , 706 , 707 , 709 , and 710 of the civil rights act of 1964 are available to enforce title i of the ada . these sections provide for enforcement by the eeoc , a state counterpart , or private litigation — provided the complainant has received a right - to - sue letter from the eeoc or the counterpart state agency , and it allows suits by the attorney general against employers engaging in a pattern or practice of discrimination . injunctive relief is available , as are monetary damages in an amount intended to make the person discriminated against whole — that is , to put the person in the position he or she would have been in had the discrimination not occurred . the civil rights act of 1991 expanded the remedies available in cases involving intentional discrimination , as opposed to cases involving facially neutral employment practices that have a disparate impact on individuals with disabilities . compensatory damages are to compensate individuals for nonpecuniary damages including humiliation , pain and suffering , and the like . punitive damages are available when the plaintiff can establish that the defendant engaged in discrimination with malice or reckless indifference to the rights of the plaintiff . compensatory and punitive damages are capped at amounts ranging from $50,000 to $300,000 , depending on the defendant's number of employees . in addition , there is a "good faith" exception to the award of damages for defendants found to have failed to provide reasonable accommodation . the lilly ledbetter fair pay act of 2009 ( fair pay act ) amended the ada regarding when actionable discrimination is considered to have occurred . congress enacted the fair pay act in response to the supreme court's decision in ledbetter v. goodyear tire & rubber co. , in which the court rejected a woman's claim for discrimination in her pay as outside the statute of limitations because she did not sue when the discrimination first occurred , even though the discrimination was ongoing and she did not learn about it until many years after it first occurred . the fair pay act states that unlawful discrimination in compensation occurs when a discriminatory compensation decision or practice is adopted , when an individual becomes subject to a discriminatory compensation decision or practice , or when an individual is affected by application of a discriminatory compensation decision or practice . liability for discriminatory practices may accrue , and individuals may obtain back pay for up to two years preceding the filing of the charges .