appendix a . methodology used to create low - income program database selection of low - income programs programs were selected for inclusion in this report if they ( 1 ) have provisions that base an individual's eligibility or priority for service on a measure ( or proxy ) of low or limited income ; ( 2 ) target resources in some way ( eg , through allocation formulas , variable matching rates ) using a measure ( or proxy ) of low or limited income ; or ( 3 ) prioritize services to low - income segments of a larger target population . a few programs without an explicit low - income provision were included because either their target population is disproportionately poor or their purpose clearly indicates a presumption that participants will be low income . such programs that serve disproportionately low - income people include the indian health service , homeless assistance grants , indian education programs , title i migrant education , and indian human services . programs with purposes that presume a low - income target population include adult basic education and social services block grants . federal student loan programs were considered for inclusion because they determine benefit levels through the same need - analysis system that is used for pell grants and several smaller postsecondary education programs . however , this system results in students from relatively well - off families receiving assistance , as there is no absolute income ceiling on eligibility . pell grants are structured in such a way that the majority of recipients are low - income and the lowest - income students receive the largest benefits . student loan programs are not as strongly targeted and therefore are not included in the report . on the other hand , deliberations about whether to include the additional child tax credit ( actc ) reached a different conclusion . the regular child tax credit ( ctc ) is a nonrefundable credit and phases out at relatively high income levels . the actc is a refundable credit that allows families with no or insufficient tax liability to get all or part of the benefit they would otherwise receive from the ctc . because of the refundable nature and other design features of the actc , it serves predominantly lower - income families . for example , for tax year 2012 , 90% of returns that claimed the actc were filed by families with adjusted gross income ( agi ) below $40,000 and 89% of the credit went to such families . thus , the actc is included in the report . because the report includes only programs with direct spending , it does not include tax provisions , with the exception of direct spending for the refundable portion of the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) and the refundable actc . finally , one program — developmental disabilities support and advocacy grants — was included in the 2011 version of this report ( crs report r41625 , federal benefits and services for people with low income: programs , policy , and spending , fy2008-fy2009 ) but dropped in the current version .