chapter 2 ) . the minerals can then be extracted from sites with valid claims . the claim can be "patented" to transfer title to the relevant lands to the claimant , although patenting the land is not necessary to extract the minerals . since fy1995 , congress has included a provision prohibiting land patents under the general mining law in the annual interior appropriations acts . receipts from hardrock / locatable minerals are generated from fees to locate the claim , an annual fee to maintain the claim , and a per - acre fee to patent the claim . the location fee is $37 per claim to locate and record the claim . the annual maintenance fee is $155 per claim . this fee replaces the previous annual requirement of $100 of development work to maintain each claim . claimants with 10 claims or fewer may file to waive the annual maintenance fee and perform the annual work assessment instead . fees are adjusted every five years for inflation , based on the consumer price index . patenting the claim ( which has been prohibited under a provision in the annual interior appropriations acts since fy1995 ) includes two fees: patent application fee is $250 , plus $50 for each claim in the application . land patent fee is $2.50 or $5.00 per acre , depending on the type of claim . disposition of receipts cost of collections ( p.l . 111-8 , fy2009 omnibus appropriations act at 123 stat . 701 ) — the blm is authorized to retain a portion of the receipts based on blm's cost of collections . general treasury — any remaining receipts are deposited in the treasury . a relatively small amount was disbursed to coastal states from offshore leases . for example , in fy2014 , this share was about $38 million out of nearly $2.2 billion in total state onshore and offshore disbursements . oil and natural gas produced on federal lands account for 5% and 13% of total u.s. oil and gas production , respectively . the added costs could cause some mines to be uneconomic . a net income royalty would be applied after all costs were subtracted from gross income and would be based on profitability of the mine . this royalty would focus not on gross production but on the operation's economic rent ; that is , any profit in excess of that necessary to maintain the mine in operation . the net income royalty would be expected to have less impact on marginal mines , and thus be less likely to shut them down . one disadvantage with this type of royalty is that it would require a much higher percentage royalty to achieve the same level of revenue flow . in addition , when there are no profits , there are no royalties , unlike the net smelter royalty . the mining industry argues that this is "socially equitable," because the royalty is applied to what it defines as excess profits or rents . a net income royalty could be difficult to administer and subject to "creative accounting," meaning that firms could increase deductions to show little or no net profits , thus avoiding payment of the royalty .