the decision is controversial . the election commission declared that it was "substantially ready" and that preparations were "sufficient to conduct free , fair and credible elections as scheduled. the decision to delay the vote was made after security officials contended that they could not guarantee security for the polls because the military "needed at least six weeks within which to conclude a major military operation" against boko haram and could not provide "traditional support" to police and other security agencies during elections . some observers view the delay as an opportunity to improve conditions for prospective voters in the northeast , amid fears that many could be disenfranchised by the violence and displacement . the delay also provides more time to address concerns about poll preparations . it is unclear , however , whether the nigerian public will view the delay as enhancing or detracting from the credibility of the electoral process . the potential for substantial improvement in the security situation in the northeast within this timeframe is also unlikely . the opposition , while urging calm , called the delay "provocative" and "a major setback for democracy," and press reports and social media suggest that many nigerians perceive the postponement as undue interference by security officials . former nigerian president olusegun obasanjo expressed public alarm with the decision , saying , "i hope we will not have a coup. secretary of state john kerry voiced deep disappointment , stating that "political interference" with the election commission was "unacceptable," warning against further delays , and declaring it "critical that the government not use security concerns as a pretext for impeding the democratic process. the united kingdom articulated a similar view , calling the decision "cause for concern. with public confidence in the electoral process reportedly already low , such concerns may amplify political tensions and raise the potential for violent protests if the election results are disputed . a contested election outcome could undermine the nigerian government's ability to bring potential post - election violence under control and further impede its ability to counter the boko haram threat . the upcoming presidential elections may be nigeria's closest contest to date , with the field of serious candidates narrowed for the first time to the standard - bearers of two major political parties . the incumbent , president goodluck jonathan , a christian from the southern niger delta region , and his people's democratic party ( pdp ) , which has been in power since the return to civilian rule in 1999 , face a strong challenge from a new opposition alliance . that party , the all progressives congress ( apc ) , draws support in part from popular disaffection with government performance in the predominately muslim north and its response to boko haram , and with reports of rising corruption . in december , the apc selected former military ruler muhammadu buhari , a northerner who challenged jonathan in the last election , as its candidate . experts suggest that inter - faith relations in nigeria , where the population is roughly divided between christians and muslims , have deteriorated in recent years .