radio identification . aircraft flying in the east china sea air defense identification zone must maintain the two - way radio communications , and respond in a timely and accurate manner to the identification inquiries from the administrative organ of the east china sea air defense identification zone or the unit authorized by the organ . transponder identification . aircraft flying in the east china sea air defense identification zone , if equipped with the secondary radar transponder , should keep the transponder working throughout the entire course . he urged the prc to exercise restraint . the white house called the prc's announcement an "escalatory development" that increased tensions . u.s. concerns focus in part on the way in which the prc set up its ecs adiz . a senior official on the u.s. national security council ( nsc ) staff said that "we [the obama administration] saw it as a provocative and escalatory act that increased tensions in the region and reduced the prospect for diplomacy . regardless of whether china had a right to establish the adiz , the way china did it was dangerous. the prc's ecs adiz overlaps with other adizs , raising the potential for accidents or incidents that could involve interceptions by fighters . the united states received less than one hour's formal notice before the prc's ecs adiz announcement . two days after the prc's declaration of the ecs adiz , the u.s. navy announced the start of the annual exercise ( annualex ) 2013 involving the carrier strike group led by the uss george washington in training with japan's maritime self - defense force . the u.s. air force flew two b - 52 bombers from the u.s. territory of guam on a training flight into the ecs adiz without informing china . a pentagon spokesman said that "we have conducted operations in the area of the senkakus . we have continued to follow our normal procedures , which include not filing flight plans , not radioing ahead , and not registering our frequencies. although the bombers' flight reportedly had been planned far in advance , going through with the flight conveyed continuity of operations , sustained support for japan , and non - compliance with the prc's ecs adiz . in august 2014 , a pla fighter aircraft intercepted at close range a u.s. p - 8 surveillance aircraft in international airspace near china's southeastern coast , providing further evidence that the u.s. military continues its normal pattern of operations . the initial reaction of japanese leaders to the ecs adiz announcement was highly critical . japan's parliament , called the diet , passed a resolution labeling the ecs adiz a violation of international law and called for china to withdraw the ecs adiz immediately . foreign minister fumio kishida , in a major speech before the diet in january 2014 , indicated tokyo's intention to gain international support for the freedom of flight above the high seas . while the abe administration has made enhancing defense capabilities a top priority , japan has not taken concrete steps to adjust its defense posture or activities to account for the ecs adiz .