in addition , h.r . 5538 , the interior , environment and related agencies appropriation bill for fy2017 , as passed by the house , contained numerous riders prohibiting epa from using fy2017 funds to implement various authorities under the clean air act . while epa has been widely criticized by industry groups and many in congress for overreaching , the agency maintains that in promulgating the rules it has promulgated , it has complied with statutory mandates placed on the agency by congress . the agency has stated that its critics' focus on the cost of controls obscures the benefits of new regulations , which , it estimates , far exceed the costs ; and it maintains that pollution control is an important source of economic activity , exports , and american jobs . some argue that the case for ghg controls has not been proven . others maintain that epa should delay taking such action until congress more explicitly authorizes it . epa finalized ghg standards for power plants on august 3 , 2015 , finalized a second round of ghg standards for trucks in august 2016 , and conducted a mid - term evaluation of the ghg standards for light - duty vehicles in 2016 , providing congress important opportunities to review the agency's actions . issues related to emissions other than ghgs from electric power plants — principally sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) , nitrogen oxides ( nox ) , and mercury — have been another focus of interest in recent years . two rules affecting these emissions — the cross - state air pollution rule ( csapr , pronounced "casper" ) and the mercury and air toxics standards ( mats ) — have taken effect , in january and april 2015 respectively . critics of the rules predicted a "train wreck" for the electric utility industry if these and other rules were implemented . the rules — along with low natural gas prices — have contributed to the retirement of many older coal - fired power plants , but , thus far , appear to have had little effect on the price of electricity or the reliability of the electric grid . for additional information , see crs insight in10578 , coal use already near epa's 2030 projection . bush administration regulations addressing these emissions were first promulgated in march 2005 , but were remanded to epa by the d.c . circuit court of appeals in two 2008 decisions ( north carolina v. epa and new jersey v. epa ) . as a result , under the obama administration , epa developed new regulations to address the court's concerns: csapr , promulgated on august 8 , 2011 , established a cap - and - trade system for so 2 and nox emissions ; mats , promulgated on february 16 , 2012 , set maximum achievable control technology standards for power plant emissions of mercury and other hazardous air pollutants . power plants were major sources of these pollutants before the development of the regulations: in 2005 , they accounted for 70% of the u.s. total of so 2 emissions , about half of u.s. mercury emissions , and roughly 20% of u.s. nox emissions .