usda is responsible for making this determination . 113-79 ) for the 2014-2018 crop years . the 2014 farm bill made significant changes to u.s. farm price and income support programs . the new shallow - loss programs — sco and stax — could prove more problematic . both programs provide revenue ( or potentially yield in the case of stax ) guarantees that are very near to the market averages , in addition to reducing farm - level risk by protecting revenues when market prices are low . accordingly , they may incentivize greater acreage and production than would occur in their absence . most studies suggest that , for u.s. program spending to exceed the $19.1-billion amber - box limit , a combination of worst - case events would have to occur , for example , low market prices generating large simultaneous outlays across multiple programs , in addition to the $1.4 billion of implicit costs associated with the sugar program . such a scenario is unlikely , although not impossible , particularly since outlays under several of the programs ( including the new dairy program , sco , stax , and crop insurance ) are not subject to any per - farm subsidy limit . perhaps more relevant to u.s. agricultural trade is the concern that — because the united states plays such a prominent role in most international markets for agricultural products — any distortion resulting from u.s. policy would be both visible and vulnerable to challenge under wto rules . these changes could have important implications for u.s. commitments to the wto in terms of compliance with current spending limits and with rules on mitigating program spillover effects and distortions in international markets . this report assumes knowledge of the u.s. farm safety net programs and their function . it briefly describes the relevant wto rules governing domestic support programs under the agreement on agriculture ( aoa ) and the agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures ( scm ) . the report then reviews the current u.s. farm safety net programs , including changes made under the 2014 farm bill , particularly to title i price and income support programs , in light of their potential for compliance with the aoa and scm and their potential to affect the success of the current doha round of multilateral trade negotiations . table 1 provides a list of current farm safety net programs . table 2 lists key parameters of the farm support programs referenced in this report . table 3 , at the end of the report , briefly reviews each of the individual 2014 farm bill provisions that are relevant to wto commitments , including a description of their function , average outlays , any changes made under the 2014 farm bill , wto status , and related potential wto effects . a domestic farm support program can violate wto commitments in two principal ways — first , by exceeding amber box spending limits ( see box below ) , and second , by generating market distortions that spill over into the international marketplace and cause significant or measurable adverse effects . for such a violation to be meaningful , another wto member country must successfully challenge the violation under the wto dispute settlement process .