ยง242 violations . the attorney general , acting though the various u.s . attorneys' offices and with the assistance of the justice department's civil rights division , has the discretion to initiate a federal prosecution . whether a prosecutor elects to do so depends upon a number of factors , not the least of which is whether there is evidence sufficient to convince a jury that the accused is guilty beyond a reasonable doubt . this statute prohibits certain interferences of federally protected activities regardless of discriminatory intent . protected activities include voting or qualifying to vote ; participating in or enjoying any benefit , service , privilege , program , facility , or activity provided or administered by the united states ; applying for or enjoying employment by any u.s. agency ; serving as a grand or petit juror in any court of the united states ; or participating in or enjoying the benefits of any program receiving federal financial assistance . moreover , individuals are prohibited from willfully injuring , intimidating , or interfering with any person because of that person's race , color , religion , or national origin , and because of the individual's activity in one of the following: enrolling or attending a public school or college ; participating in or enjoying any benefit , service , privilege , program , facility , or activity provided or administered by a state or local government ; applying for or enjoying employment , or using a labor organization or employment agency whether privately or publically run ; serving any state court as a juror ; travelling in or using a facility of interstate commerce or common carrier ; or enjoying the goods , services , and / or facilities of any establishment which provides lodging , food , beverages , gasoline , or entertainment to patrons . this statute also prohibits willful interference , by force or threat of force , with a person because the individual is or was participating in , aiding , or encouraging other persons to participate in any of the aforementioned benefits or activities without discrimination as to race , color , religion , or national origin . individuals are prohibited from intentionally defacing , damaging , or destroying religious real property based on the religious , ethnic , or racial characteristics of the property . if the destruction is based on religious animus , there must also be a showing that the property is sufficiently related or connected to interstate or foreign commerce . if the property destruction is racially motivated , a link to interstate or foreign commerce is not required . the statute also prohibits individuals from intentionally obstructing or attempting to obstruct , by force or threat of force , a person in the enjoyment of that person's religious beliefs , where the crime is committed in or affects interstate commerce . punishment for violations includes a fine and / or imprisonment for a maximum of one year . looking at the totality of the circumstances , the court concluded that the officers acted reasonably as the driver's reckless driving posed a grave public safety risk .