this restriction is known as the dormant commerce clause . state tax laws are subject to the dormant commerce clause and are therefore unconstitutional if found by the courts to impermissibly burden interstate or foreign commerce . under its authority to regulate commerce , congress can regulate state taxation . it also provides examples of where congress has appeared to act under each authority . this report discusses these authorities and several of the possible limitations . the grouping of the examples by authority is for illustrative purposes — the authority is assumed in many cases based on the context of the statute since congress often did not specify the power under which it acted , and it is possible an action by congress might be supported by more than one authority . the commerce clause grants congress the power "to regulate commerce with foreign nations , and among the several states , and with the indian tribes. congress's authority to regulate commerce has been described as plenary and limited only by other constitutional provisions . additionally , the supreme court has long held that the commerce clause , by granting congress the sole authority to regulate commerce , implicitly prohibits states from unduly burdening such commerce , even in the absence of federal regulation . this means congress can determine which types of state taxation impermissibly burden interstate or foreign commerce . congress can also authorize state taxation that would otherwise be an unconstitutional burden , so long as it is consistent with other provisions in the constitution — for example , congress could not use this authority to pass a law that violates taxpayers' due process rights . people sometimes struggle with the idea that congress can authorize state taxation that the supreme court and other courts have held to be unconstitutional . however , this is clearly the case with the dormant commerce clause . for example , in a 1992 case holding that the dormant commerce clause requires a seller's physical presence in a state before the state can require the seller to collect use taxes , the supreme court expressly stated , our decision is made easier by the fact that the underlying issue is not only one that congress may be better qualified to resolve , but also one that congress has the ultimate power to resolve . no matter how we evaluate the burdens that use taxes impose on interstate commerce , congress remains free to disagree with our conclusions .. . accordingly , congress is now free to decide whether , when , and to what extent the states may burden interstate mail - order concerns with a duty to collect use taxes . since congress can authorize state taxation that would otherwise violate the dormant commerce clause , it is helpful to know the circumstances under which a court will determine that a state tax is impermissible under such clause .