contingency funds . 113-235 did not provide the requested contingency funds . some in congress had expressed concern about the request for $1.54 billion in an ebola contingency fund for hhs and state . as worded in the request , the broader transfer authority , in addition to existing authority , would have allowed these funds to be transferred to any agency and among appropriation accounts , as long as the funds are used "for emergency expenses related to the humanitarian , economic , and stabilization crisis due to the ebola outbreak. as enacted , this funding is exempt from statutory discretionary spending limits under the budget control act . the fy2016 budget and beyond may include additional funding for these missions . congress may want to consider whether these programs are temporary or enduring requirements that would be funded in dod's base budget . of further note was the notwithstanding language included in the sfops esf contingency fund . that would have allowed these funds to be provided to countries that may currently be prohibited in law from receiving u.s. aid , or otherwise bypass other congressional restrictions or mandates . within the fy2015 appropriations ( p.l . 113-235 ) , congress included $5.4 billion in oco funds for the department of defense for operation inherent resolve , its ongoing efforts against the islamic state in iraq and syria through u.s. airstrikes and training of iraqi and syrian opposition forces . while the oco request of $520 million for the department of state specifically designated to counter the islamic state ( is ) was not provided in the appropriations act , some state department oco accounts were increased with broader explanatory statement language for "other assistance" or "other areas of unrest," or "extraordinary costs , including those resulting from conflict. earlier , on november 10 , 2014 , the administration had amended its fy2015 overseas contingency operations request by adding $4.94 billion for dod and $520 million for the department of state to support efforts to combat the islamic state ( is ) . dod's earlier oco request in june 2014 already had included an illustrative allocation of $500 million from the $4.0 billion requested in the counterterrorism response fund ( ctpf ) to train and equip syrian opposition forces to fight the islamic state . including this allocation , dod's request to combat the islamic state totaled $5.4 billion . these amendments brought the fy2015 oco request to a government - wide total of $71.7 billion — $7.8 billion for state and $63.9 billion for dod . this compares with $91.5 billion — $6.5 billion for state and $85.0 billion for dod — appropriated in fy2014 . budget authority designated as overseas contingency operations / global war on terrorism ( oco / gwot ) , which is how all oco funds are designated , is effectively not subject to the statutory discretionary spending limits established by the bca . as this program is implemented , congress may want to raise several budgetary and policy oversight issues about the funding provided: will the $1.6 billion provided cover dod's iraq training plans and could some funding be available from other dod oco funds that may be larger than needed ?