the cost - sharing amounts that can be charged vary with income . another kaiser family foundation report noted that , in january 2013 , non - zero co - payment amounts for non - preventive physician visits applicable to children in families with income at 151% fpl ranged from a low of $0.50 in georgia to a high of $25 in utah and texas . higher co - payment amounts for a non - preventive physician visit applied to children in families with income at 201% fpl and ranged from a low of $0.50 in georgia to a high of $25 in utah and texas . in addition , a co - payment amount equal to 10% of the cost of a non - preventive physician visit applied to children in families with income at 201% fpl in louisiana . specific medicaid subgroups are exempt from out - of - pocket costs , including ( 1 ) certain children , ( 2 ) pregnant women , ( 3 ) individuals in nursing homes or who receive services provided in home and community - based settings , ( 4 ) terminally ill individuals receiving hospice care , ( 5 ) indians who receive care through indian health care providers or through what is called contract health services , and ( 6 ) individuals with breast or cervical cancer . exclusions from the application of both premiums and point - of - service cost - sharing are identified in table 5 below . federal regulations delineate beneficiary and public notice requirements related to out - of - pocket costs for medicaid beneficiaries . the state medicaid agency must provide a public schedule describing current premiums and other cost - sharing requirements , including ( 1 ) individuals who are subject to premiums or cost - sharing along with the current amounts ; ( 2 ) the mechanisms for making payments for required premiums and cost - sharing charges ; ( 3 ) the consequences for applicants or recipients who do not pay a premium or cost - sharing charge ; ( 4 ) a list of hospitals charging cost - sharing for nonemergency use of the emergency department ; and ( 5 ) a list of preferred drugs or a mechanism to access such a list , including the state medicaid agency website . finally , state medicaid agencies must make the public schedule available to a number of subgroups in a manner that ensures that affected applicants , beneficiaries and providers are likely to have access to such a notice . each state designs and administers its own version of medicaid under broad federal rules . it must also be made available when premiums , service - related cost - sharing charges , or aggregate limits are revised . for applicants , this information must be available at the time of application . as a result , there is significant variation across states in terms of who is eligible for coverage , what services are available , and which subgroups of beneficiaries are subject to out - of - pocket costs .