likewise , 18 u.s.c . the government has 90 days to file its complaint . at this point , any person claiming an interest in the property may file a claim pursuant to the supplemental rules for certain admiralty claims not later than 30 days after the date of service of the government's complaint or , if applicable , not later than 30 days after the date of final publication of the filing of the complaint . the claimant then has an additional 20 days after filing the claim to file an answer to the government's complaint . as will be discussed in detail below , the burden of proof is on the government to prove that the property is forfeitable by a preponderance of the evidence . if the government meets its burden , the property owner can then raise an affirmative defense , such as the innocent owner defense , again , discussed more thoroughly below . under the seventh amendment , claimants have a constitutional right to a jury trial as to any issue of fact . at this point , the case will proceed like other civil suits: both sides will conduct discovery under the federal rules of civil procedure , one or both sides will move for summary judgment , and , like many forfeiture cases , it is likely to be resolved without a full - blown trial . unlike civil forfeitures , which are in rem actions brought directly against the offending property , criminal forfeitures are in personam actions in which the government proceeds against the person as part of a criminal prosecution , and only property owned by the defendant — and not third parties — is subject to forfeiture . until 1984 , there were only two criminal forfeiture statutes on the books: the racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations act ( rico ) and continuing criminal enterprise ( cce ) statutes . congress expanded criminal forfeitures as part of the comprehensive crime control act of 1984 to cover all federal drug crimes , not just cce violations . and in an effort to shift more forfeiture cases from the civil to the criminal side , congress enacted 28 u.s.c . § 2461 ( c ) as part of cafra . this so - called "bridge statute" allows the government to confiscate any property in a criminal proceeding that is forfeitable under the civil forfeiture provisions . as with the civil forfeitures , the first task of the government in criminal forfeitures is generally to secure the property subject to confiscation . the government can seek a pretrial restraining order by alleging that the property sought to be restrained would be subject to forfeiture upon conviction . as will be discussed in more detail below , the supreme court has held that probable cause is the appropriate standard for such a pretrial restraining order and that this determination can conclusively be made by the grand jury .