to date , none has been successful . barring unforeseen circumstances , such experiments do not appear to enjoy widespread support , and even if enacted , they might be subject to legal challenges on various grounds , including dilution of minority voter influence . with respect to the national popular vote initiative , despite its successful adoption by california in 2011 and new york in 2014 , and the results of the 2016 election , the npv interstate compact has yet to develop sustained momentum . none of these proposals has been successful to date . pennsylvania — in 2011 and 2012 , two proposals were introduced in the pennsylvania legislature to award the commonwealth's electoral votes according to the district system , but neither bill was enacted . in 2013 , legislation was introduced to award electoral votes according to the proportional system . as with earlier proposals , no action was taken beyond committee referral . virginia — in 2012 , a variant of the district system was introduced in the virginia general assembly . in contrast to the system as enacted in maine and nebraska , which awards each state's two senatorial electors to the presidential ticket winning the most popular votes statewide , this legislation would have awarded the senatorial electors to the presidential ticket that won the popular vote in the greatest number of congressional districts statewide . the bill was "bypassed indefinitely" in 2013 . wisconsin — between 2011 and 2014 , press accounts indicated that wisconsin state legislators would introduce legislation to award the state's electoral votes according to the district system . the wisconsin legislature's database for this period does not , however , identify any such proposal as having been introduced . npv is a nongovernmental initiative which seeks to establish direct popular election of the president and vice president through an interstate compact , rather than by constitutional amendment . under the compact's provisions , legislatures of signatory states ( including the district of columbia ) would appoint presidential electors committed to the presidential ticket that gained the most votes nationwide . assuming all 50 states joined the npv compact , this would deliver a unanimous electoral college decision for the candidates winning the most popular votes . northwestern university law professor robert w. bennett and constitutional law professors akhil and vikram amar are generally credited as originators of the npv concept . npv relies on the constitution's broad grant ( in article ii , section 1 , clause 1 ) of power to each state to "appoint , in such manner as the legislature thereof may direct [emphasis added] , a number of electors , equal to the whole number of senators and representatives to which the state may be entitled in the congress. specifically , the plan calls for an interstate compact in which the legislatures in each of the participating states agree to appoint electors pledged to the candidates who won the nationwide popular vote . a third option would be to leave arrangements as they are at present . the participating state legislatures would then choose the slate of electors pledged to the "nationwide popular vote winner," notwithstanding the results within their particular state .