however , mmr vaccine coverage levels vary by state . according to the cdc , "in 10 states , 95% of the children aged 19 – 35 months in 2013 had received at least one dose of mmr vaccine , while in 17 other states , less than 90% of these children were vaccinated against measles. it is transmitted through coughing and sneezing , and it can live for up to two hours on a surface or in an airspace where the infected person coughed or sneezed . someone who is not immunized against measles and comes into contact with the virus has a 9-in - 10 chance of becoming infected . symptoms associated with the measles start to appear approximately 7 to 14 days after a person is infected . symptoms usually consist of high fever , cough , runny nose , and red / watery eyes . most of the 102 cases — 81 people from california and 13 from six other states — are considered to be part of a large , ongoing outbreak linked to an amusement park in california , and about half the patients were unvaccinated or did not know their vaccination status . at present , only one company is licensed to sell measles vaccine in the united states: merck & co. , inc. , based in whitehouse station , nj . according to the u.s. food and drug administration , merck is licensed and approved to sell two vaccines that contain the measles vaccine — one is the measles , mumps and rubella virus vaccine , live ( known as mmr ii ) , and the second is measles , mumps , rubella , and varicella virus vaccine live ( known as proquad ) . according to merck's financial filings with the u.s. securities and exchange commission , global revenue from the sale of proquad in 2013 ( the most recent year for which annual sales data are available ) was $314 million ; revenue from the sale of mmr ii was $307 million for the same year . for the first nine months of 2014 , revenue from the sale of proquad was reported to be $278 million and revenue from the sale of mmr ii was $249 million . the role of the federal government in vaccine policy , particularly in the development of guidelines for when to administer specific vaccines ( and when not to ) and to what populations is extensive . the federal government also has a major role in the purchase and distribution of vaccines , particularly childhood vaccines . however , the role of the federal government is much more limited and constrained in its ability to mandate the use of specific vaccines by individuals — this responsibility rests primarily with state and local officials .