sudan . under president william clinton , in 1993 the secretary of state designated the government of sudan as a state sponsor of acts of international terrorism . this was the first of several steps that escalated in 1997 when the president declared that sudan's "continued support of international terrorism ; ongoing efforts to destabilize neighboring governments ; and the prevalence of human rights violations , including slavery and the denial of religious freedom" constituted a national emergency to the foreign policy , national security , and economy of the united states . for more than a decade , however , the state department has described sudan as generally cooperative on counterterrorism efforts . in january 2017 , president obama issued an order to signal a pending substantial outlook for u.s. - sudan relations based on sudan's "marked reduction in offensive military activity , culminating in a pledge to maintain a cessation of hostilities in conflict areas in sudan , and steps toward the improvement of humanitarian access throughout sudan , as well as cooperation with the united states on addressing regional conflicts and the threat of terrorism. this launched an extended forecast toward ending the national emergency and lifting most — if not all — of the economic sanctions . in november 2018 , the state department announced that the administration would consider rescinding sudan's designation if certain conditions , including with respect to respect for human rights and religious freedom , were met . this brief report provides information on legislation that authorizes the designation of any foreign government as a state sponsor of acts of international terrorism . it addresses the statutes and how they each define acts of international terrorism ; establish a list to limit or prohibit aid or trade ; provide for systematic removal of a foreign government from a list , including timeline and reporting requirements ; authorize the president to waive restrictions on a listed foreign government ; and provide ( or do not provide ) congress with a means to block a delisting . it closes with a summary of delisting in the past . three statutes authorize the secretary of state to designate a foreign government for repeatedly providing support for acts of international terrorism , and to curtail aid or trade to that country as a result: section 620a of the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( faa'61 ; p.l . 2371 ) , as amended , prohibits most aid under the act , the food for peace act , peace corps act , or the export - import bank act of 1945 ; section 40 of the arms export control act ( aeca ; p.l . 2780 ) , as amended , prohibits exports , credits , guarantees , other financial assistance , export licensing overseen by the state department , and general eligibility related to providing munitions under the act , the foreign assistance act of 1961 , or any other related law ; and section 1754 ( c ) of the export controls act of 2018 ( eca'18 ; part i , subtitle b , title xvii , of the john s. mccain national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2019 ; p.l .