for others , some assistance types are not authorized . the funding associated with these types of assistance typically results in lower obligation levels than assistance provided as a result of major disaster declarations , although there is significant variation across incidents . one of the primary sources of assistance for flooding events is the national flood insurance program ( nfip ) , which is not funded through the drf . for more information on the nfip , please refer to crs report r44593 , introduction to fema's national flood insurance program ( nfip ) , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . many existing crs products address issues related to the drf , the disaster declaration process , and types of drf assistance . below is a list of several of these resources: crs report r41981 , congressional primer on responding to major disasters and emergencies , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report r43519 , natural disasters and hazards: crs experts , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report r43784 , fema's disaster declaration process: a primer , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r43537 , fema's disaster relief fund: overview and selected issues , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r44619 , fema disaster housing: the individuals and households program — implementation and potential issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r43990 , fema's public assistance grant program: background and considerations for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed . in the electronic version of this report , table 1 includes links to crs products that summarize major disaster assistance from the drf for each state and the district of columbia . actual and projected obligations from the drf as a result of major disaster declarations for tribal lands , american samoa , guam , the northern mariana islands , puerto rico , the virgin islands , the federated states of micronesia , the marshall islands , and the republic of palau are available upon request . each state profile includes information on the most costly incidents and impacted localities . in both the national and state - level products , information is provided on the types of assistance that have been provided for major disasters . many other federal programs that provide assistance following a major disaster are not funded through the drf . while the specific agencies and programs called upon will vary from one disaster to another , an overview of selected programs can be found in crs report r42845 , federal emergency management: a brief introduction , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] . a total of 936 major disaster declarations were made between fy2000 and fy2015 . these declarations resulted in more than $133.6 billion in actual and projected obligations from the drf . there was a high level of variation in the amount of actual and projected funding obligated for major disasters each year , with more than $48.6 billion in actual and projected obligations for disasters in fy2005 alone . figure 1 displays the actual and projected obligations for all major disaster declarations each fiscal year . in figure 1 , obligations associated with each declaration are reported in the fiscal year in which the major disaster was declared .