instead , p.l . 111-240 requires the president to provide a separate statement of the appropriations request for advocacy , "which shall be designated in a separate account in the general fund of the treasury. the act also requires the sba administrator to provide advocacy with "appropriate and adequate office space at central and field office locations , together with such equipment , operating budget , and communications facilities and services as may be necessary , and ... necessary maintenance services for such offices and the equipment and facilities located in such offices. in addition , congress has provided advocacy its own , separate appropriations amount since fy2012 . this increase has exceeded the rate of inflation . the sba has statutory authorization to transfer appropriations from the business loan administration account into the salaries and expenses account . as evidenced by the amounts listed in the total available funds column in the table , the sba exercised that authority in every fiscal year from fy2000 to fy2018 ( and is expected to do so again in fy2019 ) , transferring the entire appropriation for business loan administration into the salaries and expenses account in each of those fiscal years . appropriations for the sba's business loan administration account have varied since fy2000 , increasing in some years and decreasing in others ( see table 3 ) . overall , appropriations for sba business loan administration increased from $129 million in fy2000 to $155.150 million in fy2019 . the program's recommended appropriations have not kept pace with inflation . as evidenced by the $0.0 balance in the total funds available column for the business loan administration account , the sba has routinely transferred all business loan administration appropriations to the salaries and expenses account . the combined appropriations for sba salaries and expenses and business loan administration increased from $305.490 million in fy2000 to $422.650 million in fy2019 . this increase has not kept pace with inflation . according to the sba , the oig's mission is to "provide independent , objective oversight to improve the integrity , accountability , and performance of the sba and its programs for the benefit of the american people. the office was created within the sba by the inspector general act of 1978 ( p.l . 95-452 , as amended ) . the inspector general , who is nominated by the president and confirmed by the senate , directs the office . advocacy's mission is to "encourage policies that support the development and growth of american small businesses" by intervening early in federal agencies' regulatory development processes on proposals that affect small businesses and providing regulatory flexibility act compliance training to federal agency policymakers and regulatory development officials ; producing research to inform policymakers and other stakeholders on the impact of federal regulatory burdens on small businesses , document the vital role of small businesses in the economy , and explore and explain the wide variety of issues of concern to the small business community ; and fostering two - way communication between federal agencies and the small business community . as shown in table 5 , advocacy's funding has increased from $5.620 million in fy2000 to $9.120 million in fy2019 . this increase has exceeded the rate of inflation .