, war and national defense . may 2013: israeli officials reported a failed attempt by the syrian electronic army to compromise water supply to the city of haifa . july 2014: the united states charged a chinese entrepreneur with breaking into the computer systems of the u.s. defense giant boeing and other firms to steal data on military programs concerning warplanes , including c - 17 cargo aircraft , and the f - 22 and f - 35 fighter jets . the unified command plan organizes combatant commands into geographic and functional areas . u.s. cyber command is currently organized under the functional strategic command , and co - directed and located with the national security agency ( nsa ) . with the complicated lines of authority ( title 10 vs . title 50 ) associated with this structure , some have suggested separating the two organizations and giving civilian control to the nsa while elevating cyber command to the level of a full unified combatant command . dod has been tasked by congress to study and report on the possible implications of this realignment . specifically , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 ( p.l . 112-239 ) asks in section 940 "how a single individual could serve as a commander of a combatant command that conducts overt , though clandestine , cyber operations under title 10 , united states code , and serve as the head of an element of the intelligence community that conducts covert cyber operations under the national security act of 1947. . given that the dod views cyberspace as one of five global domains , some proponents in congress contend that a separate cyber force , akin to the army , navy , air force , or marine corps , is necessary to properly address the military aspects of the domain . however , critics point to the multi - layered aspect of cyberspace in which all services have equities . as previously discussed , blurred lines between operations undertaken under title 10 and title 50 authorities can complicate efforts to determine the chain of command and jurisdictional review process . what does this ambiguity mean for congressional oversight committees ? have some operations taken place without congressional notification ? what has been the department of defense's role in responding to cyberattacks on private networks ? the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 ( p.l . 113-291 ) contains some provisions related to dod cybersecurity and cyber operations . these provisions: require reporting on cyber incidents with respect to networks and information systems of operationally critical contractors and certain other contractors . require the principal cyber advisor to identify improvements to ensure sufficient civilian workforce to support uscybercom and components . direct a program of decryption to inspect content for threats and insider activity within dod networks . state the sense of congress that as icann turns to global community for leadership , support should be given only if assurances are provided for current legacy ip numbers used by dod and the u.s. government . direct that a new mission forces , training , manning and equipping plan and associated programmatic elements be submitted to congress .