similarly , h.r . airlines for america supported h.r . 4441 , finding that similar reforms have been successful in other countries and would promote funding stability and greater accountability , and would "make nextgen a reality instead of an unrealized dream. congressional reluctance to accept aviation user fees leaves unanswered the question of how a corporatized or privatized air traffic control system would be funded . a number of entities fall under the broad rubric of "quasi - governmental organizations" and exist as hybrids between governmental and private sectors . examples include the tennessee valley authority , mortgage lender fannie mae , intercity passenger rail provider amtrak , the smithsonian institution , and the national academies . faa itself works closely with the mitre center for advanced aviation system development , a congressionally chartered not - for - profit corporation , on air traffic control technologies . many federal agencies rely on contracts with private - sector entities to provide goods and services . faa itself has extensive experience with outsourcing both major acquisitions of air traffic control technologies and certain operational aspects of the national airspace system . to date , faa has not outsourced any operations associated with radar control of air traffic , such as terminal radar approach control ( tracon ) facilities and en route centers , and has contracted out air traffic services only at low - activity nonradar towers . although nats uk is a unique example of public - private partnerships ( p3s ) in air traffic control , congress has shown great interest in p3s in other fields as a means to leverage government assets , potentially reduce federal government costs , and share risks with private firms . some federal agencies , especially the department of defense and the department of veterans affairs , have relied extensively on public - private partnerships for real - property management . dot has encouraged states to use p3s to design , build , maintain , and operate highway and public transportation projects . a p3 approach could be regarded as a hybrid between a government - owned corporation and a completely private entity , with both the federal government and aviation industry stakeholders sharing in financial and organizational oversight . in the 114 th congress , h.r . 4441 would have limited the applicability of user fees to commercial airline operations , thus excluding general aviation and business aviation in particular . this limitation , however , was insufficient to gain the support of important interest groups representing general aviation and business aviation . while opposition to corporatization and user - fee funding of air traffic services stalled the legislation to implement the usats proposal in the 1990s , the federal aviation reauthorization act of 1996 ( p.l . 104-264 ) instead included language authorizing reform of the faa procurement and personnel management systems in order to keep pace with new technology and match resources with personnel needs . the act mandated the creation of a 15-member faa management advisory council designated by the secretary of transportation , including 13 members representing aviation interests , 1 member from the department of defense , and 1 member from dot .