appendix a . gas furnace: non - condensing type appendix b . chronology of the regional standards policymaking process appendix c. doe rulemaking analysis plan overview and general approach in march 2010 , doe published a notice of the consensus agreement and issued a rulemaking analysis p lan ( rap ) for residential furnaces . the rap is based on the energy - saving criteria specified in epca , as amended . as noted previously , in the background section , epca specified that any amended appliance ( "covered product" ) efficiency standard must be designed to achieve the maximum improvement in energy efficiency that is "technologically feasible and economically justified. further , doe may not adopt a standard that would not result in "significant conservation of energy. in assessing an efficiency standard as "economically justified," doe must determine that the benefits of using equipment that satisfies the standard would exceed its burdens . this assessment must address public comments on the proposed standard and consider , "to the greatest extent practicable," several additional factors . to address the criterion of "technological feasibility" doe assesses the full range of commercially available equipment and its associated energy efficiency levels . doe then chooses several trial standard levels ( tsls ) across the spectrum of available energy efficiency levels . to assess the economic justification criterion , doe runs an elimination process for the tsls . the process starts with the maximum technologically feasible level — the highest of doe's selected tsl levels of energy efficiency — and then runs scenarios with successively lower efficiency levels until reaching a point where the level is economically justified . doe must then assess whether that level would achieve a "significant amount of energy savings. market participants and distribution channels the rap identified non - weatherized ( indoor ) natural gas furnaces as accounting for the dominant market share among the family of residential furnace equipment types: because the large majority of residential furnace shipments fall into the non - weatherized gas product class , doe will focus heavily on non - weatherized gas - fired furnaces . as a result , doe plans to select units for teardown that will include approximately 25 non - weatherized gas - fired furnaces , 4 weatherized gas - fired furnaces , 6 mobile home gas - fired furnaces , and 8 non - weatherized oil - fired furnaces . in order to estimate the price "markup" that a manufacturer adds to furnace production cost , doe had to define furnace market participants and identify associated distribution channels ( supply chains ) . the rap describes the furnace distribution channel in simple terms: most residential furnaces pass through the following distribution channel: the original equipment manufacturer ( oem ) assembles the system and sells it to a distributor ; the distributor sells the unit to a contractor ; the contractor sells the unit to the final end - user and performs the installation . after installation , the contractor performs all service on the system , including inspection , maintenance , and repair . the rap provides rich detail about the contractor portion of the channel , where the direct interaction with consumers takes place: most contractors compete at the local level and the majority of them are small businesses .