113-235 are relatively small . nevertheless , both proponents and opponents of the nmi may see such appropriations authorizations as opening the door to future increases in funding for the nmi as well as establishing a precedent for the creation of additional programs of a similar nature for manufacturing or other sectors of the u.s. economy . the act provides for the secretary of commerce to use up to $5 million in funds appropriated to the nist industrial technology services account to carry out the nmi program . the availability of funds from this authorization , however , will depend on the level of annual appropriations made to the nist its account . in addition , whatever appropriations are made to the its account may be subject to congressional prioritization and restrictions included in report language accompanying the appropriations bill . in fy2015 , congress appropriated $138.1 million for the its account , directing nist to spend $130.0 million on the hollings manufacturing extension partnership and $8.1 million on nist's advanced manufacturing technology consortia program . it did not provide explicit funding for the nmi in fy2015 . for fy2016 , if congress desires to provide funding to nist to carry out the nmi program under the act's authorization , it may choose to increase funding for the its account in an amount equal to the level of funding it wishes to provide for the administration of the nmi program , reduce funding for one or both of the existing programs being funded by this account , or leave the determination of the allocation of the its appropriation to the secretary of commerce or nist . a second source of funding provided for by the act is authority given to the department of energy to transfer to nist up to $250 million for the period fy2015-fy2024 . however , the availability of funds provided by the doe to nist depends , in part , on the level of annual appropriations made to the doe's energy efficiency and renewable energy account specifically for advanced manufacturing r&d . this source of funding for the nmi may also be subject to prioritization and potential restrictions included in report language accompanying the appropriations bill . in addition , the availability of these funds to nist will depend on doe's willingness to transfer funds to nist for the nmi program . a third possibility for funding the program is the authority given to the secretary to accept funds , services , equipment , personnel , and facilities from any covered entity to carry out the program . the act does not specify how the funds provided by nist , doe , or other agencies are to be allocated between program management activities and funding for the centers . in the absence of such specifications , it appears that the funds from these sources may be used for either or both of these purposes . in addition to authorizing the establishment of centers for manufacturing innovation , the act authorizes the establishment of a network of these centers . in this regard , the act specifies which centers are eligible to be a part of the network and designates the national program office as "a convener of the network.