step 4 . allot the first half of the excess amount using a formula each state's and territory's share of the first half of the excess amount is determined by multiplying the population of the state by its allotment percentage determined in step 3 . the resulting product is then divided by the sum of the corresponding product for all states and territories . the resulting fraction is then multiplied by one - half of the excess amount to determine the second component of the state's formula allocation . expressed as an equation , this step is as follows: step 5 . step 3 . vr services may be provided on an individual or group basis . due to the individualized nature of each client's plan for employment , the nature and intensity of services provided to each client may vary . services to individuals may include counseling and guidance services , including assistance in helping a client exercise informed choice in selecting an employment objective ; job - related services , including job search and placement assistance as well as job retention services , follow - up services , and follow - along services ; training services ( such as postsecondary education ) as well as support of training ( such as books and supplies ) or application of training ( such as licensing fees ) ; supportive services such as transportation subsidies or assistance in acquiring assistive technology ; and supported employment services or other post - employment services necessary to help a client retain or advance in employment . vr agencies can also support activities that more broadly assist individuals with disabilities in the labor market . these services for groups may include capacity building ( such as the development of new programs ) or investments in new materials such as assistive technology . as noted previously , wioa requires each state to reserve 15% of its vr grant for pre - employment transition services for youth with disabilities . wioa also added section 113 to the rehabilitation act , which establishes required activities and responsibilities regarding these transitional services . wioa emphasizes coordination between state vr agencies and state and local entities responsible for providing services under the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) . section 113 specifies that each state shall use its reservation of funds to "ensure that the designated state unit , in collaboration with the local educational agencies involved , shall provide , or arrange for the provision of , pre - employment transition services for all students with disabilities in need of such services who are eligible or potentially eligible for services[.] required pre - employment transition activities include job exploration counseling , work - based learning experiences , counseling on postsecondary opportunities , workplace readiness training , and instruction in self - advocacy . authorized activities include developing strategies for improving outcomes for individuals with disabilities in competitive integrated employment and postsecondary education and disseminating information about effective approaches . section 113 also specifies that the transition from secondary school must be coordinated among relevant government entities .