this is not true . states have the power to tax their residents on online purchases , even when the seller is located outside the state and has no real connection with it — in this situation , the state can impose the use tax on the purchaser . the constitution does , however , limit the state's power to require an out - of - state seller to collect use tax from the purchaser on behalf of the state . specifically , the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment and the commerce clause both require that a sufficient connection or "nexus" exist between a state and an out - of - state business before the state may impose tax obligations on it . due process requires there be a sufficient nexus between the state and the seller so that ( 1 ) the state has provided some benefit for which it may ask something in return and ( 2 ) the seller has fair warning that its activities may be subject to the state's jurisdiction . the dormant commerce clause requires a nexus in order to ensure that the state's imposition of the liability does not impermissibly burden interstate commerce . importantly , congress has the authority under its commerce power to permit state taxation that would otherwise violate the dormant commerce clause , but cannot change the standard required for due process . the nexus standard for use tax collection liability is not the same under both clauses . the supreme court has ruled that , absent congressional action , the standard required under the dormant commerce clause is the seller's physical presence in the state , while due process requires only that the seller have directed purposeful contact at the state's residents . this was not always the case . the court first articulated the physical presence requirement in the 1967 case national bellas hess v. dept . of revenue of illinois , where it grounded the requirement in both clauses . the court noted that each required a similar connection between the state and the seller: due process required that "the state has given anything for which it can ask return," while state taxes on interstate commerce were permissible when they represented "a fair share of the cost of the local government whose protection [the seller] enjoys. the court concluded that these principles , along with the fact that the use tax collection obligations would burden interstate commerce due to the significant number of u.s. taxing jurisdictions and complexity of their requirements , meant that a state's authority to impose the obligations was limited to when the seller had a physical presence in the state . by the late 1980s , it seemed possible that physical presence was no longer required for use tax obligations because the court had modified its analysis of both the due process and the commerce clauses . the due process clause in other contexts was no longer interpreted to require an individual or entity's physical presence in a state before that state could exercise authority over the individual or entity ; instead , liability could be imposed when the individual or entity intentionally made a sufficient level of contact with the state .