the reasons for such opposition will be unique to that property . §§4321 et seq. ) under nepa , federal agencies must consider the environmental impacts of an action before making a final decision about that action . with regard to surplus property disposal , the responsible federal agency would be required to identify impacts associated with both reporting the property as excess and disposal of the property , but not necessarily its future development that would not constitute a federal action itself . the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act of 1980 ( cercla ; 42 u.s.c . since a nonfederal land owner would not be required to take such action , members of the public may want the landholding agency to ensure that the property has been adequately surveyed to identify archeological sites or to make the sale conditional on a buyer agreeing to implement certain actions if archeological sites are later discovered . the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla ) is the principal federal statute that addresses releases of hazardous substances into the environment on both federal and nonfederal lands . section 120 ( h ) of cercla generally requires the united states to clean up contaminated federal property prior to transferring the property out of federal ownership . the policy premise of this provision is that the united states should assume full responsibility for the cleanup of contamination caused by federal activities , and not shift the burden of that responsibility to the recipient merely as a consequence of acquiring the property . section 120 ( h ) applies to all contaminated federal property declared surplus to the needs of the federal government . the agency with administrative jurisdiction over a surplus federal property generally is responsible for performing and paying for the cleanup of contamination to fulfill the financial liability of the united states . in some cases , the recipient may voluntarily agree to pay for the cleanup of a contaminated surplus federal property in exchange for a discounted purchase price to acquire the property , or other conditions of ownership that the recipient may desire . as is the case with federal facilities that remain in federal ownership , funds available for the cleanup of surplus federal properties are subject to the availability of appropriations to the federal agencies that administer those properties . for example , the department of defense ( dod ) performs and pays for the cleanup of surplus federal property on military installations closed under a consolidated base realignment and closure ( brac ) round out of funds appropriated to the dod base closure account . §§9601 et seq. ) section 120 ( h ) of cercla generally requires federal agencies to clean up contaminated federal property prior to transferring the property out of federal ownership , unless assurances are provided that the cleanup will be carried out subsequent to transfer and certain conditions are satisfied . to ensure compliance with cercla , a federal agency would be required to certify whether or not hazardous substance activity took place during the period of federal ownership and whether , as a result , hazardous substances were released that may warrant remediation . the national historic preservation act ( nhpa ; 16 u.s.c .