for example , h.r . 46 and s. 20 , the financial takeover repeal act of 2013 , would repeal the dfa in its entirety , including the provisions designed to promote financial stability in titles i and ii . however , the code provides a number of exceptions to the automatic stay , including for certain "qualified financial contracts ( qfcs ) ," that is , securities contracts , commodity contracts , forward contracts , repurchase agreements , swap agreements , and netting arrangements . it is especially common for financial institutions to be parties to qfcs , making special protections provided for them all the more important in case of a financial institution's insolvency . additionally , the bankruptcy code provides trustees , who administer bankruptcy liquidations , the authority to avoid ( i.e. reducing the number of countries of operation and the extent of operations within countries could help improve a covered financial institution's resolvability by , for example , reducing the coordination burdens of multiple insolvency regimes cooperating on the proper allocation of assets and treatment of creditors and , relatedly , the incentive of administrators of those regimes from engaging in self - interested "ring - fencing" of the failed institution's assets . ring - fencing , in this context , refers to an insolvency regime administrator freezing the transfer of assets held by an affiliate of a failed institution that are located within the jurisdiction of the administrator so that those assets may be used to pay off domestic creditors , potentially at the expense of creditors located in other jurisdictions . ring - fencing can lead to an inefficient allocation of the failed firm's assets , inconsistent treatment among creditor classes , and cutting the flow of cross - border funds that may be needed to maintain certain critical operations . 1450 / s. 685 , the too big to fail , too big to exist act , would require the secretary of the treasury to identify all financial institutions it considers to be "too big to fail," and within one year of such designation , "break up [these] entities ... so that their failure would no longer cause a catastrophic effect on the united states or global economy without taxpayer bailout. and as a final example , h.r . 613 , the systemic risk mitigation act , would among other things , require every bank holding company with $50 billion or more in consolidated assets to hold long - term , subordinated debt of the value of at least 15% of its total consolidated assets . as is discussed more fully below , increasing long - term , unsecured debt arguably could help promote the long - term viability of the firm and , if the firm actually fails , help absorb some of its losses .