the state or quality of being protected from such threats . the broad field of endeavor aimed at implementing and improving those activities and quality . it is related to but not generally regarded as identical to the concept of information security , which is defined in federal law ( 44 u.s.c . ยง3552 ( b ) ( 3 ) ) as protecting information and information systems from unauthorized access , use , disclosure , disruption , modification , or destruction in order to provide - ( a ) integrity , which means guarding against improper information modification or destruction , and includes ensuring information nonrepudiation and authenticity ; ( b ) confidentiality , which means preserving authorized restrictions on access and disclosure , including means for protecting personal privacy and proprietary information ; and ( c ) availability , which means ensuring timely and reliable access to and use of information . cybersecurity is also sometimes conflated inappropriately in public discussion with other concepts such as privacy , information sharing , intelligence gathering , and surveillance . privacy is associated with the ability of an individual person to control access by others to information about that person . thus , good cybersecurity can help protect privacy in an electronic environment , but information that is shared to assist in cybersecurity efforts might sometimes contain personal information that at least some observers would regard as private . cybersecurity can be a means of protecting against undesired surveillance of and gathering of intelligence from an information system . however , when aimed at potential sources of cyberattacks , such activities can also be useful to help effect cybersecurity . in addition , surveillance in the form of monitoring of information flow within a system can be an important component of cybersecurity . the risks associated with any attack depend on three factors: threats ( who is attacking ) , vulnerabilities ( the weaknesses they are attacking ) , and impacts ( what the attack does ) . the management of risk to information systems is considered fundamental to effective cybersecurity . the federal role in cybersecurity involves both securing federal systems and assisting in protecting nonfederal systems . under current law , all federal agencies have cybersecurity responsibilities relating to their own systems , and many have sector - specific responsibilities for ci . more than 50 statutes address various aspects of cybersecurity . figure 1 is a simplified schematic diagram of major agency responsibilities in cybersecurity . in general , the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) develops standards that apply to federal civilian ict under the federal information security modernization act ( fisma ) , and the office of management and budget ( omb ) is responsible for overseeing their implementation . the department of defense ( dod ) is responsible for military ict , defense of the nation in cyberspace , and , through the national security agency ( nsa ) , security of national security systems ( nss ) , which handle classified information . nsa is also part of the intelligence community ( ic ) .