if the provisions in h.r . 3964 and s. 2198 are exactly the same as h.r . while title i of h.r . 5781 — in similar fashion to s. 2198 — aims to maximize water supplies within existing law and regulations , title ii aims to protect third parties from "redirected" impacts and involuntary water supply reductions to the state and specified contractors ( similar to language included in h.r . 5781 , and only limited debate on the bills themselves . the issues the bills address , however , have been debated within congress for several years , including during hearings on similar bills . also , there are no estimates of how much more water might be gained if the bills were passed , nor is there information on how much might be made unavailable to varied interests compared with the status quo . thus , crs analysis of the potential impacts of the bill and its effects on interests is limited . further , the full impact of the legislation will likely not be known until it is understood how the administration would implement the bill , and how implementation might differ from current management practices . the following three tables show a comparison of h.r . 5781 with selected similar sections of h.r . the comparative analysis among the bills is summarized in the discussion above . the tables below show only a comparison of text from the bills themselves . 5781 is used as the base for comparison . selected provisions that compare to provisions under h.r . 5781 are inserted into the table . 5781 , or if no comparable provision to h.r . a variety of factors affect cvp and swp water deliveries . these include operational constraints pursuant to the federal esa , as noted above , but also state water quality regulations and court orders implementing state and federal water quality and other laws , cvp allocations policies , and the state's long established water rights system . the effects are widespread and are being felt by many economic sectors . the extent and severity of the drought is also taking its toll on fish and wildlife resources and has increased concern for wildfires . california's complex water supply systems also experienced severe water supply shortages during a recent three - year drought , which lasted from 2008 to 2010 , during a six - year drought from 1987 to 1992 , and during a two - year drought from 1976 to 1977 . cvp and swp water operations and water supply reductions have been at the heart of legislation in the 113 th congress aimed at addressing management of the systems in response to the current drought in california . faced with the prospect of another dry winter and water shortages in 2015 , the short - term issue for congress is how to respond to demands for increased water deliveries , while avoiding harm to the environment ( including several fish species and water quality ) and economies that depend directly on environmental resources ( eg , recreation , commercial and sport fishing ) .