how responses are managed is also under study . immediately after the boston marathon bomb attack in april 2013 , for example , fearful that a cellphone signal might trigger another bomb , authorities ordered that wireless phone networks be turned off . this practice is being reconsidered given the ubiquity of cellphones for communications and their use for wea . hd radio is ibiquity's core business . radio stations that broadcast hd radio pay fees to ibiquity . in 2011 , an analysis by pew research identified 2,103 hd radio stations , approximately 13% of all radio stations , noting that the number appeared to have plateaued . in the united states the fm / dab / internet chip for smartphones is marketed as nextradio . it was introduced in the united states by emmis communications in 2013 . nextradio is enhanced through cloud services provided by tagstation . nextradio requires a smartphone with the customized chip and radio tuner and uses an app that makes it possible to listen to over - the - air radio while connected to the internet , providing a number of interactive features . there are approximately 32 devices currently available in the united states with nextradio pre - installed . as emmis noted in the above - quoted filing with the securities and exchange commission , the broadcasting industry is lobbying regulators and legislators in support of including nextradio chips in smartphones . the basis of the industry campaign , as expressed by nab , is the value of radio information in times of disaster . the reasoning , discussed in the 2014 necp , is that if people are most readily reached by , for example , social media , then alerts must be delivered by social media . the number of active smartphone social network users in the united states was estimated at 97.9 million users in 2013 and is projected to grow to 160.5 million by 2017 . the backbone of the united states' emergency alert system ( eas ) is a network of high - power am radio broadcast stations that broadcast alerts across wide areas . these stations are referred to as primary entry point stations because they are the point of entry for emergency alerts and warnings . these alerts are in turn picked up and distributed across the country by additional radio stations , television , most cable systems , and other media , as required by the fcc . since 2009 , the federal emergency management administration ( fema ) has been enhancing the pep backbone to reach 90% of the country's population . the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) jointly administers eas with the fcc , in cooperation with the national weather service ( nws ) , an organization within the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) . the noaa / nws weather radio system — referred to as national weather radio — is the primary source for alerts and warnings over eas . measures to improve nwr and related networks are ongoing . for example , fema is developing the integrated public alert and warning system ( ipaws ) to meet requirements for an alert system as specified by an executive order issued by president george w. bush .