supporters of h.r . 1779 argue that the changes to the definitions of mortgage originator and to high - cost mortgage would expand credit in the manufactured - housing market . opponents of h.r . 1779 believe loosening the protections available to consumers could result in consumers receiving relatively high - interest loans without the counseling and disclosure typically associated with such loans . cbo projects that h.r . is the cfpb as an institution structured appropriately so as to achieve the correct balance between independence on the one hand and transparency and accountability on the other ? has the substance of the cfpb's rulemaking struck an appropriate balance between protecting consumers from abuse and ensuring that consumers have access to financial products while lenders are not unduly burdened by new regulations ? congress has assessed these questions using a range of its authorities , including holding oversight hearings and providing advice and consent during the confirmation of the cfpb's director . this report focuses on congress's exercise of another of its authorities — the consideration of legislation related to the cfpb . after providing an overview of the cfpb , the report examines some of the legislative proposals from the 113 th congress that have seen committee or floor action and that respond to the two policy questions described above . each bill is explained and placed in the larger context of the policy debates about the cfpb . title x of the dodd - frank act established the cfpb , and , in doing so , it consolidated many consumer financial protection responsibilities into one agency . the dodd - frank act states that the purpose of the cfpb is to implement and enforce federal consumer financial law while ensuring that consumers have access to financial products and services . it also instructs the cfpb to ensure the markets for consumer financial services and products are fair , transparent , and competitive . to fulfill its mandate , the cfpb can issue rules , examine certain institutions , and enforce consumer protection laws and regulations . the dodd - frank act further established that the cfpb is to be headed by a director , appointed by the president and subject to the advice and consent of the senate , for a five - year term . after the expiration of the term , the director may continue to serve until a successor has been appointed and qualified . the cfpb is located within the federal reserve system . the federal reserve board , however , cannot veto a rule issued by the cfpb , although the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) can set aside a cfpb - proposed rule with the vote of two - thirds of its members . the cfpb , which is not subject to the congressional appropriations process , is funded through the earnings of the federal reserve system . the dodd - frank act caps the cfpb's funding at 12% of the federal reserve's operating expense as reported in its fy2009 annual report , subject to annual adjustment based on a formula set in statute . for fy2015 , the transfer cap is estimated to be $618.7 million .