appendix a . selected minerals major applications appendix b . selected critical minerals - related legislation in the 113 th congress h.r . is there a possibility of material shortfalls ? if china uses more of its raw materials and metals for its own downstream manufacturing sector instead of exporting them , as well as competing for raw materials and metals from outside china , then there may be a cause for concern . materials such as the platinum group metals ( pgms ) , niobium , tantalum , manganese , and cobalt are heavily imported by the united states and china . most of the minerals and metals discussed in this report have been classified by the department of defense ( dod ) as strategic minerals , while others are classified by the department of energy ( doe ) as critical . many of these materials are used in building defense systems while others are required for new energy technologies . many chinese leaders have acknowledged that double - digit economic growth is unsustainable . over the next five years , china is planning a more sustainable growth rate in its gross domestic product ( gdp ) of about 7% - 8% annually . new economic reforms that will generally lead to more market - based decision making are underway , according to china's third plenum . the slowing of china's economy and less construction has resulted in less demand , overcapacity , and lower prices for many raw materials , particularly steel and steel - making materials ( eg , iron ore , chromium , and manganese ) . the economic slowdown in china has implications for the global economy , particularly those countries and companies that export raw materials to china ( eg , brazil , australia , and south africa ) . because of weak domestic demand for steel and subsequent falling prices , chinese steel producers are exporting more high - valued steel products to other parts of asia . prices in general could rebound once excess production capacity is eliminated and high - cost producers discontinue operations or are merged with large - scale operations . the mining industry in china consists of many small and fragmented companies . china's national government seeks to consolidate its mining industry , eliminating obsolete and inefficient capacity , and has announced specific consolidation goals for certain sectors . chinese consolidation plans intend to address energy efficiency along with air and water pollution concerns . the chinese government has closed some obsolete iron ore smelting plants and mines around beijing because of their negative impact on air quality . it also has begun to implement longer - term plans to improve the quality of the environment . the mining and metals industry is generally seeking technology upgrades that are more efficient and less polluting . eliminating excess capacity will be the mining sector's biggest challenge , said gu zangqin , head of the china national petroleum and chemical planning institute . gu argues that china's move to more urbanization , a growing middle class , and industrialization will likely continue to drive up demand for raw materials and consumer products in the long run .