appendix a . presidential nominations , 112 th congress appendix b . positions affected by p.l . 112-166 appendix c. abbreviations of department . it excludes appointments to regulatory boards and commissions as well as to independent and other agencies . the president is responsible for appointing individuals to positions throughout the federal government . in some instances , the president makes these appointments using authorities granted to the president alone . other appointments , generally referred to with the abbreviation pas , are made by the president with the advice and consent of the senate via the nomination and confirmation process . this report identifies , for the 112 th congress , all nominations submitted to the senate for executive - level full - time positions in the 15 executive departments for which the senate provides advice and consent . related congressional research service ( crs ) reports regarding the presidential appointments process , nomination activity for other executive branch positions , recess appointments , and other appointments - related matters may be found at http: / / www.crs.gov . this report features a pair of tables presenting information for each of these 15 executive departments . the first table in each pair provides information on full - time positions requiring senate confirmation as of the end of the 112 th congress and the pay levels of those positions . the second table for each department tracks appointment activity within the 112 th congress by the senate ( confirmations , rejections , returns to the president , and elapsed time between nomination and confirmation ) as well as further related presidential activity ( including withdrawals and recess appointments ) . in some instances , no appointment action occurred within an agency during the 112 th congress . information for this report was compiled using the senate nominations database of the legislative information system ( lis ) http: / / www.lis.gov / nomis / , the congressional record ( daily edition ) , the weekly compilation of presidential documents , telephone discussions with agency officials , agency websites , the united states code , and the 2012 plum book ( united states government policy and supporting positions ) .