appendix a . older americans act: authorizations of appropriations table a - 1 shows the authorizations of appropriations for each title of the act as stipulated by the 2006 older americans act amendments ( p.l . appendix b . older americans act programs: fy2006-fy2015 funding table b - 1 shows the funding history for oaa programs for fy2006 through fy2015 . amounts are not adjusted for inflation . the table includes several non - add lines — in italicized font with funding amounts in parentheses — for specific programs within a larger budget account ( i.e. , nutrition services ) . similarly , h.r . 5464 did not specify funding for holocaust survivors . although fy2015 final funding did not establish the budget's proposed holocaust survivor assistance fund , it did include $2.5 million in new discretionary funding to provide supportive services for aging holocaust survivors in fy2015 . the oaa contains seven titles . except for title v , community service employment for older americans ( cseoa ) , all programs are administered by the administration on aging ( aoa ) in the administration for community living ( acl ) within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) . title v is administered by the department of labor's ( dol's ) employment and training administration . as such , discretionary funding for oaa titles ii , iii , iv , vi , and vii is provided in annual hhs appropriations ; oaa title v funding is provided in the annual dol appropriations . title i does not authorize appropriations . since the enactment of oaa , congress has reauthorized and amended the act numerous times . in the past , oaa reauthorization has included extending the act's authorizations of appropriations for a five - year period . the last oaa reauthorization occurred in 2006 , when congress enacted the older americans act amendments of 2006 ( p.l . 109-365 ) , which authorized appropriations through fy2011 . although the authorizations of appropriations under the act expired at the end of fy2011 , congress has continued to appropriate funding for oaa - authorized programs and activities . this report discusses oaa funding . it begins with an overview of oaa's fy2015 funding and provides a detailed breakdown of current - year funding for each of the act's programs and activities . the report then reviews oaa's funding history since fy2001 . next , it summarizes fy2015 legislative activity with respect to oaa appropriations . it concludes with a discussion of fy2015 funding decisions for selected oaa programs . the following appendixes provide more detailed oaa funding information and funding history . appendix a shows the authorizations of appropriations for each title of the act as stipulated by the 2006 older americans act amendments ( p.l . appendix b provides funding levels for oaa programs from fy2006 through fy2015 . for general background on dol and hhs appropriations , see crs report r43236 , labor , health and human services , and education: fy2014 appropriations . for more information about the older americans act , see crs report r43414 , older americans act: background and overview . the fy2015 consolidated and further continuing appropriations act ( p.l .