appendix a . articles on shift to new international security environment this appendix presents citations to articles by or about observers who have concluded that the international security environment has undergone a shift from the post - cold war era to a new and different situation . citation from 2007 robert kagan , "end of dreams , return of history," policy review ( hoover institution ) , july 17 , 2007 . citations from late - 2013 and 2014 walter russell mead , "the end of history ends," the american interest , december 2 , 2013 . paul david miller , "crimea proves that great power rivalry never left us," foreign polic y , march 21 , 2014 . we just haven't noticed," washington post , march 15 , 2018 . chris meserole and alina polyakova , "disinformation wars," foreign policy , may 25 , 2018 . do the december 2017 nss and the january 2018 nds correctly describe or diagnose the shift in the international security environment ? as strategy documents , do they lay out an appropriate u.s. national security strategy and national defense strategy for responding to the shift in the international security environment ? u.s. grand strategy . should the united states continue to include , as a key element of u.s. grand strategy , a goal of preventing the emergence of a regional hegemon in one part of eurasia or another ? if not , what grand strategy should the united states pursue ? what is the trump administration's position on this issue ? defense funding levels . in response to changes in the international security environment , should defense funding levels in coming years be increased , reduced , or maintained at about the current level ? should the budget control act ( bca ) of 2011 , as amended , be further amended or repealed ? nuclear weapons and nuclear deterrence . are current dod plans for modernizing u.s. strategic nuclear weapons , and for numbers and basing of nonstrategic ( i.e. , theater - range ) nuclear weapons , aligned with the needs of the new international security environment ? u.s. and nato military capabilities in europe . are the united states and its nato allies taking appropriate and sufficient steps regarding u.s. and nato military capabilities and operations in europe ? what potential impacts would a strengthened u.s. military presence in europe have on total u.s. military force structure requirements ? what impact would it have on dod's ability to implement the military component of the u.s. strategic rebalancing toward the asia - pacific region ? capabilities for high - end conventional warfare . are dod's plans for acquiring capabilities for high - end conventional warfare appropriate and sufficient ? do the united states and its allies and partners have adequate strategies for countering russia's so - called hybrid warfare in eastern ukraine , russia's information operations , and china's so - called salami - slicing tactics in the south and east china seas ? stephen m. walt , "the bad old days are back," foreign policy , may 2 , 2014 . walter russell mead , "the return of geopolitics," foreign affairs , may / june 2014 .