, prosecutorial discretion ) . through the president's executive action of november 20 , 2014 , the obama administration would be providing eligibility for two forms of temporary immigration relief — deferred action and parole — for certain segments of the unauthorized population , and would expand the availability of certain types of waivers of the unlawful presence grounds of inadmissibility in the ina . a key principle underlying u.s. immigration policy is facilitating the permanent and temporary entry of foreign nationals with needed skills . admitting professional , managerial , and skilled foreign workers raises a series of policy tensions as the united states attempts to compete internationally for the most talented workers without negatively impacting wages and working conditions of native workers and students entering the u.s. labor market . the president's immigration accountability executive action announced on november 20 , 2014 , includes provisions meant to alleviate uncertainty for potentially millions of unauthorized aliens through deferred action and the use of provisional waivers and parole . some bills have been targeted at particular segments of the unauthorized population . for example , legislation known as the development , relief , and education for alien minors ( dream ) act has proposed to enable certain unauthorized aliens who arrived in the united states as children to obtain lpr status through a two - stage process . accomplishing such goals in the face of a potentially resistant congress may prove challenging . uscis , the agency tasked with carrying out sizable portions of the executive action , would be relying upon an indeterminate amount of additional fee revenue from deferred action petitions to implement some of these objectives , while other agencies , lacking congressional appropriations , would be attempting to implement changes to current policies and procedures mostly through increased coordination and more innovative marshaling of existing resources . other more controversial measures , such as the major senate immigration reform bill considered in the 113 th congress , have aimed to provide lpr status more broadly . while only legislative action can bestow legal immigration status , the obama administration has used other mechanisms to enable unauthorized aliens to remain in the united states . the administration has also taken steps to address the impact of provisions in the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) that make aliens who have been unlawfully present in the united states for more than 180 days and then depart , inadmissible to the country for a specified period of time . these provisions are known as the 3- and 10-year bars . it is also intended to revise enforcement priorities and improve and coordinate strategic initiatives across a range of immigration policy areas , including border security , high skilled immigration , and naturalization . whether this executive action can accomplish these objectives and prompt congress to pass more permanent legislative solutions is unclear . that debate and its attendant legal questions are beyond the scope of this report . as the administration proceeds to implement the executive action , some in congress have vowed to halt some or all of its provisions . security along u.s. borders has been an ongoing subject of congressional interest since the 1970s , when illegal immigration emerged as a serious national problem .