appendix a . describing incomes at the top of the distribution survey data , like the cps - asec used by the census bureau to describe the distribution of household money income cannot be used to identify with certainty the highest and lowest earners in the population ( see "census data" ) . irs data are superior for studying incomes at the top , but privacy rules limit the information the irs can share publicly about filers , though it does provide some information . for example , irs is required by law to report ( in aggregate ) on the number of filers with adjusted gross incomes above $200,000 , and it produces occasional reports on the top 400 filers , considered in aggregate and with identifying information removed . through data agreements with both agencies , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) is able to combine cps and irs data to create a more comprehensive picture of the income distribution than could be obtained from either data set used alone . as part of their analysis , cbo describes the distribution of incomes within the top 20% of households . figure a - 1 shows average after - tax income within the top quintile for 2011 as reported by cbo . cbo data indicate a wide range of incomes at the top of the income spectrum . the top 20% of households received $188,200 on average in after - tax income in 2011 . average income among the top 1% was $1,031,900 . while mean income among the top 1% is high relative to the overall quintile mean , it is likely to lie far below incomes of the highest earners . for reference , irs analysis of the top 400 filers in 2009 revealed that average adjusted - gross income among them was $202 million . appendix b . summary indicators reported by census the u.s. census bureau publishes several summary measures of income dispersion in its annual income and poverty in the united states report: the gini index , mean log deviation of income ( mld ) , theil index , and atkinson index . these indicators differ from the measures described in the main body of this report in that they do not convey descriptive details on the experience of the typical household , the range of incomes , or the shape of the distribution , but instead use information on the full distribution to characterize overall income dispersion ( i.e. , they are relative measures used to assess departure from a perfectly equal distribution of income ) . while the gini is familiar to many ( and discussed in this report — see " gini index " ) , the other three measures are less so . this appendix provides an overview of the mld , theil , and atkinson indices , explaining their basic properties and interpretation , and the value they bring to analysis of the income distribution . generalized entropy indices: mld and theil index general entropy ( ge ) indices are a family of relative inequality measures that are based on ratios of incomes to the mean .