the relevant language in p.l . 113-235 increased contribution limits to national political party committees . most prominently , these party committees include the democratic national committee ( dnc ) , democratic congressional campaign committee ( dccc ) , democratic senatorial campaign committee ( dscc ) , republican national committee ( rnc ) , national republican congressional committee ( nrcc ) , and the national republican senatorial committee ( nrsc ) . these committees may also establish new accounts , each with separate contribution limits , to support party conventions , facilities , and recounts or other legal matters . in practice , it appears that an individual's contributions to a national party could increase from at least $97,200 annually to at least $777,600 . for a two - year election cycle , an individual could give twice that amount , or more than $1.5 million . under inflation adjustments announced in february 2015 , it appears that an individual may contribute at least $801,600 to a national party committee in 2015 . although this report emphasizes increases in individual contribution limits , political action committees ( pacs ) may also make larger contributions to parties . for multicandidate pacs — the most common type of pac — contributions to a national party appear to have increased from $45,000 to at least $360,000 annually . unlike limits for individual contributions , those for pacs are not adjusted for inflation . ultimately , the impact of the proposed language will depend on a combination of agency implementation and political practice . the federal election commission ( fec ) is responsible for administering the increased limits . the agency's rulemaking , advisory opinions , or enforcement activities could further clarify how the provisions will affect donors and elections . on december 17 , 2014 , the fec briefly stated that it was "assessing" the language and would issue guidance "as soon as practicable. similarly , donor and party decisions will determine how or whether fundraising practices change . in particular , it is unclear how many donors have the ability or desire to make the larger contributions now permitted . as of this writing , how the fec intends to interpret the contribution limits and how the parties intend to alter fundraising practices , if at all , remains to be seen . the report has been prepared in response to evolving questions concerning ongoing legislative debate . some implications remain unclear at this time , and the analysis below could change with additional information . this report will be updated as additional information becomes available . 113-235 was enacted , the federal election campaign act ( feca ) permitted an individual to contribute $32,400 annually to national party committees ( reflecting 2014 limits , subsequently increased for inflation , as discussed below ) . 113-235 increased the limits as discussed below . these limits apply separately to the six political committees around which the two major parties are organized . for both parties , these include a headquarters committee ( eg , the democratic national committee ) , a house campaign committee ( eg , the national republican congressional committee ) , and a senate campaign committee ( eg , the national republican senatorial committee ) .