for example , h.r . in another example , both the house and senate have introduced bills entitled the bureau of consumer financial protection - inspector general reform act of 2015 ( h.r . 314 in the 113 th congress and h.r . 6723 in the 112 th congress ) is another example of legislative action that sought to amend the responsibilities of existing igs . authority for most of the igs is provided by the ig act . the statutory igs may be grouped by these criteria: the method of appointment , the authorizing statute , and the branch of government in which they are located . both bills were reported to the house committee on oversight and government reform . no further action was taken on either bill . in addition to amending the jurisdiction of existing igs to oversee the operations of certain federal entities , congress has , from time to time , proposed legislation seeking to create an entirely new ig . for example , in december 2015 , congress created a new agency - head - appointed ig to oversee the operations of the committee for purchase from people who are blind and severely disabled , also known as the abilityone program . the new ig was established following the release of a 2013 gao report that found "specific areas where the commission needs to establish adequate oversight procedures to better help ensure program integrity , transparency , and effectiveness. 1211 , 113 th congress ) , would have required igs government - wide to review their affiliated agency's compliance with the freedom of information act ( foia ) . among the issues raised by peggy gustafson , the sba ig who also testified on behalf of cigie , was a suggestion to exempt federal igs from the computer matching and privacy protection act . 957 was ordered to be reported by the house committee on financial services . on february 12 , 2015 , s. 510 was referred to the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs . no further action has been taken on either bill . similar legislation seeking to establish an independent ig for the cfpb was introduced in the 113 th congress ( h.r . 3770 , 113 th congress ) . in the 113 th congress ( 2013-2014 ) , several bills were introduced seeking to amend the appointment structure of federal igs . sections 403 and 413 amended the appointment structures of the national security agency ig ( nsa ig ) and the national reconnaissance office ig ( nro ig ) from agency head appointments to presidential appointments with the advice and consent of the senate . in a senate report to accompany one of the bills seeking to amend the igs' appointment structures , the committee wrote [t]his provision will ensure the nsa inspector general operates independently of the director of the agency in overseeing the activities of the nsa , particularly with respect to activities that may raise privacy concerns . ... by requiring presidential appointment and senate confirmation of the nro inspector general , this provision will ensure the nro inspector general continue to operate with appropriate independence from the nro director in overseeing the activities of the nro .