these questions are discussed in the sections below . discrimination against individuals with an infectious disease may be covered by section 504 of the rehabilitation act , the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) , or the air carrier access act ( acaa ) . the following sections discuss the status of individuals in three classes: individuals who may have been exposed to ebola virus but are not sick ; individuals who are sick with evd ; and individuals who have recovered from the disease . section 504 of the rehabilitation act prohibits entities receiving federal funds from discriminating on the basis of disability . the ada prohibits discrimination against individuals with disabilities in employment , state and local programs , public accommodations , and other areas . both acts use the same definition of an individual with a disability . an individual with a disability is "[any] person who ( i ) has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life's activities , ( ii ) has a record of such an impairment , or ( iii ) is regarded as having such an impairment. it appears that the rehabilitation act and the ada would most likely afford protection to two classes of individuals: ones sick from ebola virus and those who have recovered from evd . it is unclear whether the acts would protect individuals who may have been exposed to the virus but are not sick . a symptomatic individual suffering from evd would most likely qualify as an individual with a disability because evd is limiting the major life activity of normal bodily functions . an individual who has recovered from ebola would appear to qualify as an individual with a disability because he or she would be an individual with a history of evd . it is not clear whether an individual who may have been exposed to ebola virus , but is asymptomatic , would be covered by section 504 or the ada . it could be argued that such an individual qualifies because he or she is perceived as having ebola . on the other hand it could be argued that he or she does not qualify because he or she is not perceived as having ebola but is perceived to be a vector for the virus . because there are no reported court decisions on whether an individual who is contagious but has no impairment qualifies as an individual with a disability , it is not possible to know whether an individual who is regarded as being contagious , but is not , would qualify as an "individual with a disability" or as an individual "regarded as" having a disability . neither the rehabilitation act nor the ada specifically discusses contagious diseases . the supreme court dealt with the issue in the context of section 504 in school board of nassau county v. arline . the court considered the case of an elementary school teacher with recurrent tuberculosis who was terminated from her employment . she claimed she was dismissed because of a disability in violation of section 504 . the school district claimed she was terminated not because of her disability , but because she was contagious and posed a risk to others .