both decisions necessarily had political consequences . instead , the political question doctrine applies to issues that courts determine are best resolved within the politically accountable branches of government — congress or the executive branch . understanding exactly when the doctrine applies , however , can be difficult . the "precise contours of the doctrine are murky and unsettled," without a clear consensus among the members of the supreme court or academia . the supreme court itself has noted that the political question doctrine has caused "[m]uch confusion" ; and determining if it applies to a given case requires "a delicate exercise in constitutional interpretation. and tort claims brought against the federal government might sometimes pose a political question if they would require a court to review military discretionary decisions . likewise , a broad reading of zivotofsky might also eliminate judicial consideration of the prudential aspects of the political question doctrine or severely limit the application of baker 's second factor — a lack of judicial standards . in the first place , the majority opinion only mentioned the first two baker factors in its analysis , declining to even mention the remaining four . the court also rejected the argument that resolution of the claim was inappropriate because of a lack of judicially manageable standards . in fact , one reading of the majority opinion might be that no case presenting a potential question of statutory interpretation ( i.e. , when a court must interpret an ambiguous statute or determine whether a statute is constitutional ) can ever pose a political question . reflecting perhaps a robust conception of judicial supremacy , the majority emphasized that when a statute is "alleged to conflict with the constitution," it is the duty of the courts to "say what the law is. nevertheless , the majority did not expressly hold that no political question could ever arise in a case involving statutory interpretation , it simply stated that because the plaintiff sought to vindicate a statutory right , the proper analysis was whether the statute was constitutional . and the majority also did not address justice sotomayor's concurrence that envisioned hypothetical statutes that might do so . put another way , the court ruled that the proper analysis when a plaintiff seeks to vindicate a statutory right is to examine the constitutionality of the statute ; but did not expressly hold that the political question doctrine is always inapplicable to cases involving statutes . the majority's analytic framework might also indicate that some cases involving statutory interpretation could still pose a political question . the majority did not fully explain why its interpretative approach was the proper one . instead , it simply reasoned that because the plaintiff sought to vindicate a statutory right , a court should interpret the statute at issue , and the political question doctrine was inapplicable . the court did not clearly indicate whether this was the correct approach in all cases presenting a matter of statutory interpretation . without such an interpretative anchor for lower courts to follow , there may remain some room for courts to construe a case involving statutory interpretation in a manner that avoids falling under zivotofsky 's requirements .