the minnesota supreme court rejected both of these arguments . according to the court , the fundamental right to marry did not include the right of same - sex couples to marry , and minnesota's classification of persons who are authorized to marry did not offend the constitution's equal protection principles . the court seemingly utilized rational basis review , and rested its conclusion on the fact that minnesota did not classify those authorized to marry with any "irrational or invidious discrimination. the plaintiffs in baker then appealed to the u.s. supreme court , which was required to grant review under a now - defunct statute mandating that the court accept appeals of state supreme court cases wherein state statutes face constitutional challenges . the plaintiffs' appeal asked the supreme court to consider whether minnesota's refusal to recognize their marriage: ( 1 ) deprived them of due process of the law under the fourteenth amendment ; ( 2 ) violated their rights under the fourteenth amendment's equal protection clause ; or ( 3 ) deprived them of their right to privacy under the ninth and fourteenth amendments . the supreme court summarily dismissed the appeal , that is , dismissed it without an opinion "for want of [a] substantial federal question. a summary dismissal is considered a decision on a case's merits , and is thus binding on lower courts . that is , a summary dismissal rejects the specific issues challenging an appealed decision , and this dismissal creates precedent that lower federal courts must then follow when considering the same issues . therefore , in the immediate wake of the supreme court's summary dismissal in baker , it appeared as though lower federal courts had to dismiss challenges to state same - sex marriage bans that were based on the constitution's equal protection and due process principles . however , the supreme court has also held that summary dismissals are no longer binding precedent when doctrinal developments show that the court now views the issues summarily decided as raising "substantial federal question[s]. the circuit courts that have considered equal protection and due process challenges to state same - sex marriage bans are split regarding whether baker requires them to dismiss such claims . the u.s. court of appeals for the sixth circuit ( sixth circuit ) has held that baker precludes it from evaluating equal protection and due process challenges to state same - sex marriages . conversely , the u.s. courts of appeals for the fourth , seventh , ninth , and tenth circuits have all held that doctrinal developments since baker — more specifically , the supreme court's decisions in romer v. evans , lawrence v. texas , and united states v. windsor — indicate that the court now views the issues summarily decided in baker as raising substantial federal questions . accordingly , these circuit courts have held that baker does not preclude their review of equal protection and due process challenges to state same - sex marriage bans . in the wake of windsor , a number of challenges to state same - sex marriage bans made their way into federal courts . same - sex marriage has engendered heated debate throughout the country .