another proposal ( h.r . 2661 ) would add a new type of trail — "national discovery trails" — to the system . national discovery trails would be extended , continuous interstate trails that provide for outdoor recreation and travel and that connect representative examples of america's trails and communities . these and other 114 th congress bills affecting the national trails system are shown in table 2 . many comparable bills had also been introduced in previous congresses . the studies address both the suitability ( i.e. nsts and nhts are designated by acts of congress . , physical and financial viability ) of adding the trail to the system . the act contains additional criteria for nhts , which must  ( 1 ) be established by historic use and be significant because of that use ; ( 2 ) be significant with respect to a broad facet of american history , such as trade and commerce , exploration , migration and settlement , or military campaigns ; and ( 3 ) have significant potential for public recreational use or historical interest . in contrast to national scenic and historic trails , national recreation trails may be designated by the secretaries of the interior and agriculture with the consent of the federal agency , state , or political subdivision with jurisdiction over the lands involved . recreation trails must be reasonably accessible to urban areas and must meet other criteria as prescribed by the act or by the secretaries . the secretaries also have authority to designate connecting and side trails . for all four trail types , routes may intersect both federal and nonfederal lands . the law provides limited authorities for federal land acquisition in connection with the trails . along the designated rights - of - way for nsts and nhts , the secretaries may acquire land in areas that are already under their administrative jurisdiction ( eg , on trail segments that lie within the boundaries of an existing national park or national forest but are not federally owned ) . outside their administrative boundaries , the secretaries are to encourage state and local governments either to acquire trail lands or to enter into agreements with private landowners for the necessary rights - of - way . only if state and local governments fail to do so may the federal government acquire the land or form cooperative agreements with landowners . for nrts , the provisions are more limited , in that federal land acquisition may take place only within existing administrative boundaries . connecting and side trails may only include nonfederal lands if no federal acquisition is involved . when adding individual trails to the system , congress has often included specific land acquisition provisions — for example , authorizing federal acquisition only from willing sellers or establishing a geographical boundary for land acquisition , such as within a quarter - mile on either side of the trail . 111-11 gave federal land management agencies the authority to purchase land from willing sellers for a number of trails that had previously prohibited any federal land acquisition . the 30 national scenic and historic trails are administered by either the secretary of the interior or the secretary of agriculture , acting through the land management agencies .