the language of h.r . 114-1 is identical aside from technical corrections to that of the amended version of the 113 th congress bill , s. 2244 , which passed the house on december 10 , 2014 . 114-1 includes provisions to extend the tria program nearly six years , until the end of 2020 ; decrease the federal loss sharing gradually from 85% to 80% ; increase the program trigger by $20 million per year until it reaches $200 million from $100 million in 2015 ; increase the insurance marketplace aggregate retention amount by $2 billion per year until it reaches $37.5 billion from the $27.5 billion . after it reaches $37.5 billion , the amount is to be set by the secretary of the treasury to equal the annual average of aggregate insurer deductibles for the previous three years ; extend the various dates for mandatory recoupment by seven years ; change the mandatory recoupment provisions to require that 140% of the federal payments be recouped ; require the treasury to study the certification process and issue final rules governing the process , including a timeline ; require the treasury to collect additional data on the terrorism insurance market and include that data in an annual report ; and require a government accountability office ( gao ) study on the possible effects of instituting insurer premiums for tria coverage and requiring capital reserve funds for terrorism . in addition to the tria provisions , p.l . 114-1 also includes a title ii relating to insurance agent licensing , a section relating to the makeup of the federal reserve board of governors , and a title iii amending statutory provisions originating in the 2010 dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act relating to derivatives and margin requirements for end users . similar provisions to title ii and title iii passed the house in the 113 th congress . table 1 below presents a side - by - side analysis of the tria law as it existed upon expiration and p.l . a side - by - side comparison of legislation in the 113 th congress can be found in the appendix . the government did not charge premiums for this coverage . instead , if the insured losses were under $27.5 billion , the secretary of the treasury was required to recoup 133% of government outlays through a surcharge on commercial property / casualty insurance policies . if insured losses rose above $27.5 billion , the secretary was required to recoup a reduced amount of the outlays . at some high insured loss level , which depended on the exact distribution of losses , the secretary no longer was required to recoup outlays but retained the discretionary authority to do so . under the law when it expired , all mandatory recoupment was required to be completed by the end of fy2017 . since tria's passage , private industry's willingness and ability to cover terrorism risk have increased . the initial thresholds of the program when it expired were as follows: 1 . a terrorist act must have caused $5 million in insured losses to be certified for tria coverage .