the agency has not issued related guidance or initiated any regulatory actions . congress may be interested in oversight of epa's uic program or , more broadly , in federally sponsored research on the relationship between energy development activities and induced seismicity . although only a small fraction of the more than 30,000 u.s. wastewater disposal wells appears to be problematic for causing damaging earthquakes , such incidents may raise questions as to whether other energy - related activity — specifically , underground injection for carbon dioxide sequestration — may present similar risks . other lines of evidence are required to positively link human activities to earthquakes . that linkage is becoming increasingly well understood in parts of the united states where activities related to oil and gas extraction — deep - well injection of oil and gas wastewater and hydraulic fracturing — have increased significantly in the last few years , particularly in oklahoma , texas , arkansas , ohio , colorado , and several other states . nevertheless , the majority of deep - well injection and hydraulic fracturing activities are not known to cause earthquakes ; most are termed "aseismic" ( i.e. , not causing any appreciable seismic activity , at least for earthquakes greater than m 3.0 ) . scientists currently have limited capability to predict human - caused earthquakes for a number of reasons , including uncertainty in knowing the state of stress in the earth , rudimentary knowledge of how injected fluids flow underground after injection , poor knowledge of faults that could potentially slip and cause earthquakes , limited networks of seismometers ( instruments used to measure seismicity ) in regions of the country where most oil - and - gas - related activities are occurring , and difficulty in predicting how large an earthquake will grow once it is triggered . despite these uncertainties , a simple conceptual model for understanding how deep - well injection may be triggering earthquakes is starting to evolve , particularly for oklahoma , which has experienced the greatest change in seismicity since about 2009 . in the conceptual model , injecting oil and gas wastewater into the sedimentary formation increases its pore pressure . over time the increase in pore pressure propagates into pre - existing faults in the crystalline basement rocks underlying the sedimentary formation ( see figure 2 ) . some of the faults in the crystalline basement rocks are "critically stressed," meaning that any change to the pre - existing pressure regime has the potential to initiate "slip" along the fault . slip along a fault creates an earthquake ; the size of the earthquake is generally related to the amount of slip and the length of the fault . furthermore , studies indicate that even small pressure perturbations have the potential to cause relatively large earthquakes along these critically stressed pre - existing faults in crystalline basement rocks . this may have been the case for the large , m 5.6 and m 5.8 earthquakes in oklahoma in 2011 and 2016 , respectively . the national research council ( nrc ) estimates that conventional oil and gas production and hydraulic fracturing combined generate more than 800 billion gallons of fluid each year .