snow assistance determinations are based on snow accumulations . both types of assistance are triggered by a presidential disaster declaration . the criteria used by fema to determine whether to recommend a declaration depend on the type of winter incident . determinations for severe winter storms are based on the severity and magnitude of the event and the capabilities of the state and affected local governments to respond to the incident . requests for snow assistance and assistance for severe winter storms must also include the estimated cost of federal and nonfederal public assistance associated with the incident . fema divides the estimated cost of federal and nonfederal public assistance by the statewide population to give some measure of the per capita impact the incident has had on the state . this report describes snow assistance and assistance for severe winter storms , the declaration process , the criteria used to make eligibility determinations , and the types of assistance that are provided after the president has issued a major disaster declaration for the incident . this report also provides some historical data on winter incidents obligations for the incidents from fema's disaster relief fund ( drf ) . the drf is the main account used to fund a wide variety of programs , grants , and other forms of emergency and disaster assistance to states , local governments , certain nonprofit entities , and families and individuals affected by disasters . a severe winter storm is an event that includes one or more of the following: snow , ice , high winds , blizzard conditions , and other wintry conditions that cause substantial physical damage or property loss . the same procedural actions discussed previously must be taken by a governor or tribal leader when requesting federal disaster assistance for severe winter storms . as with requests for snow assistance , and in fact , a request for any major disaster declaration , the state or tribal government must demonstrate that the capabilities of the state or tribal government to effectively respond to the winter storm are , or will be , exceeded . the estimated cost of federal and nonfederal public assistance associated with the incident must also be included in the request . however , snow accumulations are not used as a criterion to make eligibility determinations and snow removal costs are not used to calculate the per capita impacts of the incident . the types of eligible assistance for severe winter storms vary according to the nature and severity of the incident . fema divides disaster - related work into two broad categories: ( 1 ) emergency work , and ( 2 ) permanent work . these are further subdivided into seven categories ( see table 1 ) . depending on the nature of the incident , one or more categories of work may be provided for the winter storm . however , it should be noted that a limited level of snow removal is provided for severe winter storms . generally , snow removal is a precursor to the performance of otherwise eligible emergency work . for example , snow removal may be necessary to access downed power lines or gain access to a damaged building .