section 800.70 . an additional fee is charged by fgis for supervising official inspection and / or weighing services . other ( unofficial ) inspection companies may be operating in these regions , but only an agency designated by fgis is allowed to issue official inspection certificates . for exports , fgis directly inspects about two - thirds of exported grain and oversees the inspection of the remainder . exporters are required to use the service provided by either the fgis field offices ( located in louisiana , ohio , oregon , and texas ) or a delegated state agency ( alabama , south carolina , virginia , washington , and wisconsin ) within geographic boundaries of the export port in which they operate . fgis provides mandatory export inspection and weighing services on a fee basis at 45 export elevators , including 4 floating rigs . the house passed h.r . 2088 by voice vote on june 9 , 2015 . the senate - reported bill did not receive a floor vote . the senate amended the house - passed mandatory price reporting act of 2015 ( h.r . 2051 ) to include reauthorization provisions for the usgsa , mandatory price reporting , and the national forest foundation , all of which were set to expire on september 30 , 2015 . 2051 , as amended by the senate , passed the senate by unanimous consent and passed the house by voice vote . the united states grain standards act ( usgsa ) of 1916 — p.l . 64-190 , as amended ( 7 u.s.c . 71 et seq .

 ) — authorizes the federal grain inspection service ( fgis ) of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) to establish official marketing standards ( not health and safety standards ) for certain grains and oilseeds . the specific crops are barley , canola , corn , flaxseed , oats , rye , sorghum , soybeans , sunflower seed , triticale , wheat , and mixed grain . as issued and modified in regulations , official grain standards define each grain , classes of the grain , and numerical grades . the grades specify physical characteristics such as minimum weight and maximum percentage of defects ( eg , foreign material , damaged kernels ) . the standards facilitate the marketing of grain by serving as contract language , enabling buyers and sellers to more easily determine quality ( and therefore value ) of these commodities . fgis promotes the uniform application of u.s. grain standards by official inspection personnel . specifically , to encourage the marketing of high - quality grain for an agriculture sector that is highly dependent upon export demand , the usgsa requires that exported grains and oilseeds be officially inspected ( if sold by grade ) and weighed . export inspections are carried out by either federal inspectors or federally supervised state inspection agencies , called delegated official inspection agencies . domestically marketed grain and oilseeds may be , but are not required to be , officially inspected . official inspections of domestically traded grain are done by federally supervised state agencies and private companies , called designated official inspection agencies .