sections 730-774 . congress subsequently strengthened sanctions on cuba through provisions in such legislation as the cuban democracy act of 1992 ( cda , p.l . 102-484 , title xvii ) , the cuban liberty and democratic solidarity ( libertad ) act of 1996 ( p.l . 104-114 ) , and the trade sanctions reform and export enhancement act of 2000 ( tsra , p.l . 106-387 , title ix ) . among its sanctions , the cda prohibits u.s. subsidiaries from engaging in trade with cuba . it also prohibits entry into the united states for any seaborne vessel to load or unload freight if it has been involved in trade with cuba within the previous 180 days , except pursuant to a department of the treasury license . the libertad act codified the economic embargo , including all restrictions under the cacr , although the president retains broad authority to amend the regulations . nevertheless , as set forth in the libertad act , the president cannot eliminate the embargo regulations without making a determination that a transition government is in power in cuba . the libertad act also requires the president to end the embargo if he determines that a democratically elected government is in power . while tsra authorizes u.s. commercial exports to cuba , it also includes prohibitions on u.s. government assistance and private financing and requires "payment of cash in advance" or third - country financing for the exports . the act also prohibits tourist travel to cuba . in addition to these key acts , there are numerous other provisions of law that impose sanctions on cuba , including restrictions on trade , foreign aid , and support from international financial institutions . on december 17 , 2014 , president barack obama announced major changes in policy toward cuba , moving away from the long - standing sanctions - based policy aimed at isolating cuba toward a policy of engagement and normalization of relations . the policy shift included three major components: ( 1 ) the rescission of cuba's designation as a state sponsor of international terrorism ; ( 2 ) the restoration of diplomatic relations ; and ( 3 ) an increase in travel , commerce , and the free flow of information to and from cuba . the cuban government had been designated by the state department as a state sponsor of international terrorism in 1982 under section 6 ( j ) of the export administration act ( p.l . 4605 ( j ) ) , as amended , and provisions of other laws because of its alleged ties to international terrorism . as part of president obama's shift in cuba policy , the state department undertook a review of cuba's designation , which ultimately was rescinded on may 29 , 2015 . diplomatic relations with cuba had been severed by the eisenhower administration in january 1961 in response to the cuban government's demand to decrease the number of u.s. embassy staff within 48 hours . in 1977 , under the carter administration , the united states and cuba agreed to establish interests sections in each other's capitals .