there is no private right of action in the ftc act . the commission's powers under the ftc act are summarized below . the ftc frequently receives complaints from consumers about cross - border fraud , including allegations that a foreign business located outside of u.s. territory has engaged in unfair or deceptive acts or practices causing injury to consumers in the united states . it is possible that a foreign entity in a foreign country could make false or misleading environmental marketing claims that injure u.s. consumers . for example , a foreign manufacturer might affix deceptive labels to its products prior to their import into the united states . partly in order to address cross - border fraud , congress amended the ftc act in 2006 to expand and clarify further the ftc's international enforcement authorities , allowing greater cooperation between the agency and foreign countries and specifically allowing extraterritorial application of the ftc act by u.s. courts to certain conduct by foreign entities located in foreign countries . however , despite these amendments , the ftc may face several procedural hurdles in litigating cases against a foreign defendant who lacks a legal presence in the united states , including the challenges involved in serving process on foreign defendants in a foreign country ; overcoming defendants' motions to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction or forum non conveniens ; engaging in discovery abroad ; and obtaining recognition and enforcement of u.s. judgments by foreign courts . the ftc's enforcement of section 5 of the ftc act , which prohibits unfair or deceptive acts or practices in or affecting commerce , is central to the agency's role in regulating environmental marketing claims . to explain to businesses and the public how the ftc interprets section 5 in determining which environmental marketing claims are unfair or deceptive , the agency has issued nonbinding guides for the use of environmental marketing claims . because these "green guides" are administrative interpretations of law , the ftc cannot bring an enforcement action alleging a violation of them per se , but must find that the practice at issue is unlawful under section 5 of the ftc act or other applicable law . in addition to enforcement efforts directly under section 5 of the ftc act , the ftc also enforces various other laws passed by congress aimed at assisting consumers in making meaningful comparisons regarding products' environmental attributes . most of these laws state that violators are subject to ftc enforcement actions under section 5 of the ftc act . some commentators have suggested that certain environmental marketing messages have the potential to deceive consumers , and that the prevalence of such messages in the marketplace may discourage companies from competing to create more environmentally beneficial products . environmental marketing claims may be self - declared by manufacturers in advertising or on product labels , or made by a government or third party through a certified "seal of approval" or "environmental label" awarded to a product that meets certain environmental criteria .