appendix b . past fmap rate exceptions although fmap rates are generally determined by the statutory formula described above , table 1 lists current exceptions that have been added to the medicaid statute and regulations over the years , and table b - 1 lists past fmap exceptions . medicaid is jointly funded by the federal government and the states . participation in medicaid is voluntary for states , though all states , the district of columbia , and the territories choose to participate . medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program that finances the delivery of primary and acute medical services as well as long - term services and supports . each state designs and administers its own version of medicaid under broad federal rules . while states that choose to participate in medicaid must comply with all federal mandated requirements , state variability is the rule rather than the exception in terms of eligibility levels , covered services , and how those services are reimbursed and delivered . the federal government pays a share of each state's medicaid expenditures . this report describes the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) calculation used to reimburse states for most medicaid expenditures , and it lists the statutory exceptions to the regular fmap rate . the federal government's share of most medicaid service costs is determined by the fmap rate , which varies by state and is determined by a formula set in statute . the fmap rate is used to reimburse states for the federal share of most medicaid expenditures , but exceptions to the regular fmap rate have been made for certain states , situations , populations , providers , and services . the fmap rate is also used in determining the phased - down state contribution ( "clawback" ) for medicare part d , the federal share of certain child support enforcement collections , temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) contingency funds , a portion of the child care and development fund ( ccdf ) , and foster care and adoption assistance under title iv - e of the social security act . an enhanced fmap ( e - fmap ) rate is provided for both services and administration under the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , subject to the availability of funds from a state's federal allotment for chip . the e - fmap rate is calculated by reducing the state share under the regular fmap rate by 30% . the fmap rate is used to reimburse states for the federal share of most medicaid expenditures . in fy2019 , 13 states are to have the statutory minimum fmap rate of 50% , and mississippi is to have the highest fmap rate of 76.39% . from fy2018 to fy2019 , the regular fmap rates for 36 states is to change , while the regular fmap rates for the remaining 15 states ( including the district of columbia ) is to remain the same . exceptions to the regular fmap rate have been made for certain states , situations , populations , providers , and services .