, regional or national ) . regional and national accreditation attests to the overall quality of institutions and their programs , in general , and allows students at institutions to receive title iv aid , but it does not address the quality of individual programs with regard to specialized programmatic criteria , such as whether the curriculum offered meets professional guidelines . additionally , these institutions have diverse missions and student populations . the wide array of institutions served by regional accrediting agencies has led some to propose a restructuring of the accreditation system , with accreditors focusing more narrowly on types of institutions accredited ( eg , community colleges , research universities ) , rather than on institutions that fall within a particular geographic region . by doing so , they argue , peer reviewers and professionals familiar with the operations of each type of institution would evaluate institutions within that category , thus ensuring a strong peer - review foundation , and help to establish better measures of outcomes and accountability . congress might consider whether restructuring the current accreditation system is desirable and , if so , how a new structure could be fashioned . restructuring options that congress might consider include encouraging or facilitating the transformation of the current regional accreditation system into one organized on the basis of institutional type or mission or allowing other entities , such as a state regulatory body , to serve the accreditation agency role of determining the quality of an institution . the process of receiving initial accreditation and then periodically having it renewed is often viewed as time - and resource - intensive . although the federal government does not set specific accreditation requirements , it indirectly influences the criteria accrediting agencies review based on the federal standards accrediting agencies must meet to be recognized by the ed . accrediting agencies often state that the numerous ed - recognition criteria are onerous and unnecessary , potentially discouraging accrediting agencies from placing greater emphasis on educational rigor and innovation . congress may wish to consider whether all aspects of the federal recognition process are necessary in determining whether an accrediting agency is a reliable authority on the quality of the education being offered or whether other steps could be taken to reduce the costs and burdens associated with the overall process . some items that have been raised include decreasing or modifying the existing statutory and regulatory criteria for federal recognition of accrediting agencies and redistributing the responsibilities between accrediting agencies and ed ( eg , shifting more oversight of institutional financial sustainability to ed ) . efforts to provide access to postsecondary education to a broad variety of students ( eg , older , working , and / or low - income students ) and potentially reduce postsecondary educational costs for students have resulted in the emergence or further proliferation of nontraditional educational delivery models and providers . for instance , although competency - based education ( cbe ) has been used by some schools for decades , recently there has been an increased interest in cbe as a means to potentially decrease time to degree completion and , therefore , costs to students .