it cannot , however , mandate that outcome . the conference report ( h.rept . 115-404 ) mandates that the secretary of defense "establish a program of record to develop a conventional road - mobile ground - launched cruise missile system with a range of between 500 to 5,500 kilometers" and authorizes $58 million in funding for the development of active defenses to counter inf - range ground - launched missile systems ; counterforce capabilities to prevent attacks from these missiles ; and countervailing strike capabilities to enhance the capabilities of the united states . the legislation also mandates that the president impose additional sanctions on russia if it remains in noncompliance with the inf treaty . congress also addressed the inf treaty in the national defense authorization act for fy2019 ( p.l . the conference report legislation states that the president must submit a determination to congress stating whether russia "is in material breach of its obligations under the inf treaty" and whether "the prohibitions set forth in article vi of the inf treaty remain binding on the united states as a matter of united states law. these are the prohibitions on the testing and deployment of land - based ballistic and cruise missiles with a range between 500 and 5,500 kilometers . the legislation also stated that the united states should "take actions to encourage the russian federation to return to compliance" by providing additional funds for the development of military capabilities needed to counter russia's new cruise missile and by "seeking additional missile defense assets … to protect united states and nato forces" from russia's noncompliant ground - launched missile systems . the fy2016 ndaa ( h.r . 1735 , §1243 ) also addressed russia's compliance with the inf treaty and possible u.s. military responses . this legislation stated the sense of congress that the development and deployment of a nuclear ground - launched cruise missile by russia is a violation of the inf treaty , that russia should return to compliance with the inf treaty , that efforts to compel russia to return to compliance "cannot be open - ended," and that there are several u.s. military requirements that would be addressed by the development and deployment of systems currently prohibited by the inf treaty . the legislation went on to require that the president notify congress both about the status of russia's compliance with the inf treaty and the status and content of updates that the united states provides to its allies in nato and east asia about russia's testing , operating capability , and deployment of inf - range ground - launched ballistic missiles or ground - launched cruise missiles . as was noted above , the legislation also mandated that the secretary of defense submit a plan to congress for the development of counterforce capabilities to prevent intermediate - range ground - launched ballistic missile and cruise missile attacks , countervailing strike capabilities to enhance the forces of the united states or allies of the united states , and active defenses to defend against intermediate - range ground - launched cruise missile attacks . the fy2017 ndaa ( p.l . the statement did not provide any information about the substance of the discussions or about the possibility of future meetings .