holocaust memorial museum ) . for most museums operated in whole or in part by the federal government , congressional authorization is required . in the 113 th congress ( 2013-2014 ) , legislation was introduced to authorize the national museum of the american latino , and to authorize a commission to study the potential creation of a national women's history museum . for the national museum of the american latino , a commission reported to congress in 2011 that the museum should be established and made part of the smithsonian institution . the desire to continue to build new museums does not seem likely to abate in the coming years . how new proposals might be considered and if any standard process should be applied to the museum evaluation and authorization process could be a useful tool for congress . since the number of museum proposals , however , is generally not large in any given congress , prescribing specific processes for the evaluation of new museum ideas might not be necessary or warranted . since then , proposals to authorize the museum have been introduced , but no further action has been taken either by the committees of jurisdiction or the house or the senate . in december 2014 , the commission to study the potential creation of a national women's history museum was established in the carl levin and howard p. "buck" mckeon national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 ( p.l . it will report "not later than 18 months after the date of the first meeting of the commission" on whether the museum should be authorized , how it should be funded , and whether it should be a smithsonian museum . this report focuses on contemporary museum creation in the district of columbia . using examples from past museum authorizations , the three most common methods of establishing a museum — creation of a museum study commission , donation acceptance , and direct authorization through law — are examined . , belonging to the united states in washington" into a single organization . since the creation of the smithsonian institution , congress has used its authorizing statute as a template for establishing other museums . since 1980 , congress has authorized four new museums in the district of columbia — the united states holocaust memorial museum , the national law enforcement museum , the national museum of the american indian , and the national museum of african american history and culture . §§8901-8909 ) — which guides the placement of memorials in the district of columbia and prohibits construction in certain areas of the nation's capital — for the future of museums on and around the national mall . museums in the district of columbia can be broadly divided into two groups: private and federal . private museums are not within the purview of congress and are not addressed in this report . federal museums are generally created by statute and may receive appropriations for museum operations . statutorily created federal museums can be categorized into smithsonian and non - smithsonian museums .