sharing information has benefits . if a firm reports a cyberattack , law enforcement can begin searching for those responsible and possibly alert other organizations , which can review their cybersecurity arrangements to prevent similar attacks . in some cases , broader sharing of information would benefit the attacked firm ; if it does not have the resources for defense or other countermeasures , sharing information might allow another entity , such as a security consultant or the software developer , to develop a countermeasure . although most data breaches have not been expensive compared with the revenues and profits earned , recent events may change the attitude of boards of directors and senior management: the chief executive officers at target and sony entertainment were forced to resign . cybercrime continues to increase . the media reports data breaches exposing tens of millions of personal financial records at retailers , such as target , home depot , and tj maxx . the ponemon institute , an independent research institute , estimates that in 2013 the number of attacks on 59 companies based in the united states increased over that of 2012 and the average cost per attack also increased . the ponemon study found the average cost of a cybercrime incident in fy2014 was $12.7 million compared with $11.6 million in fy2013 . the center for strategic and international studies estimates that cybercrime costs the global economy about $445 billion in a typical year . the risks to critical infrastructure and national security from cyberattacks are harder to quantify , but the bipartisan policy center recently concluded that the united states has a "september 10 th ability to guard against cyberattacks. although some informal networks might lack the technical capabilities of an isac , they can arguably discourage free - riding by cutting "takers" out of the network , which would alter incentives in favor of more information sharing . some sharing is already happening . many cybersecurity companies currently share information with clients . some of this is being done in real time . the "bottom line," is likely to be how nonfederal entities — particularly businesses — value the benefits from sharing information against the cost of sharing . neither bill would address the cost of full membership in isaos or isacs which , at $10,000 to $100,000 , are too expensive for small - and medium - size businesses . president obama and some members of congress have identified increasing cybersecurity as a priority . it would seem that companies could increase their cybersecurity at relatively little cost by sharing information about cyberattacks . the costs of a data breach can include detection , containment , repair , incident response , investigation , fraud losses , and lost sales . the cost of sharing information , including joining a specialized sharing organization , is likely to be less than $100,000 . one obstacle to reducing cybercrime is misaligned incentives , which reduce information sharing about cyberattacks . in the aftermath of a cyberattack , at least four groups could be notified: law enforcement , other companies , customers , and ( for public companies ) stockholders .