the fs receives both discretionary and mandatory appropriations . although it is an agency within the usda , the fs receives its discretionary appropriations through title iii of regular interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bills . annual mandatory appropriations are provided under existing authorizing statutes . laws authorizing mandatory appropriations allow the fs to spend money without further action by congress , and the budget authority for several of these mandatory spending accounts is dependent on revenue generated by activities on the national forests . in fy2016 , the fs received $7.06 billion in total funding , of which $6.36 billion ( 90% ) was discretionary funds and an estimated $691.91 million ( 10% ) was mandatory funds . management of the nfs is primarily funded as one of the fs's main discretionary accounts . for example , congress has considered legislation to prioritize timber production over other uses or to specify a certain annual output of timber production . in contrast , congress has also considered legislation that would prioritize recreation , hunting , and fishing over other uses . there are several ongoing concerns regarding wildfire management , including the total federal costs of wildfire management , the strategies and resources used for wildfire management , and the impact of wildfire on both the quality of life and the economy of communities surrounding wildfire activity . fire control expenditures continue to climb , affecting the implementation of other programs ( and thus affecting national forest uses ) through personnel and funds transferred to fire control . it is unclear when , whether , and how this cost spiral can be contained . congress often considers legislation to prioritize various national forests uses over others or to define or specify levels of production . however , several of the mandatory accounts also fund nfs activities , although this report focuses on discretionary appropriations . in fy2016 , congress appropriated $1.51 billion to the nfs discretionary account . on average over the last five fiscal years , the nfs account has received approximately 28% of the fs discretionary appropriations . fs budget requests and interior appropriations subcommittee documents typically allocate monies in each account among various subaccounts and , in some cases , among specific programs and activities . the fs further allocates its appropriations — at the account , subaccount , and program activity levels — among the nine fs regions , five research stations , two service centers and laboratories , and the national headquarters office in washington , dc . once the funds have been allocated to the regions and programs , the money is then further allocated to each national forest . this can make analyzing appropriations by region or by forest challenging . the nfs account includes several subaccounts , programs , and activities , many of which reflect the different ways the national forests are used . the chief has traditionally been a career employee of the agency . the chief reports to the usda secretary through the under secretary for natural resources and environment . the nfs regions are often referred to by number rather than by name . table 1 identifies the number , states encompassed , and acreage for each of the regions .