restrictions on specific exports . the united states has tightened restrictions on u.s. exports of dual - use and military items to russia . the united states urged other countries to impose sanctions on russia , and coordinated sanctions with a number of other countries , particularly in the eu . in august 2014 , russia announced a retaliatory ban on the import of certain foods from the united states , the eu , and other countries imposing sanctions . in 2014 , the united states and other countries also began opposing new projects in russia at the world bank and european bank for reconstruction and development ( ebrd ) , to put additional pressure on the russian government in response to russia's actions in ukraine . canada , france , germany , italy , japan , the united kingdom , and the united states suspended the g - 8 and instead resumed convening as the g - 7 , of which russia is not a member , for the first time since the late 1990s . russian officials still attend g - 20 meetings , which include a broader group of advanced and emerging - market economies . u.s. and eu sanctions on russian individuals , firms , and sectors in 2014 came at a time when russia's economy was still struggling to recover from the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 . in the early 2000s , russia's economy benefited from rising oil prices . its economy was hit hard by the global financial crisis and ensuing global economic downturn , as demand for its exports fell , particularly in europe . russia's economy contracted sharply , by 7.8% , in 2009 . the economy rebounded the following year , growing by 4.5% , before slowing between 2010 and 2013 . 8901 et seq . ) and the ukraine freedom support act of 2014 ( p.l . 8921 et seq . ) these acts contain provisions on u.s. sanctions in response to the conflict in ukraine . u.s. sanctions on russia in response to the ukraine conflict include the following: asset freezes and prohibitions against transactions with specific russian individuals . the u.s. government has frozen assets under u.s. jurisdiction and prohibited u.s. persons from engaging in transactions with a number of russian individuals , including russian officials , deputies , businesspeople , and associates with ties to the kremlin . asset freezes and prohibitions against transactions with specific entities . some russian companies are subject to u.s. asset freezes and are prohibited from engaging in economic transactions with u.s. individuals and entities . examples include bank rossiya , which has been called the "personal bank of putin" ; the volga group , a holding company owned by a close ally of putin ; and almaz - antey , a state - owned defense company . restrictions on financial transactions with russian firms operating in key sectors . sanctions target sectors in russia's financial services , energy , and defense sectors . u.s. individuals and entities face restrictions on select financial transactions , such as prohibitions on extending new debt with maturities longer than 30 or 90 days ( depending on the sector ) .