the measure is similar to h.res . 54 , which was passed by the house in april 2017 ( see " trump administration ," below ) . on may 1 , 2017 , the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) announced that it would not extend a stay on the implementation of a rule from december 2016 authorizing the importation of lemons from argentina . ( see " trade and investment issues ," below. ) on april 27 , 2017 , president trump hosted a visit by argentine president mauricio macri at the white house in which the two leaders discussed ways to deepen relations in such areas as trade and investment , cooperation on measures to combat illicit trafficking and financing , and cyber policy . the two leaders also agreed to work closely on the situation in venezuela . in addition , president trump delivered a tranche of declassified documents relating to human rights abuses in argentina during the country's military dictatorship , continuing a process that began under the obama administration . ( see " trump administration ," below. ) president mauricio macri's government has ushered in significant changes to argentina's economic and foreign policies since his inauguration to a four - year term in december 2015 . the macri government has moved ahead with market - friendly economic policies , including the elimination of currency controls , the elimination or reduction of taxes on agricultural exports , a revamp of inflation statistics , and a resolution of the long - standing dispute with holdout creditors . economic adjustment measures triggered an economic downturn in 2016 , with gdp declining by almost 2.3% , but also are leading to more sustainable growth in 2017 , with a forecast for 2.2% growth . president macri largely has had success receiving approval from argentina's congress for his reform agenda , but given that macri's party and electoral coalition have only a minority in congress , the government could face difficulty in the future . this is especially true as the country approaches legislative elections in october 2017 , which many observers see as a referendum on the policies of the macri government . in the foreign - policy arena , the macri government has improved relations with neighboring brazil and uruguay , the promarket countries of the pacific alliance , and the uk . it also has spoken out strongly about the situation in venezuela . u.s. - argentine relations have greatly improved under the macri government compared to under the kirchner governments , when the bilateral relationship was often tense . macri's election brought to power a government that to date has demonstrated a strong commitment to constructive bilateral relations . the obama administration moved swiftly to engage the macri government , highlighted by president obama's state visit to argentina in 2016 and the launching of a high - level dialogue in august 2016 . relations continue to be positive under the trump administration , with president macri visiting the white house on april 27 , 2017 . the two leaders discussed ways to deepen relations on a host of areas , including trade and investment , combatting illicit financial activities , cyber policy , and the situation in venezuela .