the potential significance of armstrong beyond the medicaid program also remains to be seen . the court's decision could inform future litigation brought by a private party seeking to compel state officials to comply with other federal statutes , particularly where those statutes provide mechanisms for federal agencies to enforce their requirements . additionally , the decision may inform the drafting and consideration of legislation in congress , insofar as the opinion clarifies the analysis and presumptions the court will utilize when considering whether equitable relief has been foreclosed . as in douglas , the armstrong plaintiffs argued that the rates were in violation of the equal access provision required under medicaid . however , in contrast to douglas , idaho's rates had already received approval from cms . therefore , armstrong presented an opportunity for the court to squarely address the question presented in douglas , but without the risk of intervening administrative action requiring a remand to the lower courts . the immediate effect of the armstrong decision would appear to be the insulation of state medicaid programs and officials from suits brought by private parties , such as beneficiaries or providers , alleging violations of federal medicaid requirements . without a private avenue of enforcement directly against states , future litigation will likely focus on federal actions to approve state plans , possibly as actions seeking review of a final agency action under the administrative procedure act . though the availability of such a cause of action may not be in doubt , whether the level of review in the context of such an action is sufficient may be a topic of future debate . as noted by justice breyer in his concurrence in armstrong , the law may give the federal agency broad discretionary authority to decide when and how to exercise or to enforce statutes and rules . in armstrong , idaho's reimbursement rates for providers of "habilitation services" were challenged by providers of these services . but , if that is so , it is because congress decided to vest broad discretion in the agency to interpret and to enforce ยง30 ( a ) . as a result , it may be difficult for respondents to prevail on an apa claim unless it stems from an agency's particularly egregious failure to act . this report provides an overview of the decision in armstrong , the potential implications of this decision for medicaid , and the availability of equitable relief against state officers in federal courts generally . during the october 2014 term , the supreme court was again presented with the question posed by douglas , namely , whether the supremacy clause independently provides a cause of action to prevent state officials from violating a federal statute . the facts of this case , armstrong v. exceptional child center , incorporated , are similar to the facts of douglas . on march 31 , 2015 , the supreme court decided in armstrong v. exception child center , incorporated , that private parties cannot seek an injunction from a federal court to prevent state medicaid officials from implementing a state plan that may violate federal law .