however , the next day the ica stayed enforcement of the standard . this section will focus on two state plans that are involved with current controversial occupational safety and health issues . rather , osha relies on the following existing section of the osh act and federal standards to attempt to reduce heat - related illnesses and injuries: section 5 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the osh act , commonly referred to as the general duty clause , requires that each employer "shall furnish to each of his employees employment and a place of employment which are free from recognized hazards that are causing or are likely to cause death or serious physical harm to his employees" ; the personal protective equipment ( ppe ) standards require each employer to assess potential hazards to employees and provide employees with appropriate ppe to protect against these hazards ; the sanitation standards require employers to provide employees with access to potable water ; and the safety training and education standard for construction requires construction employers to "instruct each employee in the recognition and avoidance of unsafe conditions" in the workplace . the california state plan exceeds osha's standards and includes specific requirements that employers must fulfill when their employees are working outdoors during periods of high temperatures . the arizona state plan includes a residential construction fall protection standard that has recently been deemed insufficient by osha and may result in osha reconsidering its approval of the state plan . the california state occupational safety and health plan is administered by cal / osha . the california plan is unique in that it includes a specific occupational safety and health standard that applies in cases of employees working outdoors during periods of high temperatures with the goal of reducing heat - related illnesses . unlike the california state plan , osha does not have a specific standard addressing the hazards of working outdoors in high temperatures . thus , the california state plan exemplifies going beyond the statutory requirement of providing a state plan that is at least as effective as the federal system and implementing standards to address hazards not specifically covered by osha . there is no federal occupational safety and health standard that specifically addresses the hazards of working outdoors in high temperatures . in addition , osha has developed a smartphone application that allows employers and workers to determine the current heat index and risk level for heat illness and provides recommended protection measures based on the current risk level . osha has also launched a heat illness prevention safety campaign that includes the use of materials , such as the poster shown in figure 2 , developed by cal / osha as part of california's state occupational safety and health plan . in 2005 , cal / osha established a heat illness prevention standard as part of california's state occupational safety and health plan and updated this standard in 2015 .