for example , while h.r . 653 , as referred in the senate , would authorize inspectors general to review agencies' foia compliance and potentially recommend adverse action , the senate bill does not . furthermore , the house legislation , as referred in the senate , would limit the scope of exemption 5 , preventing the withholding of "opinions that are controlling interpretations of law," "final reports or memoranda created by an entity other than the agency ... [that are] used to make a final policy decision," and "guidance documents used by the agency to respond to the public. geological and geophysical information and data . these exemptions are intended to prevent the disclosure of certain types of records , with examples including those related to law enforcement proceedings , personally identifiable information , or records pertaining to national security . foia has been subsequently amended multiple times , most recently by the open foia act of 2009 ( p.l . in march of 2009 , attorney general eric holder distributed a memorandum related to foia to the heads of all executive departments and agencies . the memorandum built upon a previous memorandum from president obama , which stated that foia "should be administered with a clear presumption: in the face of doubt , openness prevails. to reinforce this point , the memorandum from the attorney general instructed agencies to preemptively disclose information prior to a public request , partially disclose information in the event that some aspect of a record must be withheld , and not withhold information simply because it falls within the strict legal parameters of an exemption . further , the memorandum stated that the department of justice will defend a denial of a foia request only if ( 1 ) the agency reasonably foresees that disclosure would harm an interest protected by one of the statutory exemptions , or ( 2 ) the disclosure is prohibited by law . the new policy established by this memorandum is often referred to as "the presumption of openness. this guidance from the obama administration departed from the previous administration's position on foia implementation , in which the department of justice stated that it would defend any decision to withhold information under a foia exemption if the decision had a "sound legal basis" and did not "present an unwarranted risk of adverse impact on the ability of other agencies to protect other important records. in recent years , some members of congress have expressed interest in further amending foia to address both the presumption of openness and other issues , especially the electronic accessibility of agency records . during the 113 th and 114 th congresses , legislation to amend foia was considered in both the house and the senate . in both chambers , the currently proposed foia amendments address many of the same issues , often with similar language . the bills , however , also contain substantive differences . this report provides an overview of two foia bills in the 114 th congress , s. 337 and h.r . 653 , and provides analysis of certain foia - related provisions within each .