the boundaries as proposed by h.r . 4766 are provided in the map in the appendix . a companion senate bill ( s. 1865 ) also would have made the united states liable for damages to downwinders , onsite participants , and affected sheep herds as well as uranium miners . the bill would have created a federal advisory board with the authority to add to the list of specified cancers . the affected area for downwinder eligibility was expressed in terms of counties and other geographic features and included the following areas: in arizona , the area north of the grand canyon and west of the colorado river ; in nevada , the counties of eureka , lander , lincoln , nye , and white pine ; and in utah , the counties of beaver , carbon , duchesne , emery , garfield , grand , iron , kane , juab , millard , piute , san juan , sanpete , sevier , uintah , washington , and wayne . in addition , the bill would have given the secretary of health , education , and welfare the authority to add to the list of affected areas . the original reca statute included a smaller downwinder eligibility area than is currently covered by the program . initially , only residents of the following areas were covered by reca: in arizona , the area north of the grand canyon and west of the colorado river ; in nevada , the counties of eureka , lander , lincoln , nye , and white pine and clark county townships 13 through 16 at ranges 63 through 71 ; and in utah , the counties of beaver , garfield , iron , kane , millard , piute , and sevier . the current downwinder eligibility area was established with the enactment of the 2000 reca amendments , which added geographical areas in arizona and utah and created the current area described in table 3 . the initial and current reca downwinder eligibility areas are provided in the map in the appendix . since the enactment of the 2000 reca amendments , members of congress have introduced numerous bills over multiple congresses to expand the downwinder eligibility area . these bills would have expanded eligibility for nts downwinders to persons who were living in colorado , idaho , montana , and new mexico as well as in the entire states of arizona , nevada , and utah during periods of atmospheric atomic weapons testing at nts . additional legislation would have created downwinder eligibility for persons living in guam during atomic weapons testing in the pacific and for persons affected by fallout from the initial trinity test in new mexico . in 2002 , in response to a mandate from congress contained in the house report to accompany the 2002 supplemental appropriations act for further recovery from and response to terrorist attacks on the united states , p.l . 107-206 , hrsa asked the national research council ( nrc ) board on radiation effects research to study scientific evidence related to the health effects of radiation exposure and make recommendations to congress , including whether the reca downwinder area should be expanded . the nrc issued its final report on this study in 2005 .