trends in appropriations . the cost of brac . brac implementation is one reason that military construction appropriations between fy1989 and fy2011 , the last year of brac implementation , may not have dropped to levels expected at the end of the cold war . that the 2005 brac round , implemented between fy2006 and fy2011 , required an extraordinary commitment of funding was largely due to three reasons unique to that round: its primary goal was not cost savings , but rather support for the "transformation" of u.s. military forces into a lighter "expeditionary" post - cold war organization ; operations in iraq and afghanistan prompted an increase in ground forces ( "grow the force" ) requiring the construction of new troop facilities ; and the redeployment of overseas units to u.s. garrisons required construction of additional domestic facilities funded through the brac account . since 2011 , appropriations for military construction and family housing appear to have shrunk to levels not seen since the mid - 1970s . military construction for fy2012 , the first post - brac year , amounted to $13.8 billion , a 28% reduction from the year before . the $10.0 billion appropriated for fy2014 represented a further 27% reduction below those for fy2012 . the president requested $6.6 billion in military construction and family housing appropriations for fy2015 , which represented a level 53% below the appropriation of three years earlier . the military construction appropriations levels for fy 2016 through fy 2019 presented by dod in its future years defense plan ( fydp ) are projected to rise to $9.3 billion , then decline to $8.5 billion , $8.0 billion , and $7.7 billion , respectively . post - brac actual , requested , and projected military construction and family housing new budget authority is illustrated in figure 2 . the conference committee on h.r . 83 , division i , raised several key issues in drafting the fy2015 appropriation . capital asset projects , such as the construction of military facilities , can be either fully funded or incrementally funded . as a general rule , the office of management and budget ( omb ) has directed federal agencies , including dod , to fully fund construction in order to accurately reflect the real cost of each project . nevertheless , major projects that would require the dedication of substantial amounts of budget authority could limit the amount of annual budget authority available for other construction . for such large , budget - intensive projects , dod has broken the funding stream into phases spread over a number of years . each phase , though , is considered to be an independent , stand - alone project in the sense that its completion must yield a usable facility . this has led some in the construction industry to suggest that the approach is inefficient in both cost and time to completion . while generally supporting full funding , congress has occasionally modified such projects by converting a series of construction phases into a single project and funding them in a series of increments , thereby preserving new budget authority and offering the potential for more efficient construction .