ensure that the policies of the executive branch are informed by sound science . congress has expressed an abiding interest in the health of the federal science and technology ( s&t ) enterprise and the roles that it plays in meeting federal mission needs , expanding the frontiers of human knowledge , addressing societal needs , developing the u.s. science and engineering workforce , and promoting u.s. technological leadership , innovation , and competitiveness . for more than half a century , presidential science advisors have played a central role in u.s. s&t policy — informing presidents on s&t issues , serving as liaisons to the s&t community , and articulating presidential priorities to federal s&t agencies and to the public . in addition , since 1976 , presidential science advisors have directed and managed the office of science and technology policy . ostp plays an important role in coordinating and integrating the activities of federal s&t enterprise , acquiring scientific and technical advice and information from the private sector , and advising the president on related matters . congress provides oversight of ostp in the execution of its statutory authorities . in addition to the legislation currently under consideration , the 114 th congress may explore issues and legislative options related to the structure of ostp , its authorities , its relationships with the nstc and pcast , and the portfolio of policy issues identified in this report . the 114 th congress may opt to consider a variety of issues and legislative options related to ostp . to this end , ostp has established the following strategic goals and objectives: ensure that federal investments in science and technology are making the greatest possible contribution to economic prosperity , public health , environmental quality , and national security . energize and nurture the processes by which government programs in science and technology are resourced , evaluated , and coordinated . sustain the core professional and scientific relationships with government officials , academics , and industry representatives that are required to understand the depth and breadth of the nation's scientific and technical enterprise , evaluate scientific advances , and identify potential policy proposals . generate a core workforce of world - class expertise capable of providing policy - relevant advice , analysis , and judgment for the president and his senior staff regarding the scientific and technical aspects of the major policies , plans , and programs of the federal government . ostp also has several roles not articulated in these formal statements . these include serving as a sounding board and conduit of information for agency executives seeking to understand , clarify , and help shape science and technology - related policy objectives and priorities and helping to resolve interagency conflicts over areas of s&t responsibility and leadership . ostp also plays a managerial and executive role with respect to other white house science and technology entities . ostp manages the nstc and exercises policy and programmatic oversight of pcast . congressional oversight of ostp and influence over its activities are ongoing processes .