appendix a . 2824 with additional amendments . on september 19 , 2017 , the strong families act of 2017 ( s. 1829 ) was introduced , and included several of the same provisions in h.r . the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( h.r . supporting evidence - based home visiting to prevent child maltreatment congress subsequently funded a home visiting pilot program that had been proposed by the bush administration in the fy2008 budget request and had a child maltreatment focus . as part of the request , the administration sought $10 million ( as a set - aside within the discretionary activities account of the child abuse prevention and treatment act , capta ) for competitive grants to expand , upgrade , or develop home visiting programs that have "proven effective models," and to support a national cross - site evaluation to examine factors associated with successful replication or expansion of such models . families participate on a voluntary basis . in fy2017 , the miechv program served 156,297 individual parents and children who participated in 942,676 home visits . jurisdictions that carry out home visiting programs under the program must adhere to specific requirements . for example , they must use most of their program funding to implement one or more home visiting models that have been identified by hhs to be effective . separately , hhs provides training and technical assistance to jurisdictions and is carrying out research activities to evaluate the impacts of the program on participants' outcomes . this report begins with an overview of the miechv program and home visiting generally , and discusses federal efforts to increase and support home visiting services . some home visiting proposals reflected government - wide efforts beginning in the george w. bush administration and extending into the obama administration to expand social programs that work and eliminate those that do not . education begins at home act the education begins at home act ( s. 2412 ; 108 th congress ) , introduced in 2004 , sought to authorize a stand - alone home visiting program , and would have directed the departments of education and health and human services to collaboratively award grants to support home visiting . it would have also amended the early head start program to establish standards for home visiting staff . the bill was not taken up ; however , several similar bills were introduced in subsequent years . one of these similar bills ( the education begins at home act , h.r . 3628 ; 109 th congress ) was the focus of a hearing by the house education and the workforce committee . at the hearing , representative osborne said that home visiting can "deliver parent education and family support services directly to parents with young children and aim to offer guidance to parents on how to support their children's development from birth through their enrollment in kindergarten. other witnesses , including representatives from two home visiting programs ( parents as teachers and nurse - family partnership ) , testified about the role of home visiting in improving multiple child and family outcomes in education , health , and other domains .