appendi . this will be a sustained fight , and we are in the early stages. it also seeks to use its revenue to administratively control and govern the territory it has seized . in several respects , the islamic state presents a unique policy challenge to combating terrorist financing . its financial strength lies in its ability to secure large amounts of funding from primarily internal sources , its lack of reliance on international sources of funds , and its exploitation of ungoverned spaces and porous borders to move funds with impunity . these characteristics often place the organization's finances beyond the reach of some of the most common counterterrorist financing policy tools . the islamic state controls a variety of public resources and infrastructure in parts of iraq and syria , enabling it to assemble a "diverse financial portfolio. some of these resources , such as oil and antiquities , can be smuggled and sold for considerable profit . others — agriculture and energy and water utilities — generate limited revenue and require a significant investment in inputs or technical expertise , but help the group portray itself as exercising the functions of a legitimate government . activities such as kidnapping for ransom or the looting of state banks in iraq are profitable in the near - term but not necessarily sustainable . in other cases , is control over a set of resources is notable not solely for the revenue the group derives from it , but also for the extent to which it limits the ability of the iraqi and syrian governments to conduct trade , provide utility services , or feed its citizens . targeting the islamic state's finances is one of five core lines of effort to degrade and defeat the terrorist organization . general john allen , the u.s. special presidential envoy for the global coalition to counter isil , stated in early 2015 that the united states cannot defeat isil through military efforts alone , and highlighted the need to deprive the group of access to financial resources . u.s. policy to counteract is financing has concentrated on three primary areas: disrupting the group's main sources of funding , restricting its access to the international financial system , and imposing sanctions on its senior leadership and financial facilitators . the united states also has sought to collaborate with international partners , including through cooperation on financial intelligence collection and analysis . although military airstrikes on is - linked oil infrastructure and supply networks have already altered the organization's financial profile , counterterrorist financing policy responses remain nascent . policymakers continue to grapple with how to develop quick and effective responses to combat is financing . some caution that counter - finance tactics may need to be balanced with consideration of the economic harm such actions may inflict on civilian populations in is - controlled territory . in the absence of alternatives , particularly for key resources such as oil , utilities , and agriculture , efforts to counter is - financing could damage local economies and services and contribute to an expanding humanitarian crisis in the region . early international efforts to address is financing have focused on gathering information and generating a common understanding of the organization's financial capabilities .