such credits are not provided through the shop exchanges . the premium credit is an advanceable , refundable tax credit , meaning tax filers need not wait until the end of the tax year to benefit from the credit and may claim the full credit amount even if they have little or no federal income tax liability . receiving the credits as advanced payments means that monthly insurance premiums will be automatically reduced by the credit amount . therefore , the direct cost of insurance to an individual / family generally will be lower than the "advertised" cost for a given exchange plan . the treasury department ( treasury ) promulgated final regulation on the premium credits on may 23 , 2012 . for 2015 , table 2 displays selected annual income levels used in the calculation of premium credit amounts and required premium contributions , as discussed above . table 3 displays the maximum monthly premium contributions for individuals and families who receive premium tax credits , provided that they enroll in the applicable reference plan . both figure 1 and table 3 illustrate the cliff effect that occurs at 133% fpl . for individuals with income below 133% fpl , the credit formula ensures that such individuals pay no more than 2.01% of their income for the second - lowest - cost silver plan . for incomes at 133% fpl , individuals and families may pay 3.02% of their income toward premiums for the reference plan . for example , an individual with income at 132.99% fpl ( annual income of $15,520 ) may be required to pay $26 in monthly premiums for the second - lowest - cost plan in 2015 ( see table 3 ) . the first scenario ( and amount ) is straightforward: the premium for the exchange plan in which the person / family enrolls . the second scenario is more complicated , involving a formula that considers the premium for a reference plan in the local area in which the person / family resides , and an amount that the person / family may be required to contribute toward the premium . based on a comparison of the amounts resulting from each scenario , the premium credit will be the lesser amount . the following text box , "calculation of the premium credit amount," discusses these two scenarios in more detail . under scenario b , the amount that a tax filer who receives a premium credit is required to contribute toward the premium ( for the reference plan ) is capped as a percentage of household income ; that is , the maximum premium contribution is the product of the tax filer's household income and the "applicable percentage," as specified in the aca . in general , the applicable percentage is less for those with lower incomes compared with those with higher incomes ; where income is measured relative to the federal poverty level . under scenario b , the amount that tax filers with income between 100% fpl and 133% fpl may be required to contribute toward the reference plan's premium is capped at 2.01% of household income for 2015 . for tax filers with income 300% - 400% fpl , their premium contribution is capped at 9.56% of income .