these are discussed below . sria reformed the pa program primarily through the creation a new section of the stafford act establishing alternative procedures for the pa program . as described earlier in this report , fema created the public assistance alternative procedures ( paap ) pilot program to implement these alternative procedures . as described in law , the purpose of the pa alternative procedures is to: ( 1 ) reduc[e] the costs to the federal government of providing such assistance ; ( 2 ) increas[e] flexibility in the administration of such assistance ; ( 3 ) expedit[e] the provision of such assistance to a state , tribal or local government , or owner or operator of a private nonprofit facility ; and ( 4 ) provid[e] financial incentives and disincentives for a state , tribal or local government , or owner or operator of a private nonprofit facility for the timely and cost - effective completion of projects with such assistance reducing federal costs for providing assistance . sria also requires the dhs ig to assess the effectiveness of the alternative procedures for permanent work projects . of note , the ig's report is not specifically required to assess the portion of the alternative procedures for debris removal assistance , though the ig retains the standing authority to review and audit these grants . by law , among other elements , the ig's report is required to contain assessments of whether the alternative procedures: increased the speed of disaster recovery for the community ; used estimates that were accurate ( presumably to mean accurate to actual costs ) ; and should be continued , with any recommendations for changes to them in future legislation . the report is to be issued three to five years following enactment of sria ( so between january 2016 and january 2018 ) and is to be provided to the committees of jurisdiction for the stafford act ( the committee on transportation and infrastructure in the house , and the committee on homeland security and governmental affairs in the senate ) . in a committee report requirement accompanying the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l . 114-4 ) , congress has also directed fema to produce quarterly reports on implementation of the paap pilot program , especially for permanent work . these quarterly reports are instructed to include fema's assessment of "challenges and recommendations , including proposed authority modifications" to help the pilot program achieve its legislative objectives . in addition , the quarterly reports are to contain , among other items , a financial summary of all permanent work projects in the paap pilot program and descriptions of projects over $50 million . the issuances of the ig's report and fema's quarterly reports on the paap pilot program may provide congress with direction on how it could further revise the stafford act to improve the pa program .