hereinafter , this option will be referred to as the "state option. under current law , title i , part a , of the esea authorizes federal aid to leas for the education of disadvantaged children . the authorization of appropriations for most programs authorized by the esea extended through fy2007 . as congress has not reauthorized the esea , there is currently no explicit authorization of appropriations for esea programs . however , because the programs continue to receive annual appropriations , appropriations are considered implicitly authorized . during the 114 th congress , the house education and the workforce committee considered and on february 20 , 2015 , reported the student success act ( h.r . 5 ) , a bill that would reauthorize the esea . 5 would make several changes to current law , but one issue that has attracted substantial congressional interest is a new option that would be available to states for distributing funds available under title i - a of the esea to local educational agencies ( leas ) and schools . 5 , this option is referred to as "title i portability" and "title i funds follow the low - income child state option. title i - a grants provide supplementary educational and related services to low - achieving and other students attending pre - kindergarten through grade 12 schools with relatively high concentrations of students from low - income families . title i - a has also become a vehicle to which a number of requirements affecting broad aspects of public k - 12 education for all students have been attached as a condition for receiving title i - a grants . it is the largest program authorized under the esea , and is funded at $14.4 billion for fy2015 . under the state option , title i - a lea grants would be calculated by ed using the four formulas prescribed by current statute . however , once the grants were calculated , each state would have the option to reallocate the total amount of title i - a funds that were "earned" by the leas in the state using a new formula . states would be permitted to redistribute all of the title i - a funds received to leas based on each lea's share of enrolled eligible children . an eligible child would be defined as a child from a family with an income below 100% of the poverty level based on the most recent data available from the department of commerce . leas would , in turn , distribute the funds received to individual public schools in the lea based on each school's share of enrolled eligible children . thus , under the state option title i - a funding would follow a low - income child to any public school he or she attended . however , the state option's reliance on only a child poverty count to distribute grants to leas / schools eliminates a variety of factors used under current law to determine lea grants .