does this model work ? should more or less oversight or action occur , and at what level ? how can regional and watershed planning impact the overall effectiveness of the current environmental laws ? use of current resources : congress authorizes and appropriates billions of dollars for federal conservation efforts each year . demand for these resources continues to outpace supply . how are current federal resources for conservation being utilized ? how effective are they , and how can they be improved ? are federal leveraging programs — such as the regional conservation partnership program , which leverages federal funds with private funds — an effective way to extend the federal dollar ? agencies and stakeholders have suggested "targeting" limited resources to areas of greatest need . to what extent is targeting effective , and what barriers to targeting exist ? the source of the problem : the exact sources and causes of nutrient pollution can vary greatly by location . case study analysis and modeling can assist with identifying sources at the local level but provide little in the way of nationwide conclusions . what additional research or monitoring efforts are required to identify sources of nutrient pollution ? at what level should these efforts occur – – field level , state level , nationally ? effectiveness of the solution : conservation bmps are frequently held up as being the solution to agricultural nutrient pollution . what scientific evidence supports the use of these bmps ? can additional research and innovation provide other "tools" in the response "toolbox" ? value versus cost of conservation : agricultural producers seek to maximize profit , while simultaneously minimizing cost . does the value of conservation bmps outweigh the cost ? are savings and efficiencies ( if any ) adequately communicated to producers to increase adoption ? consequences of actions : nutrient pollution may or may not directly impact the polluters themselves . according to ers , the cost of removing nitrates from u.s. drinking water supplies is over $4.8 billion per year . the bulk of this cost is borne by large water utilities and then passed on to consumers . it is estimated that if the agricultural industry were required to pay based on its contribution to nitrate loading , agriculture's share would be about $1.7 billion per year . who should bear the cost of nutrient loading ? can education and outreach connect on - farm actions to potential off - farm results ? increased demand to feed a growing population is frequently cited as the reason for additional agricultural output . applying additional nutrients for increased yields and managing nutrients from animal production will likely continue if these demands are realized . this will only elevate the importance of managing these additional nutrients correctly or potentially repeating and exacerbating the environmental degradation that has occurred in the past . agriculture is one of a number of industries that produces , uses , or releases nutrients that may adversely affect the environment . the exact source of water impairments is frequently not identified until major ecological events prompt additional research . even then , the nature of how nutrients move through the environment can make their origin difficult to track .