appendix a . employer reporting and other requirements under section 6056 of the irc , a large employer must file a return with the irs reporting certain information about the health care coverage the employer offered to each full - time employee ( or alternatively , that the employer did not offer health care coverage to that employee ) . in addition , section 6051 ( a ) ( 14 ) of the irc requires that large employers must furnish a similar statement to each full - time employee by january 31 of the following calendar year . in summary , large employers must provide the following information to their full - time employees: the existence of an exchange , including services and contact information ; the employee's potential eligibility for premium credits and cost - sharing subsidies if the employer plan's share of covered health care expenses is less than 60% ; and the employee's potential loss of any employer contribution if the employee purchases a plan through an exchange . large employers must provide the following to the irs: a return including the name , address , and employer identification number ; a certification as to whether the employer offers its full - time employees ( and dependents ) the opportunity to enroll in minimum essential coverage under an eligible employer - sponsored plan ; the length of any waiting period ; months coverage was available ; monthly premiums for the lowest - cost option ; the employer plan's share of covered health care expenses ; the number of full - time employees ; the name , address , and tax identification number of each full - time employee ; and information about the plan for which the employer pays the largest portion of the costs ( and the amount for each enrollment category ) . in addition , the employer must also provide each full - time employee the following: a written statement showing contact information for the person required to make the above irs return and the specific information included in the w - 2 return for that individual . on november 2 , 2015 , p.l . 114-74 , the bipartisan budget act of 2015 , repealed the automatic enrollment requirement in section 18a of the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) . this provision had been added by section 1511 of the aca . the automatic enrollment provision would have required an employer ( covered under the flsa ) with more than 200 full - time employees to automatically enroll new full - time employees in one of the employer's health benefits plans and continue the enrollment of current employees . additionally , employers would have had to provide adequate notice and the opportunity for employees to opt out of any automatically enrolled coverage . appendix b . related legislative activity in the 114 th  congress in the 114 th congress , section 4007 of p.l .