each of these is briefly discussed below . every rule issued by a federal agency must be based upon a grant of authority given to that agency by congress in statute , and it is congress's prerogative to ensure that agencies issue rules in a manner consistent with congressional intent . as such , congress can use its legislative power to oversee the issuance and implementation of rules , or even require that an agency repeal a rule . for example , congress can make a change to the underlying statute authorizing a rule or enact legislation that simply overrides the rule . such a change could remove or change the agency's authority to issue the rule , or it could prescribe more specifically in law what the rule should contain . the advantage of using the cra is that the procedures it provides for , particularly in the senate , can make it easier to pass a joint resolution of disapproval than to pass a regular bill . however , as discussed in detail below , members must submit and act on a cra resolution within a particular time period following issuance of a rule , whereas congress can use its general legislative power to act on a rule at any time . hearings are another method of conducting oversight of federal rules . congressional committees can hold oversight hearings at any time that focus on the development or implementation of a particular rule or set of rules that fall under their jurisdiction . oversight hearings can give members a chance to ask agency officials questions about rules and communicate their views to agency officials . a member of congress also can request a meeting with the rulemaking agency while a rule is under development to communicate his or her views to the agency . in addition , a member can request to meet with the office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) , the entity within omb that reviews most agency regulations prior to their publication . such meetings are sometimes referred to as "12866 meetings," a reference to executive order 12866 , which governs oira review of agency rulemaking . during the review process , oira can play a significant role in the content of a proposed or final rule . therefore , members may want to make their views known to oira while the rule is under review . finally , congress has frequently used appropriations legislation to restrict an agency's use of funds to promulgate or implement particular regulations . however , unlike cra joint resolutions of disapproval , provisions of this type do not nullify an existing regulation , nor do they remove the agency's underlying statutory authority to issue a regulation . therefore , any final rule that has taken effect will continue to be binding law — even if an appropriations restriction prohibits the agency from using funds to enforce the rule . in addition , restrictions on the use of funds in appropriations acts , unless otherwise specified , are binding only for the period of time covered by the measure ( i.e. , a fiscal year or a portion of a fiscal year ) .