attorneys office . no such language was included in p.l . 114-113 or the accompanying explanatory statement . with respect to prosecuting cybercrime , the u.s . $146 million for the bop to expand re - entry and recidivism - reducing programs , including programs to strengthen family bonds , expand vocational training and the employer bonding program , and hire more mental health staff . $2 million for the office of the pardon attorney ( opa ) to hire additional staff to help review applications for clemency received from certain low - level , nonviolent offenders seeking to have their sentences reduced under the administration's clemency initiative . also , the administration requested an additional $52 million ( for a total of $120 million ) for grants to state , local , and tribal governments under the second chance act . grants authorized under the act provide funding for employment assistance , substance abuse treatment , housing , family programming , mentoring , victims support , and other services that can help reduce recidivism . 114-113 and the accompanying explanatory statement were largely silent as to congress's actions regarding the administration's "smart on crime" proposals . congress provided $68 million for second chance act grants , the same as the fy2015 appropriation . the explanatory statement was silent as to whether any of the increased funding for the u.s . attorneys or the bop was for any of the administration's proposals . the explanatory statement notes that any plan to augment opa staffing through the transfer or temporary assignment of non - opa employees is subject to the reprogramming requirements set forth in section 505 of the cjs appropriations act ( division b of p.l . this condition would appear to reflect some policymakers' concern about and desire to provide oversight of the administration's clemency initiative . the attorney general is responsible for the review and adjudication of immigration cases in coordination with the department of homeland security's ( dhs's ) efforts . the executive office of immigration review ( eoir ) conducts immigration court proceedings , appellate reviews , and administrative hearings on behalf of doj . the eoir's mission is to "provide the timely and uniform interpretation and application of immigration law , ensuring due process and fair treatment for all parties involved. if congress should decide to eliminate the cap and allow all collected funds to be distributed in a given fiscal year , it could possibly have significant consequences for the doj budget . as mentioned , the capped amount and remaining balance in the cvf are considered part of the doj budget total . these amounts impact the doj appropriation , are used to offset spending limits for doj programs , and are included in the overall budget score for doj . to keep pace with the unique challenges of this evolving threat , nsd will need to recruit , hire , and train additional cyber specialists. as such , for fy2016 the administration requested an expansion of $1.7 million and 12 positions over the existing $2.7 million and 19 positions . the explanatory statement accompanying p.l . 114-113 directs the nsd to "strengthen its support of the intelligence community in identifying and disrupting cyber threats.