111-5 ) funding . the america competes reauthorization act of 2010 ( p.l . the white house office of management and budget ( omb ) has indicated that the president's senior advisors will recommend a veto if the president is presented with h.r . 2028 , as passed by the house . the "statement of administration policy" cites insufficient funding for arpa - e as one of several reasons behind the administration's opposition . as reported by the senate committee on appropriations , h.r . 2028 would provide $291 million to arpa - e in fy2016 . this amount is $11 million more than both the fy2015 enacted and house - passed levels , but $33 million less than the administration request . 114-54 accompanied h.r . 2028 when it was reported by the senate committee on appropriations . table 3 shows arpa - e authorizations of appropriations , budget requests , and appropriations since the agency was first authorized in 2008 . congress has funded arpa - e at approximately $280 million since fy2012 — with the exception of fy2013 , when the process commonly known as sequestration ( as well as enacted rescissions ) reduced the agency's funding level to about $250 million . arpa - e is a comparatively new addition to the federal research and development ( r&d ) portfolio . given the nature of r&d , which can take decades to produce widely recognized or transformative results , it may be many years before arpa - e's ultimate impact is fully understood . some early concerns about the agency focused on perceived differences between arpa - e and the darpa model . these include differences in the markets for defense and energy - related products . darpa , for example , has a built - in customer ( the u.s. military ) , which arpa - e does not have . further , some analysts have argued that industrial relationships and characteristics of the energy sector ( including powerful incumbent firms and the wide array of energy - dependent products ) have the potential to stop the dissemination of disruptive innovations . it is not clear whether these early concerns have become actual challenges for arpa - e , or whether arpa - e has been able to adjust and respond to its unique position . the annual arpa - e budget justification also contains a line item for program direction , which includes salaries and benefits , travel , support services , and related expenses . as passed by the house on may 1 , 2015 , the energy and water development and related agencies appropriations act , 2016 ( h.r . arpa - e's budget justifications are published on the agency's website at http: / / arpa - e.energy.gov / ? q=arpa - e - site - page / arpa - e - budget . patterned after the widely lauded defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) — which played a key role in the development of critical technologies such as satellite navigation and the internet — arpa - e was established by the america competes act ( p.l .