citizens. section 133 would have prohibited funding to approve , license , facilitate , authorize , or otherwise allow the use , purchase , trafficking , or import of property confiscated by the cuban government . in its statement of policy , the administration maintained that the provision "could severely chill authorized u.s. - cuba commerce designed to support the cuban people. section 134 would have prohibited funding to approve , license , facilitate , authorize , or otherwise allow any financial transaction with an entity owned or controlled , in whole or in part , by the cuban military or intelligence service or with any officer of the cuban military or intelligence service , or an immediate family member thereof , but the restrictions would not apply to financial transactions with respect to exports permitted under the trade sanctions reform and export enhancement act of 2000 . in its statement of policy , the administration maintained that the provision "is overly broad and , as written , could significantly undermine the ability for u.s. persons to engage in otherwise authorized business in order to more effectively support the cuban people. section 135 would have prohibited funds to be used to authorize a general license or approve a specific license under 31 c.f.r . 801 or 31 c.f.r.527 with respect to a mark , trade name , or commercial name that is the same as or substantially similar to a mark , trade name , or commercial name that was used in connection with a business or assets that were confiscated unless the original owner has expressly consented . the provision would have introduced a new sanction prohibiting the treasury department's office of foreign assets control from issuing a general or specific license to allow for the payment of trademark registration fees . an existing trademark sanction in the fy1999 omnibus appropriations measure ( ยง211 of division a , title ii , p.l . 105-277 ) prevents the united states from accepting payment for trademark registrations and renewals from cuban nationals that were used in connection with a business or assets in cuba that were confiscated , unless the original owner of the trademark has consented . u.s. officials maintain that sanction prohibits a general license for transactions or payments for such trademarks . in january 2016 , however , ofac issued a specific license for payments related to the renewal of the havana club trademark , and the uspto subsequently renewed the havana club trademark for the 2006-2016 period and then for 10 additional years until 2026 . before house floor consideration , the house rules committee approved a structured rule ( h.rept . 794 ) on june 21 , 2016 , for the consideration of h.r . 5485 that made in order two potential cuba amendments easing sanctions: a crawford amendment , listed as amendment 24 in h.rept . 114-639 , would have prohibited funds in the act from being used to implement , administer , or enforce a prohibition against private financing of u.s. agricultural sates to cuba . the amendment ultimately was not introduced . a sanford amendment , listed as amendment 47 in h.rept . 114-639 , would have prohibited funds in the act from being used to administer or enforce 31 c.f.r .