house committee staff has decreased . this may represent a shift from collective congressional activities typically carried out in committees ( including legislative , oversight , and investigative work ) to individualized activities typically carried out in members' personal offices ( including direct representational activities , constituent service and education , and political activity ) . chamber directories may reflect different organizational arrangements over time for some entities . this could lead to counting staff doing similar work in both years in different categories , or in different offices . the extent to which the criteria for inclusion in the directories for the house have changed over time cannot be fully determined . some editions of the house's directories do not always list staff in various entities the same way . this may raise questions regarding the reliability of telephone directory data as a means for identifying congressional staff levels within the house over time . some house staff may have more than one telephone number , or be listed in the directory under more than one entity . as a consequence , they might be counted more than once . this could lead to a more accurate count of staff in specific entities within the house , but multiple listings may also lead to an overcount of staff working in the chamber . a random sample of house member offices used to develop an estimate of member office staff working in washington , dc , and discussed in greater detail below , may or may not be representative of the entire population of house member offices . the extent to which the sample is representative of the population from which it is drawn will determine the accuracy of the estimated data for house member offices . while it is unlikely that a full count would yield significantly different results , it is a possibility . since 1977 , the number of staff working for the house has grown , though there has been a decrease in recent years . overall , there have been increases in the number of staff working in chamber leadership offices , and larger increases in the staffing of chamber officers and officials . staff have shifted from committee settings to leadership settings or the personal offices of members . some of these changes may be indicative of the growth of the house as an institution , or the value the chamber places on its various activities . one example that may be an indication of institutional development arguably is found in the growth of the number and percentage of staff working in leadership and officers and officials offices , even though that growth has slowed recently . a potential explanation for these changes may be found in what some might characterize as an ongoing professionalization and institutionalization of congressional management and administration . some note that as organizations such as governing institutions develop , they identify needs for expertise and develop specialized practices and processes . in congress , some of those areas of specialization arguably include supporting the legislative process through the drafting of measures , oversight and support of floor activities , and the management of legislation in a bicameral , partisan environment .