the report will be updated as needed . some health care - related statutes in current law include provisions that ( 1 ) are time limited and ( 2 ) will expire absent further congressional action . most expiring provisions provide temporary increases or decreases in funding or special protections that may result in greater funding . for example , one medicare provision provided increased payments for certain medicare mental health services provided during a certain time period ; when the provision was not extended , the bonus payments ended . examples of funding protections include those medicare funding provisions that establish a floor ( eg , for a geographic adjustment index under the physician fee schedule ) or a "hold harmless. generally , the list covers provisions that have or will expire before the end of the first session of the 114 th congress ( i.e. , by december 31 , 2015 ) . while medicare payments are reviewed for modification and updates each year , not every provision that changes medicare payments is considered an expiring provision . services for which payments are automatically updated each year are not considered expiring provisions and are not included in this report . for example , the physician fee schedule update is not considered an expiring provision because the statute prescribes the update process ( the sustainable growth rate , or sgr , system ) that applies each year , even though congress has regularly chosen to supersede those updates in almost all recent years . similarly , a recent change in medicare payment policy included in the aca requires the payment updates for many medicare entities be adjusted by a productivity adjustment ( similar to the payment adjustment for physicians ) . in general , the aca provisions specify that the adjustment may result in a negative payment update allowing the payment rate for a year to be less than the rate for the preceding year . just as the medicare physician payment update is not considered an expiring provision , negative payment updates resulting from the productivity adjustment would not be considered expiring provisions because the updates are not time limited and do not expire absent congressional action , though , as with physician payments , congress may choose to modify those updates . this report includes only those health care - related expiring provisions for which congressional action would be needed to extend the application of a provision once the expiration date is reached . demonstration projects and pilot programs are not included . provisions that expired or were repealed in 2013 are collected in the last section of the report . the expiring provisions are summarized below , organized by ssa or phsa title and section , as appropriate . the last part of the report includes provisions with expiration dates in 2013 that were not extended in any subsequent legislation . because these programs and provisions are diverse , the provisions identified herein are not perfectly consistent , including with regard to the style of citations . the legislative actions that created , modified , or extended the expiring provisions covered in this report are the following .