, officers that did not wear bwcs ) . the use of random assignment helps increase the internal validity of the results ( i.e. congress may grapple with these and other questions when attempting to alter states' criminal justice systems to promote increased police accountability . community policing is viewed as one potential avenue to repairing relationships between law enforcement agencies and the communities they serve . congress has already established a grant program to promote community policing: the community oriented policing services ( cops ) program . under the cops program , congress can appropriate funding for grants to state , local , and tribal law enforcement agencies to "hire and train new , additional career law enforcement officers for deployment in community - oriented policing. one issue with using the cops program to promote community policing is that there is no single definition of co mmunity policing and the authorizing legislation for the cops program does not contain a definition of community policing . two scholars , in their review of trends in policing , note that community policing is "a catchphrase that has been used to describe a potpourri of different strategies" and that "one complication in determining the extent to which [community policing] has transformed policing is determining exactly what it is. the cops office states that community policing is a "philosophy that promotes organizational strategies that support the systematic use of partnerships and problem - solving techniques to proactively address the immediate conditions that give rise to public safety issues such as crime , social disorder , and fear of crime. however , some critics argue that if community policing is only a philosophy , it is nothing more than an "empty shell. all of this is to say that if policymakers want to promote community policing , it is not clear exactly what that entails , and before providing grants to law enforcement agencies to promote community policing , policymakers may want to decide what they want community policing to be . there may be some questions about whether cops grants convince law enforcement agencies to move toward community policing . during the mid - to late 1990s , the cops office awarded billions of dollars in grants for law enforcement agencies to hire officers to engage in community policing . however , over this same period of time there was continued growth in use of special weapons and tactics ( swat ) teams by law enforcement agencies nationwide . research on swat teams indicates that many law enforcement agencies believe they play an important role in community policing strategies . in addition , scholars argue that "community policing" is just a way for law enforcement agencies to present their old ways in a new package . two scholars note , "[law enforcement agencies] are managing to reconstitute their image away from the citizen - controller paradigm based in the autonomous legal order and towards a more comforting normal rockwell image―police as kind , community care - takers. they contend that community policing is more about police transforming their image rather than the substance of their work .