appendix b . - ( i ) in general. - in carrying out this section , the secretary of homeland security shall consult with the secretary of the interior , the secretary of agriculture , states , local governments , indian tribes , and property owners in the united states to minimize the impact on the environment , culture , commerce , and quality of life for the communities and residents located near the sites at which such fencing is to be constructed . ( c ) consultation. - nothing in this subparagraph may be construed to - ( i ) create or negate any right of action for a state , local government , or other person or entity affected by this subsection ; or ( ii ) affect the eminent domain laws of the united states or of any state . ( d ) limitation on requirements. the order does not identify the contemplated mileage of the wall to be constructed . the primary statute authorizing dhs to deploy barriers along the international borders is section 102 of the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 ( iirira ) . congress made significant amendments to iirira section 102 through three enactments — the real id act of 2005 , the secure fence act of 2006 , and the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 . these amendments established a mandate upon dhs to construct hundreds of miles of new fencing along the u.s. - mexico border , and also provided the secretary of homeland security with broad authority to waive "all legal requirements" that may impede construction of barriers and roads under iirira section 102 . these statutory modifications , along with increased funding for border projects , resulted in the deployment of several hundred miles of fencing and other barriers along the southwest land border between 2005 and 2011 . a portion of this infrastructure is fencing that is primarily intended to prevent illegal border crossings by foot ( referred to by dhs as "pedestrian fencing" ) . other types of barriers have been installed to impede vehicles from smuggling persons or contraband into the united states ( referred to by dhs as "vehicle fencing" ) , but do not stop crossings by persons traveling on foot . in some instances , an additional layer of fencing ( secondary fencing ) may also be installed behind primary pedestrian fencing to further impede illegal crossings . the efficacy of deploying additional fencing along the border has been the subject of debate among many policymakers , particularly regarding the cost , environmental impact , and effectiveness of border fencing in comparison to alternative means of deterring illegal crossings . largely on account of changes in dhs's border enforcement strategy and prioritization of resources during the obama administration , the construction of additional fencing along the land border with mexico has largely halted . in october 2014 , dhs indicated that it had constructed a total of 352.7 miles of pedestrian fence ( in addition 36.3 miles of secondary fencing ) , and 299 miles of vehicle fencing along the southwest border .