this report is divided into several sections . the opening section provides an explanation of the scope of the l - hhs - ed bill ( and hence , the scope of this report ) , as well as an introduction to important terminology and concepts that carry throughout the report . next is a series of sections describing major congressional actions on fy2015 appropriations and ( for context ) a review of the conclusion of the fy2014 appropriations process . the following section provides a high - level summary and analysis of proposed and enacted mandatory and discretionary appropriations for fy2015 , compared to comparable fy2014 funding levels . the body of the report concludes with overview sections for each of the major components of the bill: the department of labor , the department of health and human services , the department of education , and related agencies . these sections provide selected highlights of the fy2015 omnibus , compared to proposed appropriations in the senate subcommittee - approved stand - alone fy2015 l - hhs - ed bill , the fy2015 president's request , and comparable fy2014 levels . finally , an appendix provides a summary of budget enforcement activities for fy2015 . this includes information on the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l . the appropriations committee subsequently divides this allocation among its 12 subcommittees . these subcommittee - level spending limits are referred to as 302 ( b ) suballocations . the 302 ( b ) suballocations restrict the amount of budget authority available to each subcommittee for the agencies , projects , and activities under its jurisdiction , effectively acting as a cap on each of the 12 regular appropriations bills . enforcement of the 302 ( a ) allocation and 302 ( b ) suballocations occurs through points of order . congress did not adopt a budget resolution for fy2015 . although the house agreed to a budget resolution ( h.con.res . 96 ) on april 10 , 2014 , this measure was not taken up in the senate , nor did the senate consider a separate budget resolution for fy2015 . instead , both the house and the senate used an alternative mechanism for fy2015 procedural budget enforcement that was enacted as part of the bba . it allowed the chairs of the house and senate budget committees to submit statements for publication in the congressional record that included fy2015 spending levels ( i.e. , 302 ( a ) allocations ) for the house and the senate appropriations committees , provided these levels were "consistent with the discretionary spending limits" set forth in the bba . the house statement was filed in the congressional record on april 29 ; the senate statement was filed on may 5 . once filed , these levels became enforceable on the house and the senate floors . based on the budget enforcement provided via this alternative mechanism , the house and the senate appropriations committees each reported initial 302 ( b ) suballocations to their subcommittees prior to floor consideration of the fy2015 regular appropriations bills .