collectively , these are known as legal bars . legal bars to veterans' benefits will not apply if the va finds that the former servicemember was insane at the time of the offense that led to the oth discharge . in addition , a former servicemember may qualify for veterans' benefits based on a prior period of other than dishonorable service . see the " exceptions to legal bars to va benefits " section below . if a claimant is not satisfied with the decision from the bva , the claimant has the option of appealing to the court of appeals for veterans claims ( cavc ) . the cavc is an article i court , established by congress , which has exclusive jurisdiction over appeals from the bva . therefore , the cavc is a separate entity from the va that reviews bva decisions . currently , up to nine judges may sit on the cavc and review appeals from the bva . the va's general counsel will defend the bva decision before the court . if the claimant is dissatisfied with the determination reached by the cavc , the claimant may appeal the decision to the court of appeals for the federal circuit ( federal circuit ) . the scope of review on veterans' appeals provided by the federal circuit is limited by statute . the federal circuit can set aside regulations that are arbitrary or capricious , unconstitutional , in excess of statutory jurisdiction , or procedurally deficient . generally , the federal circuit is not permitted to review any challenge to a factual determination , or a "challenge to a law or regulation as applied to the facts of a particular case. the federal circuit provides the last appeal of right for claimants appealing decisions made by the bva . finally , if the claimant is still not satisfied by the decision reached by the court of appeals for the federal circuit , the claimant may petition the supreme court for certiorari . once these three criteria are met a veteran may enroll in the va health care system . a veteran who does not receive an honorable or general discharge ( under honorable conditions ) from the military may still receive health care services from the vha . it should be noted that a veteran's character of discharge under oth conditions is not the same as dishonorable and does not deprive the veteran of all benefits . in making the determination , the va will generally review personnel files provided by the claimant's military branch , service treatment records , records of any court - martial proceedings ( if applicable ) , and statements , documents , or other information submitted by the claimant . the veterans health administration ( vha ) of the va operates the nation's largest integrated direct health care delivery system . eligible veterans receive health care and counseling services through 150 va medical centers ( hospitals ) , 830 community - based outpatient clinics ( cbocs ) , 136 community - living centers , and 300 vet centers . generally , veterans are required to be enrolled in the va health care system to obtain health care services .