jobs ! reg . act of 2015 ( representative frederica wilson ) . representative james renacci sponsored h.r . 2509 , the flexibility to promote reemployment act . the bill would have made a number of changes to the state uc demonstration projects created by the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l . the bill would have extended the time period that the ( now - expired ) state demonstration projects could be approved by dol through december 31 , 2019 ( p.l . 112-96 authorized these demonstration projects through december 31 , 2015 ) , as well as expanded the existing authority for state uc demonstration projects by authorizing 10 states per year to conduct approved demonstration projects ( the original , expired authority was only for 10 states total ) . 2509 also would have revised state uc demonstration project requirements , including removing a requirement that any direct disbursements paid to employers for hiring uc claimants not exceed an individual's uc weekly benefit amount and requiring that dol approve state applications for uc demonstration projects based on the order of receipt . additionally , the bill would have transferred the responsibility for the state uc demonstration project impact evaluation from the states , as under the now - expired demonstration authority , to dol and would have required a specific procedure for termination of the state uc demonstration project by dol . 2721 , the pathways out of poverty act of 2015 , and h.r . 3555 , the jobs ! jobs ! jobs ! act of 2015 , among many provisions , would have allowed states to ( 1 ) establish a bridge to work program to provide euc08 claimants with short - term work experience placements with eligible employers ; ( 2 ) provide a wage insurance program to pay , for up to two years , an euc08 claimant who obtains reemployment up to 50% of the difference between the wages received at the time of work separation and the wages received for reemployment ; and ( 3 ) provide a program of enhanced reemployment services to euc08 claimants , including unemployed individuals who have exhausted their euc08 rights . representative rodney davis sponsored h.r . 2219 , the opportunity knocks act . the bill would have required that states allow uc beneficiaries to participate in a workforce investment act ( wia ) authorized job training program and remain eligible for benefits . if the uc beneficiary has been profiled to exhaust regular benefits , the individual would have been allowed to enroll in any coursework necessary to attain a recognized postsecondary credential . representative tony cárdenas sponsored h.r . 2755 , the american worker mobility act of 2015 . the proposal would have authorized the u.s. department of labor to grant a relocation subsidy of up to $10,000 to long - term unemployed workers . 2721 , the pathways out of poverty act of 2015 , and h.r . 3555 , the jobs ! jobs ! jobs ! act of 2015 , would have provided temporary 100% federal financing for up to three years and six months after enactment for short - time compensation ( stc ) benefits in states with existing stc programs .