22 and s. 1140 and in the house on h.r . 1732 suggests that , even with the final rule on hold nationwide for now and judicial proceedings that could continue for quite some time , there is continuing interest in congress to change the agencies' course of action . with a change in administration in january 2017 , the 115 th congress and the new administration seem likely to revisit the "waters of the united states" issue and controversies . the new administration's legislative priorities , as well as plans for addressing the ongoing litigation of the 2015 rule or for initiating a new cwa jurisdiction rule are unclear for now . for congress , although a resolution of disapproval under the cra is no longer an available option to halt the rule , congress could pursue the other legislative options to halt or redirect the rule discussed here . waters need not be truly navigable to be subject to cwa jurisdiction . the act's single definition of "navigable waters" applies to the entire law , including the federal prohibition on pollutant discharges except in compliance with the act ( §301 ) , permit requirements ( §§402 and 404 ) , water quality standards and measures to attain them ( §303 ) , oil spill liability and oil spill prevention and control measures ( §311 ) , and enforcement ( §309 ) . the cwa gave the agencies the authority to define the term "waters of the united states" more fully in regulations , which epa and the corps have done several times , most recently in 1986 . while epa is primarily responsible for implementing the cwa , epa and the corps share implementation of the dredge and fill permitting program in section 404 . the courts , including the supreme court , generally upheld the agencies' implementation until supreme court rulings in 2001 and 2006 ( solid waste agency of northern cook county v. u.s. army corps of engineers , ( swancc ) 531 u.s. 159 ( 2001 ) ; and rapanos v. united states , 547 u.s. 716 ( 2006 ) , respectively ) . those rulings interpreted the regulatory scope of the cwa more narrowly than the agencies and lower courts were then doing , and created uncertainty about the appropriate scope of waters protected under the cwa . in 2003 and 2008 , the agencies issued guidance intended to lessen confusion over the court's rulings . the non - binding guidance sought to identify , in light of those rulings , categories of waters that remain jurisdictional , categories not jurisdictional , and categories that require a case - specific analysis to determine if cwa jurisdiction applies . the obama administration proposed revised guidance in 2011 ; it was not finalized , but it was the substantive basis for the 2014 proposed rule . in proposing to amend the regulatory definition of "waters of the united states" rather than issue another guidance document , epa and the corps were not only acting to reduce the confusion created by swancc and rapanos . they also appeared to be picking up on the suggestion of several of the justices in rapanos that an amended rule would be helpful .