these methodologies are discussed below . table 1 lists the state - specific , mass - based targets ( 2030 ) that epa prepared using both approaches and compares these targets to each state's 2012 co 2 emission baseline . in addition , table 1 provides the 2012 emission rate baseline , 2030 emission rate target , and the emission rate percentage reduction required between 2012 and 2030 . as with the emission rate reduction requirements , the mass - based reduction targets ( calculated by epa ) vary by state . this section discusses some observations about the targets , how they compare with one another , and how they compare to emission rate targets . for the vast majority of states , the percentage reductions ( between the 2012 baseline and 2030 targets ) required by the emission rates match those required by the mass - based targets epa created using approach 1 ( existing sources ) . the reason for the percentage differences in these states relates to epa's treatment of ngcc units that are under construction . these nine states are the only ones with ngcc units under construction . in epa's mass - based conversion methodology , the agency includes under - construction ngcc units in the 2012 fossil fuel - fired generation baseline . however , in the emission rate methodology the generation from these units is not included in the 2012 baseline . thus , the baselines for these nine states are effectively higher using the mass - based methodology , and a relatively higher baseline yields a smaller reduction requirement . two other states — washington and idaho — also have lower percentage reduction requirements under the mass - based methodology . their reduction percentages are highlighted in green in table 1 . these differences are the result of an adjustment epa made to the states' "adjusted affected fossil fuel generation. as discussed above ( step 2 in the mass - based methodology for existing sources ) , epa calculates a state's "adjusted affected fossil fuel generation" by subtracting incremental renewable energy and energy efficiency values from a state's 2012 fossil fuel generation baseline . if epa were to strictly apply this step for these states , the resulting values would be negative , an impossible outcome . if a negative value were allowed ( "on paper" ) for the purposes of the calculations , these states' percentage reductions would match their emission rate percentage reductions . epa adjusts the calculations in these states , by holding the "adjusted affected fossil fuel generation" at zero . four other states — iowa , maine , minnesota , and south dakota — have larger percentage reductions under the mass - based targets for the existing sources approach . the percentage reductions for these states are highlighted in orange in table 1 . the reason for these differences is due to the treatment of renewable energy ( re ) in epa's emission rate methodology , particularly its treatment in building block 3 . in building block 3 , epa applies an annual growth rate to each state's re generation in 2012 to estimate annual re generation for each state from 2017 through 2030 .