, baas ) . covered entities were not liable for , or required to actively monitor , their business associates . however , if a covered entity found out about a material breach or violation of the baa , it had to take reasonable steps to remedy the situation and , if unsuccessful , terminate the contract . hhs responded in the omnibus rule by removing the harm threshold and modifying the risk assessment portion of the breach notification rule to require the use of a more objective assessment . an impermissible use or disclosure of phi "is presumed to be a breach unless the covered entity or business associate ... demonstrates that there is a low probability that the [phi] has been compromised based on a risk assessment.... " the modified rule lists the factors that must be included in the risk assessment . now the default is notification , and the burden is on the covered entity or business associate to perform a risk assessment to determine whether there is a low probability that phi was compromised . if that determination is made ( and documented ) , then the covered entity or business associate need not provide notification . the secretary is required annually to submit a report to congress on the number and nature of the breaches reported to ocr , and the actions taken in response to such breaches . to date , the secretary has submitted two reports , each analyzing two years of information . the first report covers 2009-2010 , and the second one covers 2011-2012 . cumulatively , through december 31 , 2012 , ocr received 710 reports of major breaches affecting a total of approximately 22.5 million individuals . over the same period , ocr received 77,420 reports of breaches affecting fewer than 500 individuals . in all , these breaches affected approximately 400,000 individuals . thus , while the major breaches made up about 1% of breach reports , they accounted for more than 98% of all the individuals who were affected by a breach of their phi . of all the categories of causes of breaches , theft accounted for about half of all incidents . ocr identified the following lessons learned from the two breach reports: ensure that an organization's risk analysis and risk management plan is thorough and addresses all potential risks and vulnerabilities to ephi , regardless of location or media . that includes ephi on computer hard drives , usb drives , laptops , mobile phones , and other portable devices , as well as ephi transmitted across networks . ensure that security evaluations are conducted when there are operation changes ( eg , office moves ) and technical upgrades for hardware and software so that ephi remains secure . ensure that ephi stored on portable electronic devices is properly secured , including through encryption , with clear policies on the use and removal of such devices from a facility . implement clear policies and procedures for the proper disposal of phi in all forms . ensure physical safeguards are in place to limit access to facilities and workstations that maintain phi . ensure that employees are fully trained on the organization's privacy and security policies and procedures .