initiative . in fy2010 , usda provided $1 million in funding for the people's garden school pilot program . this pilot program was authorized by congress in the 2008 farm bill , which provided for grants to high - poverty schools to promote healthy food education and hands - on gardening in the school curriculum . the program is administered by fns . the fy2010 funding was awarded to washington state university , which is expected to serve an estimated 2,800 students attending 70 elementary schools in washington , new york , iowa , and arkansas . in fy2011 , usda provided approximately $725,000 in grants for its people's garden grant program , administered by nifa . the program is administered by fns . activities under this program were authorized in the national agricultural research , extension , and teaching policy act ( p.l . 95-113 ) to facilitate the initial investment needed to create produce , recreation , and / or wildlife gardens in urban and rural areas , and provide opportunities for science - based non - formal education . in 2011 , projects were funded in alaska , arizona , california , colorado , connecticut , hawaii , maryland , michigan , and ohio . reports from usda indicate other people's garden efforts and volunteerism within other usda agencies , including nrcs and fsa . for fy2015 , funding for "visitor center / people's garden" is reported at $0.9 million . matching funds are not required . a listing of previous awards is at usda's website . lfpp provides more than $13 million in annual mandatory funding plus authorized appropriations for marketing and promotional support specifically for local food businesses , including food hubs , delivery and aggregation businesses , and processing and storage facilities along the local food supply chain . two types of project applications are accepted under lfpp: planning grants and implementation grants . applicants can apply for either project but will receive only one type of grant per cycle . lfpp planning grants are used for the planning stages of establishing or expanding a local and regional food business enterprise . activities may include market research , feasibility studies , and business planning . the program provides assistance for producers in states traditionally underserved by federal crop insurance to mitigate financial risk through production or marketing diversification or resource conservation practices . ama provides mandatory funding through the ccc at $15 million annually from fy2008 to fy2014 , and the funding is allocated in statute as follows: nrcs ( 50% ) , rma ( 40% ) , and ams ( 10% ) . the nrcs portion provides financial and technical assistance to farmers to voluntarily address issues , such as water management , water quality , and erosion control , by incorporating conservation into their farming operations . the program provides technical and financial assistance of up to 75% of the cost of installing certain conservation practices . the rma portion provides assistance to farmers to mitigate financial risk through production or marketing diversification , including support for direct marketing and value - added processing , and the development of new risk management approaches .