the bills , however , were not enacted . the extent to which a federal employee can use some of these options is at the discretion of an agency . both congress and the executive branch have made efforts to offer a federally administered short - term disability insurance program to federal employees . in 2008 , opm submitted a proposal to congress to establish a short - term disability insurance program for federal employees to cover non - work related injuries or disabilities . according to opm , a primary purpose of the program was to ensure that there was "an opportunity for employees , particularly new employees , to obtain additional income protection for recovery from accidents or illnesses or for maternity purposes. opm further stated that the program would have been "especially beneficial to new employees who have not had sufficient time in service to accrue a bank of leave. under the proposal , a federal employee would have been able to enroll in a short - term disability plan through an approved insurance provider as part of his or her federal benefits package . enrollment in the program would have been voluntary , and federal employees would have been responsible for paying 100% of insurance premiums . subsequent legislation was introduced in the 112 th and 113 th congresses that proposed short - term disability insurance programs similar to the program proposed by opm . specifically , the programs would have offered federal employees up to 12 months of coverage for ( 1 ) a non - work related injury or disability ; ( 2 ) care for a family member , including the birth of a child ; or ( 3 ) activities related to becoming an adoptive or foster parent . past legislation has proposed expanding the type of leave available through leave donation programs . namely , the federal employees leave transfer act of 2011would have allowed a federal employee to donate his or her sick leave through the voluntary leave transfer or voluntary leave bank program for a peer experiencing a medical emergency . currently , federal law permits the donation of annual , but not sick , leave under these leave donation programs . table 1 describes specific medical situations that warrant the use of sick leave . federal employees must formally request and receive approval from their respective agencies in order to receive their sick leave entitlements . federal employees earn paid sick leave hours at varied accrual rates depending on their employment status ( table 2 ) . for example , a full - time federal employee accrues four hours of sick leave per bi - weekly pay period ( a total of 104 hours , or 13 days , per year ) . there is no limit on the amount of sick leave hours an employee can accumulate and carry over to a new leave year . in contrast , accumulation of annual leave is subject to statutory ceilings at the end of a leave year , at which point a "use or lose" policy is enforced . federal employees can receive service credit for unused sick leave at the time of retirement .