the programs are . this program used to fund infrastructure and operations at nuclear weapons complex sites . however , beginning in fy2016 , its main funding elements were material recycle and recovery , recapitalization of facilities , and construction of facilities . the latter included two controversial and expensive projects , the uranium processing facility ( upf ) at the y - 12 national security complex ( tn ) and the chemistry and metallurgy research replacement ( cmrr ) project , which deals with plutonium , at los alamos national laboratory ( nm ) . both have been significantly revised over the past several years due to cost growth and schedule slippage . the fy2016 budget structure transferred certain functions from rtbf to infrastructure and safety , described below . of the fy2015 appropriation , the amount comparable to fy2016 rtbf was $688.0 million ; the explanatory statement directed nnsa to provide "a ten - year strategic plan that would reduce the deferred maintenance backlog below fiscal year 2014 baseline levels and dispose of unneeded facilities. the fy2016 request was $1,054.5 million . the house appropriations committee recommended consolidating funding for rtbf , infrastructure and safety , and site stewardship into a new category , infrastructure and operations ( i&o ) , for which it recommended $2,228.2 million . its goal was to eliminate duplication . it "does not support changing the budget structure each year to conform to internal organizational changes. i&o , as recommended by the committee , included , among other things , operation of facilities , maintenance and repair of facilities , and recapitalization . 2028 , as passed by the house , provided the amount recommended by the house appropriations committee and did not amend the committee's recommendation on consolidation . the house appropriations committee expressed its concern about requests for construction funding . the committee is concerned that there is little accountability for advancing construction projects at the early design stages and that advance funds are being requested to initiate new construction without providing the cost and schedule projections for which the nnsa is accountable . without this information , the committee cannot determine whether the projects requested are affordable and are being managed appropriately so that it may approve new start authority . "the mission is to maintain , operate , and modernize" nnsa's infrastructure . it has five elements: operations of facilities , safety operations , maintenance , recapitalization , and line item construction . according to nnsa , "together these elements provide a comprehensive approach to arresting the declining state of nnsa infrastructure. the fy2016 request was $1,466.1 million ; the comparable fy2015-enacted funding was $1,386.7 million . while nnsa states that "construction investments will replace obsolete and unreliable facilities and infrastructure," nnsa requested the bulk of fy2016 construction funds , $660.2 million , under rtbf , compared with $42.9 million for i&s construction . the house appropriations committee recommended $660.1 million for the funds requested under rtbf construction . as noted in the previous paragraph , the committee recommended consolidating i&s into i&o . 2028 , as passed by the house , provided the amount recommended by the committee and did not amend the consolidation provision . the senate appropriations committee recommended the requested amount for i&s .