congress may address these issues through changes to sorna . the federal government plays a role in the management of sex offenders . in a law enforcement capacity , it enforces federal laws involving sexual abuse , online predatory offenses , or other related federal crimes . in addition , congress has enacted legislation that encourages the development of state sex offender registries , urges states to punish recalcitrant sex offenders , and induces state and local law enforcement to make certain information on sex offenders public , and has taken other steps involving the registration of sex offenders and notification of the community . federal legislation affecting sex offender policy has largely centered on sex offender registration and notification , and therefore they are the focus of this report . this report begins with a brief background on sex offender crime and policy in the united states , followed by a description of the role of the federal government in sex offender registration and notification . it concludes with a discussion of select issues on which congress may exercise additional oversight or address through legislation . "sex offender" is a general term used to describe an individual who has been convicted of a crime involving a sexual act . researchers have developed classifications of sex offenders based on offense patterns and types of victims and offenses ; these classifications include rapists , child abusers , internet offenders , and female sexual offenders , among others . in the united states , sex offender policy refers to how the government handles sex offenders both pre - and post - conviction ; however , it is how jurisdictions manage sex offenders post - conviction , in particular after they have served sentences for crimes committed , that is a primary focus of policymakers and the public . sex offenders are subject to a number of different management strategies including civil commitment , residence restrictions , registration and notification , and other policies aimed at preventing sexual offending . as mentioned , federal legislation on this issue has largely focused on sex offender registration and notification . while sex offense investigations and sex offender management are primarily state and local criminal justice issues , the federal government plays a significant role in sex offender registration and notification as well as other sex offender management issues not discussed in this report . aside from its role in processing federal and military sex offenders ( see " issues with registration of sex offenders in the military " ) , the federal government addresses sex offender registration and notification in multiple ways . the federal government ( 1 ) sets requirements and baseline standards for states for sex offender registration and notification , ( 2 ) provides assistance to states via grants and law enforcement support in tracking down noncompliant offenders , ( 3 ) maintains a public national website that provides information on registered sex offenders , ( 4 ) maintains a national sex offender registry for assisting law enforcement , and ( 5 ) receives and transmits information on the international travel of sex offenders . congress may decide to address a number of issues currently associated with sex offender registration and notification in the united states .