the energy sector ( i.e. , electricity , natural gas , and petroleum ) is one of 16 critical infrastructure sectors designated by the department of homeland security . incidents of reported cyber intrusions and attacks aimed at undermining the u.s. grid appear to be increasing . while parts of the electric power subsector have mandatory and enforceable cyber and physical security standards , some have argued that minimum , consensus - based standards are not enough to secure the system . nerc therefore proposes reliability standards for critical infrastructure protection ( cip ) which are updated considering the status of reliability and cybersecurity concerns for the grid . ferc views grid security as a high priority , and separately established the office of energy infrastructure security ( oeis ) to deal with cyber and physical security . oeis has a mission to provide expertise to the commission to "identify , communicate and seek comprehensive solutions to potential risks to ferc - jurisdictional facilities from cyberattacks and such physical threats as electromagnetic pulses. however , ferc still asserts that it does not have the authority to act quickly in the event of a major cyber event . cooperation between the federal government and the electric power sector now extends beyond mandatory and enforceable industry standards for the bulk electric system . however , such cooperation has not always been typical . congress enacted provisions in epact giving the federal energy regulatory commission responsibility for the reliability of the grid . epact specifically restricted ferc from exercising its reliability authority over distribution systems . even with the recent redefinition of the bes , there are many points to access the grid beyond those covered by cip standards from which a potential cyberattack could be launched . congress may want to consider whether further protection of the grid is necessary , especially along the seams between the newly revised bes and distribution systems beyond ferc's reliability authority . such actions may include standards ( voluntary or mandatory ) or defined best practices for facilities connecting to the grid at , for example , a specified voltage level below the bright - line threshold of 120 kv . congress may want to consider ways to help companies deal with the costs of critical infrastructure protection . a nonfederal entity , not including a state , local , or tribal government that shares cyber threat indicators or defensive measures through the nccic , shall be deemed to have voluntarily shared such information . all bes designated facilities ( whether these are low , medium or high risk ) under cip version 5 will be covered by some level of the new requirements . since the regulatory jurisdictions and financial structures of companies in the electric power industry can differ considerably , congress may want to look at ways to lessen possible financial strains on electric utility systems with legitimate cost - compliance burden concerns .