3964 in the 113 th congress . the fy2014 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l . these projects have largely been constructed by the corps and reclamation . 113-86 ) and drought - related provisions of the 2014 farm bill , the 113 th congress enacted legislation ( p.l . 113-121 ) that authorized the corps to assess its reservoir operations during drought and expanded epa loan and loan guarantee opportunities and eligibility for water supply systems , as discussed in crs report r43298 , water resources reform and development act of 2014: comparison of select provisions . multiple bills in the 113 th congress addressed drought operations of reclamation facilities ( eg , h.r . others addressed water efficiency , conservation , and alternative supplies ( eg , h.r . 5363 , s. 2771 ) ; several would have facilitated federal or nonfederal water storage projects ( eg , h.r . additionally , some bills ( eg , s. 2016 ) proposed changes to the stafford act , an emergency assistance act . the majority of these bills consisted of authorizations , with many provisions' implementation contingent upon appropriations ; a few bills proposed appropriations to address the western u.s. drought ( eg , h.r . because of ongoing drought conditions in much of the west , congress might again address drought planning and preparedness through oversight hearings and / or specific legislation . these issues often arise at the regional level but have a federal connection . for example , congress may be faced with responding to various water - related crises , such as extreme drought or flooding issues ( eg , california drought in 2014 and coastal flooding issues associated with hurricane sandy or other storms ) . for example , hurricane sandy flooding in 2012 and midwest floods in 2011 tested the nation's emergency response system and resulted in billions of dollars in damages . although the corps is the principal flood - fighting agency , other agencies also play a role in flood response and mitigation , such as fema's disaster assistance , flood insurance , and pre - disaster mitigation programs . additionally , responsibilities for flood damage reduction are spread among federal , state , local , and tribal governments . more broadly , congress may be faced with addressing navigation challenges due to drought - induced low river flows or floods and water supply needs of farm and urban communities while also protecting threatened and endangered species . the 113 th congress was engaged in some aspects of flood policy: policies affecting fema's national flood insurance program , flood damage reduction program and project authorizations in wrrda 2014 , and oversight recovery for areas recently affected by floods . given the magnitude of the nation's flood risk ( eg , over $10.6 trillion in insured properties in coastal counties on the east coast and along the gulf of mexico ) and how the nation's flood risk is increasing , the 114 th congress may consider additional ways to reduce flood risk , such as by improving infrastructure and protecting natural flood mitigation , removing disincentives to improved floodplain management , or promoting more pre - disaster recovery plans for highly vulnerable areas .