appendix a . requested and enacted discretionary appropriations for nist accounts appendix b . requested and enacted appropriations for selected nist program . these issues are discussed in more detail below . in the early 2000s , many industry , academia , and policy leaders expressed growing concern that federal investments in physical sciences and engineering research were not growing fast enough to keep the united states on the leading edge of technological innovation and commercial competitiveness . these programs are discussed in the next section . unlike most federal laboratories , nist has a mission specified by statute ( 15 u.s.c . 271-282a ) , has a separate authorization and appropriation , and is headed by a senate - confirmed presidential appointee ( the under secretary of commerce for technology and standards ) . nist was originally created by the nbs organic act of 1901 ( p.l . 56-177 ) as the national bureau of standards ( nbs ) , at a time when the first centralized industrial labs were being established . under the act , nbs was charged with working on "the solution of problems which arise in connection with standards" and to engage in the "determination of physical constants and the properties of materials , when such data are of great importance to scientific or manufacturing interests and are not to be obtained of sufficient accuracy elsewhere. these objectives remain central to nist's laboratory work today . when nbs was renamed nist under the provisions of the omnibus trade and competitiveness act of 1988 , the laboratory was given additional missions and supporting programs . two of the new programs — the advanced technology program and the manufacturing extension partnership program — were intended to improve u.s. innovation and industrial competitiveness . these programs generated criticism from some policymakers and analysts who objected to them on a variety of grounds , including whether such activities are appropriate for the federal government to undertake ; whether they might result in suboptimal choices of technologies , choices better left to market forces ; whether certain technologies , companies , or industries might be chosen for support based on criteria other than technical or business merit ; and whether tax dollars should be awarded to already - profitable firms . in contrast , nist's historical mission of conducting laboratory research in support of standards and metrics continued to enjoy broad support and faced little controversy . evidence of this support can be seen in the selection of the strs account — through which nist laboratory work is funded — as one of the targeted accounts in the doubling efforts of former presidents george w. bush and barack obama and successive congresses . however , even with broad support and the absence of controversy , funding for the nist strs account did not grow at the pace its advocates supported in presidential budget requests and successive authorizations of appropriations due to tight overall fiscal constraints on the federal budget . from fy2006 , the base year for the doubling effort , through fy2016 , funding for the nist strs and construction accounts grew by 42.3% in nominal terms , a compound annual growth rate of 3.6% , a rate that would result in doubling in about 20 years .