these bills were not adopted . for more on u.s. agricultural trade with cuba and legislative initiatives aimed at expanding that trade , see crs report r44119 , u.s . agricultural trade with cuba: current limitations and future prospects . for information on u.s. policy toward cuba , see crs report r43926 , cuba: issues and actions in the 114th congress . geographical indications ( gis ) are geographical names that act to protect the quality and reputation of a distinctive product originating in a certain region . the term is most often applied to wines , spirits , and agricultural products . some food producers benefit from the use of gis by giving certain foods recognition for their distinctiveness , differentiating them from other foods in the marketplace . in this manner , gis can be commercially valuable . gis may also be eligible for relief from acts of infringement or unfair competition . finally , brazil's successful challenge of certain aspects of the u.s. cotton program under the rules of the wto's dispute settlement process could serve as a role model for future domestic support - related trade disputes against u.s. farm programs . for more details , see crs report r43336 , the wto brazil - u.s. cotton case . status: the inability of the wto to move forward with the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations suggests that the wto may not rapidly achieve the global trade goals of its members . as a result , the wto's dispute settlement mechanism — which remains a primary forum for allowing members to resolve trade grievances — could likely serve as the primary mechanism for effecting future change in domestic support policies . however , there are reasons why challenges may rarely be filed — disputes are economically and diplomatically costly , and a lost challenge can help to legitimize the disputed program . the use of gis may also protect consumers from deceptive or misleading labels . examples of gis include parmesan cheese and parma ham from the parma region of italy , tuscan olive oil , roquefort cheese , champagne from the region of the same name in france , irish whiskey , darjeeling tea , ceylon tea , florida oranges , idaho potatoes , vidalia onions , washington state apples , and napa valley wines . gis — along with other types of intellectual property such as patents , copyrights , trademarks , and trade secrets — are an example of intellectual property rights ( ipr ) . the use of gis has become a contentious international trade issue , particularly for u.s. wine , cheese , and sausage makers . in general , some consider gis to be protected intellectual property , while others consider them to be generic or semi - generic terms . for example , in the united states , "feta" is considered the generic name for a type of cheese ; however , it is protected as a gi in europe . as such , feta cheese produced in the united states may not be exported for sale in the eu , since only feta produced in countries or regions currently holding gi registrations may be sold commercially . gis are included among other ipr issues in the current u.s. trade agenda .