, an outlay ) . these loan rates are national averages . actual loan rates are adjusted by region to reflect marketing cost differentials . the minimum market price that a processor wants to receive in order to remove the incentive to forfeit sugar and instead repay a price support loan , though , is higher than the loan rate . this "effective support level," also called the loan forfeiture level , represents all of the costs that processors need to offset to make it economically viable to repay the loan . these costs equal the loan rate , plus interest accrued over the nine - month term of the loan , plus certain marketing costs . the effective support level for 2015-crop ( fy2016 ) of raw cane sugar is 20.87¢ / lb ; for refined beet sugar , it ranges from 24.4¢ to 26.04¢ / lb , depending on the region . if market prices are below these loan forfeiture levels when a price support loan usually comes due ( i.e. , july to september ) , and a processor hands over sugar earlier pledged to obtain this loan rather than repaying it , usda records a budgetary expense ( i.e. if this occurs , usda gains title to the sugar and is responsible for disposing of this asset . two suspension agreements the doc signed in december 2014 — one with the government of mexico and another with mexican sugar producers and exporters — have substantially modified the terms for importing sugar from mexico and may have the practical effect of raising the effective support level . for one , mexican sugar is an important source of the u.s. sugar supply , with imports of mexican sugar averaging 15% of the sum of u.s. production plus imports during the three marketing years prior to the onset of the suspension agreements from 2011 / 2012 to 2013 / 2014 . imports of sugar from mexico in 2014 / 2015 , the year the suspension agreements took effect , represented 11% of the total of u.s. production plus imports . the agreements ( see "suspension agreements recast sugar trade with mexico" below ) establish minimum prices for mexican sugar imports that are at , or above , effective u.s. support levels . these minimum prices are calculated at mexican plants , so transportation costs to the u.s. processor or end user would add several cents per pound to the delivered cost of mexican sugar . as a result , prices of imported mexican sugar should track well above levels that would encourage u.s. loan forfeitures . market prices for raw cane sugar and refined beet sugar since the 2008 farm bill provisions took effect were higher than loan forfeiture levels until mid - year 2013 ( figure 3 and figure 4 , respectively ) . toward the end of fy2013 , market prices that were below these effective support levels prompted processors to forfeit , or hand over , to usda 381,875 tons of sugar ( 4.3% of fy2013 u.s. sugar output valued at almost $172 million ) .