in turn , pursuant to 6 u.s.c . section 143 , dhs , through i&a , is required to provide to state and localities "analysis and warnings related to threats to , and vulnerabilities of," "critical information systems," a term of art presumably controlled by the homeland security act's definition for the term "critical infrastructure": [s]ystems ... so vital to the united states that the incapacity or destruction of such systems ... would have a debilitating impact on security , national economic security , national public health or safety , or any combination of those matters . and the resulting effects of a cyberattack can have effects beyond a single company's bottom line . as "nations are becoming ever more dependent on information and information technology," the threat posed by any one cyberattack can have "devastating collateral and cascading effects across a wide range of physical , economic and social systems. with reports that foreign nations — such as russia , china , iran , and north korea – may be using cyberspace as a new front to wage war , fears abound that a cyberattack could be used to shut down the nation's electrical grid , hijack a commercial airliner , or even launch a nuclear weapon with a single keystroke . in short , the potential exists that the united states could suffer a "cyber pearl harbor," an attack that would "cause physical destruction and loss of life" and expose — in the words of one prominent cybersecurity expert – "vulnerabilities of staggering proportions. given the growing and potentially grave threat posed by cyberattacks , one of the stated priorities of the president and congressional leadership is to enact laws that ensure that both the public and private sector are prepared to meet the cyber - challenges of the future . while considerable debate exists with regard to the best strategies and methods for protecting america's various cyber - systems , one point of "general agreement" amongst cyber - analysts is the perceived need for enhanced and timely exchange of cyber - threat intelligence both within the private sector and between the private sector and the government . the argument for the real time sharing of cyber - intelligence — which could include the sharing of vulnerability data ( the vulnerabilities an intruder might exploit to gain access to a computer system ) , threat data ( the types of malware circulating the internet and the nature of the threats a given entity has faced ) , and countermeasure data ( the steps an entity has taken to prevent or mitigate the effects of a cyberattack ) — is grounded in the idea that effective cybersecurity depends upon robust knowledge about potential threats and wide dissemination of the best practices and strategies to combat such threats . despite widespread agreement about the need for enhanced cyber - information sharing , there is similar agreement among cyber - experts that current public and private sector information sharing efforts are simply inadequate . while there may be many reasons why entities may opt to not participate in a cyber - information sharing scheme , a primary rationale for such a decision concerns the potential liability that could result from sharing internal cyber - threat information with other private companies or the government .