or 97,000 lbs. , and increasing the length of double 28-foot trailers ( "pup" trailers ) pulled by a single truck to 33 feet each . large trucking firms generally support either weight or size increases ( depending on the type of freight they carry ) while smaller trucking firms ( with less financial means to reconfigure their equipment ) , railroads , and highway safety groups have generally opposed both changes . while the level of infrastructure spending is important , the way in which priorities are set is also important . one frequent claim is that freight projects do poorly in the public planning processes of state departments of transportation and metropolitan planning organizations , the government entities that are largely responsible for deciding which public projects get built , because the general public values improvements to passenger travel more highly than improvement of freight movements . planners in the public sector also can be uncomfortable advocating for projects with direct benefits to the private sector . additionally , as the national freight advisory committee claimed recently , freight projects may lose out "because their benefits spread nationally or regionally , beyond the boundaries of the funding entity. addressing major freight bottlenecks with federal grants could be difficult politically because it would entail allocating large sums to relatively few , narrowly defined geographic areas . for example , according to the american trucking associations , just 5% of the u.s. road system carries 75% of the nation's truck traffic . moreover , about 85% of the volume of containerized imports and exports is handled by 10 ports . in some cases , local planners may not fully appreciate that the competitiveness of local producers or manufacturers is most negatively affected by an infrastructure constraint outside their jurisdiction . a competitive discretionary program theoretically could fund the most valuable projects . one model of such a program is the federal new starts program , which funds public transportation construction projects through a competitive process intended to direct significant funding to the best projects . however , this is done at considerable time and cost in developing and evaluating projects . another discretionary program , the tiger program , evaluates and funds projects much more quickly , but it has been criticized for accepting applications after the deadline , advancing low - scoring projects , and changing the evaluation of lower rated projects to "highly recommended" after they were chosen for funding . a 2014 gao study noted that "an absence of documentation of such decisions can give rise to challenges to the integrity of the evaluation process and the rationale for the decisions made. an alternative way of setting priorities would be for congress to create a program that distributes funds for freight projects by formula . the formula could give weight to whichever factors congress considers most important . spending eligibilities could be written to narrowly circumscribe project selection by state departments of transportation and metropolitan planning organizations ( mpos ) . historically , however , funding formulas for federal surface transportation projects have distributed funding widely and allowed these funds to be used on a broad array of projects at the discretion of states and localities .