participation in fehb is voluntary . about 85% of federal employees participate , and about 90% of retirees participate . the statute governing fehb is in title 5 , chapter 89 of the united states code . it specifies that the federal government and the employee or retiree will share the cost of health insurance , with the federal government contributing 72% of the weighted average premium of all plans but no more than 75% of any given plan's premium , with the exception of employees of the usps , whose share of the premium is collectively bargained . the office of personnel management ( opm ) administers the program . ( for more detailed information on opm's role , see the appendix . ) opm has statutory authority to contract with health insurance carriers that offer insurance coverage for comprehensive medical services and to prescribe regulations to carry out that authority . for example , opm coordinates the administration of fehb with federal agencies , manages contingency reserve funds for the health plans , and applies sanctions to health care providers according to federal regulations . similar to most other federal agencies , the usps offers health care benefits to its employees , retirees , and their dependents through fehb . however , as an agency , the usps is governed by arrangements that are unique within the federal government in regard to its contributions to health care benefits . federal retirees and employees aged 65 or older have the option of enrolling in medicare in addition to continuing coverage in fehb . although most fehb enrollees continue their coverage into retirement , not all enrollees take up the medicare coverage available to them . several coverage options are available through the medicare program: the hospital insurance ( hi ) program in medicare part a , the supplementary medical insurance ( smi ) program in medicare part b , and prescription drug coverage in medicare part d . the aca passed in 2010 and included a number of provisions that established new requirements for all private health plans , including fehb health plans . for example , the new law allowed all adult children ( including those who are married ) to enroll in or remain on their parents' plan until the age of 26 . however , many aca provisions had no meaningful effect on fehb because many fehb plans already met the requirements established under the law , such as the provision that people with preexisting conditions cannot be denied health coverage . in some cases , how an aca provision could impact fehb is unknown . for example , it is unclear how many fehb health plans could be subject to the aca's excise tax on high - cost health plans , often referred to as the cadillac tax , which goes into effect in 2020 . in addition , the employer mandate could result in penalties to fehb , starting in 2015 , if any full - time federal worker obtains a subsidy for health insurance on the exchange .