as a result , there is significant variation across chip programs . since that time , other federal laws have provided additional funding and made significant changes to chip . most notably , the children's health insurance program reauthorization act of 2009 ( p.l . 111-3 ) increased appropriation levels for chip , changed the formula for distributing chip funding among states , and altered the eligibility and benefit requirements . the aca largely maintains the current chip structure through fy2019 and requires states to maintain their medicaid and chip child eligibility levels through fy2019 as a condition for receiving federal medicaid matching funds . the aca provided federal chip funding for fy2014 and fy2015 , then the medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 ( macra ; p.l . 114-10 ) extended federal chip funding for another two years ( i.e. the aca extended and expanded the moe provisions in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l . the aca moe provisions contain separate requirements for medicaid and chip and were designed to ensure that individuals eligible for these programs did not lose coverage between the date of enactment of the aca ( march 23 , 2010 ) and the implementation of the health insurance exchanges ( for adults ) and september 30 , 2019 ( for children ) . under the aca moe provisions , states are required to maintain their medicaid programs with the same eligibility standards , methodologies , and procedures in place on the date of enactment of the aca until january 1 , 2014 , for adults and through september 30 , 2019 , for children up to the age of 19 . the aca also requires states to maintain income eligibility levels for chip children through september 30 , 2019 , as a condition for receiving payments under medicaid . the penalty to states for not complying with either the medicaid or the chip moe requirements would be the loss of all federal medicaid matching funds . together , these moe requirements for medicaid and chip impact chip medicaid expansion programs and separate chip programs differently . fy2017 is the last year in which federal chip funding is provided in the chip statute . if no additional federal funding is provided for the program , once federal chip funding is exhausted , chip children in chip medicaid expansion programs would continue to receive coverage under medicaid through at least fy2019 , due to the aca moe requirement . however , when chip funding is exhausted , chip children in separate chip programs could obtain coverage through the exchanges or employer - sponsored insurance , but some of the children likely would become uninsured . according to a medicaid and chip payment and access commission estimate of what would happen if separate chip coverage ended in fy2018 ( which is when federal chip funding is expected to be exhausted under current law ) , 36% of the children with separate chip coverage would become uninsured . 111-148 , as amended ) child maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirement is in place through fy2019 .