by statute ( 12 u.s.c . ยง4806 ) , banks may appeal exam results to the agency ombudsman . the frequency of appeals might give some indication of bank displeasure with the examination process . the igs report that banks only formally appealed 22 occ exam results ( informally appealed 24 more ) , 23 fdic exams ( informally appealed 18 more ) , and 12 fed exams ( no informal appeal data ) out of the thousands of exams performed between 2007 and 2011 . however , banks might not appeal an exam result they thought was unfair if they thought their appeal had no chance of succeeding . as noted above , many disputes are resolved through the supervisory process , before an exam is completed . there is no official data on the regulatory burden associated with call reports . the independent community bankers of america ( icba ) , a trade association representing community banks , conducted a survey , however , which found that "[a]lmost three quarters of respondents stated that the number of hours required to complete the call report had increased over the last ten years . over one third of respondents indicated a significant increase in hours over this period . this report did not analyze whether the absolute burden is too great because that depends on policymakers' judgments about balancing financial stability , credit availability , consumer protection , and other objectives . an important distinction drawn by this report is between the concept of regulatory burden and the phrase unduly burdensome . whereas regulatory burden is about the costs associated with a regulation , unduly burdensome refers to the balance between the benefits and costs of a regulation . for example , some would consider a regulation to be unduly burdensome if costs are in excess of benefits or if the same benefits could be achieved at a lower cost . but the mere presence of regulatory burden does not mean that a regulation is unduly burdensome . overestimating regulatory burden can lead to policies that would repeal or change regulations that may have positive net benefits for consumers , banks , and the broader economy . underestimating regulatory burden , however , could result in further consolidation in the banking industry , the migration of activity outside the banking system to the shadow banking system , and reduced access and higher cost of credit for rural and underserved areas and small businesses that are customers of small banks . accurately assessing regulatory burden and determining whether the burden rises to the level of being unduly burdensome , therefore , is important for policymakers to make informed judgments . well over three quarters of respondents noted increased costs in call report preparation with almost one third noting that costs increased significantly. as noted above , regulators argue that the call reports are already tailored to reduce the burden on small banks . studies have attempted to estimate the regulatory burden of specific policies , but there is a dearth of empirical evidence on the overall regulatory burden posed by bank regulation .