the estimated effect of all proposed policies is combined . table a - 1 shows that if all of the proposals discussed in this report were enacted this year , hhs projects title iv - e foster care outlays would increase by $182 million in fy2016 and by differing amounts across each of the following nine years ( low of $77 million , high of $191 million ) . although these hhs projections are instructive , it is worth noting that estimates made by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) determine a proposal's "cost" for purposes of congressional scoring . as part of 2011 child welfare legislation ( p.l . 112-34 ) , congress required state child welfare agencies to adopt specific protocols for the use of psychotropic medications for children in foster care . to address continued concerns about the "over - prescription" of psychotropic medications for these children , as well as the lack of alternative psychosocial treatments ( eg , counseling ) , the administration seeks new funds ( and program authority ) under the title iv - e program for capacity and infrastructure building efforts led by state child welfare agencies . cbo is expected to provide its own projection of proposals included in the president's fy2016 budget in march 2015 . however , there is no estimated cost ( or savings ) for implementing the policy . at the same time , the administration seeks additional funding ( and authority ) under the medicaid program to make incentive payments to states that make measureable outcome improvements for children served by child welfare agencies . as noted , most children in foster care are eligible for medicaid — and an overriding purpose of this joint proposal is to increase communication and collaboration between state child welfare and state medicaid agencies to ensure timely assessments of mental health needs and ensure appropriate services . the administration proposes this increased flexibility only for those states that have taken the current law option to extend title iv - e assistance to youth up to 21 years of age ( as of february 2015 , 22 states , including the district of columbia , offer extended title iv - e assistance ) , or for any state that provides comparable extended title iv - e foster care assistance using state or other funding . this proposal would require a change to the authorizing legislation but would not require additional funding ( because the cfcip is a capped entitlement ) . table a - 1 shows the final or projected budget authority as well as the final or projected outlays under the title iv - e program by each of the program components that receive open - ended entitlement funding ( foster care , adoption assistance , and kinship guardianship assistance ) . roughly speaking , "outlays" represent the amount of dollars that leave the federal treasury during a fiscal year for purposes of a given program . by contrast , "budget authority" is the amount of funding congress permits an agency to use to enter into obligations with states or other entities under that program . budget authority that is granted by congress but not used does not result in an outlay from the federal treasury .