in tli , inc . in an amicus brief , the board's general counsel urged the board to abandon its current joint - employer standard , contending that "it undermines the fundamental policy of the act to encourage stable and meaningful collective bargaining. the general counsel declined to address the board's first question , but provided responses for the second and third questions . the general counsel encouraged the board to adopt a new standard that considers the totality of the circumstances , including how the alleged joint employers have structured their commercial relationship . the general counsel reasoned that this new standard would allow the board to find joint employer status where industrial realities make an entity essential for meaningful bargaining . for example , a company that receives workers from a "supplier" company and that has some control over the wages paid by the supplier company should be deemed a joint employer because meaningful bargaining over wages could not occur without its involvement . in this way , the standard proposed by the general counsel would recognize the potential to control terms and conditions of employment as sufficient to find joint employer status . whether the board will adopt a new joint employer standard is not clear . amicus briefs for browning - ferris industries of california were due by june 26 , 2014 . the parties to the case were required to file their briefs by july 10 , 2014 . the board has not indicated when a decision will be issued . at least 310 unfair labor practice charges involving mcdonald's usa and its franchisees have been filed with the board . while many of these cases have been closed , 107 cases have been found to have merit . regional directors in at least 17 of the board's regions have issued complaints against mcdonald's usa and its franchisees as joint employers . in a fact sheet devoted to the mcdonald's usa cases , the board maintains that "mcdonald's , usa , llc , through its franchise relationship and its use of tools , resources and technology , engages in sufficient control over its franchisees' operations , beyond protection of the brand , to make it a putative joint employer with its franchisees , sharing liability for violations of our act. in general , the complaints issued against mcdonald's usa and its franchisees appear to follow a similar pattern . the complaints identify the existence of a franchise agreement between mcdonald's usa and the franchisee , indicate that mcdonald's usa possessed and / or exercised control over the labor relations policies of the franchisee , and state that mcdonald's usa is a joint employer of the franchisee's employees . the complaints also describe the alleged misconduct that would constitute a violation of the nlra , if true , such as termination because of union activity , and threats of reprisal for engaging in union activity . in his amicus brief for browning - ferris industries of california , the general counsel argued that the current joint employer standard undermines meaningful collective bargaining when there is a franchise relationship: in these commercial arrangements , an employer inserts an intermediary between it and the workers and designates the intermediary as the workers' sole "employer.