as amended , s.j.res . 7 includes rules of construction stating that "nothing in this joint resolution may be construed to influence or disrupt any intelligence , counterintelligence or investigative activities relating to threats in or emanating from yemen conducted by , or in conjunction with , the united states government…" ( section 4 ) and that "nothing in this joint resolution may be construed as authorizing the use of military force" ( section 7 ) . some observers contend that aqap's power inside yemen has diminished considerably as a result of losses sustained from u.s. counterterrorism operations and of competing yemeni factions vying for supremacy . according to gregory d. johnsen , resident scholar at the arabia foundation , "aqap is weaker now than it has been at any point since it was formed in 2009. . in august 2018 , u.s. officials claimed that one of the most high - value targets in the aqap organization , bomb maker ibrahim al asiri , had been killed in a u.s. air strike last year . asiri was a saudi national who was believed to have created the explosive devices used in the 2009 christmas day attempted bombing of northwest airlines flight 253 , in a 2009 attack against former saudi arabian intelligence chief mohammed bin nayef , and in the october 2010 air cargo packages destined for jewish sites in chicago . in january 2019 , u.s. officials confirmed that jamal al - badawi , an al qaeda operative involved in the october 2000 bombing of the uss cole in aden , was killed in a precision strike in marib governorate on january 1 . al - badawi had been indicted by a federal grand jury in 2003 for the murder of u.s. nationals and u.s. military personnel . to date , two american soldiers have died in the ongoing u.s. counterterrorism campaign against aqap and other terrorists inside yemen . in january 2017 , ryan owens , a navy seal , died during a counterterrorism raid in which between 4 and 12 yemeni civilians also were killed , including several children , one of whom was a u.s. citizen . the raid was the trump administration's first acknowledged counterterror operation . in august 2017 , emil rivera - lopez , a member of the elite 160th special operation aviation regiment , died when his black hawk helicopter crashed off the coast of yemen during a training exercise . while the stockholm agreement has the potential to lead to a broader , nation - wide cease - fire , the longer it takes to implement , the greater risk of the agreement's collapse and the prospect for renewed conflict in hudaydah . the talks were the first formal negotiations since 2016 . after a week of negotiations , all sides agreed to the stockholm agreement , which consists of three components: a cease - fire around the port city of hudaydah , a prisoner swap , and a statement of understanding that all sides would form a committee to discuss the war - torn city taiz .