a question for congress is , should there be a landsat 9 ? jpss is currently scheduled to launch in 2017 . a potential problem is the possibility of a gap in coverage from the polar - orbiting weather satellite system . the current system of polar - orbiting weather satellites includes the suomi - npp satellite — now filling the operational gap until the jpss spacecraft is operational . the suomi - npp mission only life extends to 2016 ; there is a risk that its instruments will fail before jpss is launched , which will result in a gap in polar - orbiting weather satellite coverage . on february 11 , 2013 , nasa launched landsat 8 , a remote sensing satellite jointly operated by the u.s. geological survey and nasa . science and technology play an important role in national defense . the department of defense relies on a robust research and development effort to develop new military systems and improve existing systems . issues that may come before the 114 th congress regarding the department of defense's science and technology include budgetary concerns and the effectiveness of programs to transition s&t findings into fielded products . the science and technology related - energy issues that may come before the 114 th congress include the funding and role of the department of energy's office of science and the advanced research projects agency - energy , development of biofuels , reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel , and the development of biofuels and of ocean energy technology . science and technology play an increasingly large role in environmental issues . science - and technology - related environmental issues that may come before the 114 th congress include climate change science , carbon sequestration , and ocean acidification . the federal government spends billions of dollars supporting research and development to protect the homeland . some of the issues that the 114 th congress may consider include how the department of homeland security performs research and development and issues regarding its programs to detect smuggled nuclear material and biological terrorism . the rapid pace of advancements in information technology presents several issues for congressional policymakers , including those related to cybersecurity , potential changes to how the internet is governed , federal networking r&d , broadband access , and wireless services . this section focuses on policy issues relating to federal efforts supporting research and development in the physical and material sciences . some of the policy issues in this area that the 114 th congress may address include funding and oversight of the national science foundation and the multiagency initiative supporting the research and development in the emerging field of nanotechnology . issues relating to the department of energy office of science and arpa - e , both of which support science and technology in physical and material sciences , are discussed in the " energy " section of this report . congress has historically had a strong interest in space policy issues . federal policies affect scientific and technological advancement on several levels .