office of water . the office of water strategy is to "integrate climate change considerations and awareness into day - to - day management decisions for clean water and drinking water programs at national , regional , state , tribe , and local levels. in the water sector , many epa adaptation activities are compatible with , but may fall outside , the core statutory responsibilities . it may be difficult to discern the level of resources allocated to climate change adaptation activities separately from spending on core mission activities , or to determine whether focus on climate change may have an effect on implementation of core statutory missions . is the allocation of resources allotted to adaptation planning and initiatives in this or other programs adversely affecting congressionally required functions ? [author name scrubbed] , specialist in environmental and energy policy , [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] . [author name scrubbed] , specialist in environmental policy , [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] . the department of homeland security's ( dhs's ) federal emergency management agency ( fema ) has the primary mission to reduce the loss of life and property from all hazards , including man - made and natural disasters . fema accomplishes this mission by leading and supporting the nation in a risk - based , comprehensive emergency management system of preparedness , protection , response , recovery , and mitigation . through this mission , fema has a lead role in guiding nationwide adaptation to the impacts of climate change related to extreme weather events . scientific research organizations have highlighted the potential impact of climate change as it relates to the frequency , and potential severity , of extreme weather events . fema expects that climate change will adjust the likelihood and magnitude of certain extreme weather events , but not create novel threats . therefore , fema expects that the nation will experience more natural disasters of certain types — namely meteorological phenomena such as heavy precipitation events , flooding , heat waves , and droughts — that may also produce greater damages when they strike communities . when the prospective change in likelihood and severity of threats is accounted for , it may result in new risk for communities across the nation . not all changes to risks will have negative outcomes for the nation or individual communities . it is possible , for instance , that the likelihood of certain extreme weather events will decrease in a particular region with changing climate conditions such as a lower likelihood of drought in a region . changes to risk are also unlikely to be consistent across geographic regions of the nation . further , future risk to extreme weather events may be offset or exacerbated by other correlated or uncorrelated factors . for example , enhanced building design or other technological advancements may reduce physical vulnerability to a particular extreme weather event . as these types of natural disasters already threaten the nation , fema is primarily working to integrate climate change adaptation into existing programs and policies that mitigate these threats , as opposed to developing additional , climate change - specific programs / policies .