they meet all other factors of entitlement . ssa would recognize the couple as married because when the claim was filed , david and michael were domiciled in a state that recognizes same - sex marriage . generally , an applicant in a same - sex marriage is not eligible for spousal benefits if the number holder lives in a state that does not recognize same - sex marriage . for an applicant to receive benefits based on the work record of his spouse ( referred to as number holder ) , the applicant and the number holder must qualify as married under the social security act and state law . under ssa's current interpretation of the social security act's definition of family status found in section 216 ( h ) , the agency would not recognize the same - sex marriage because the state where the number holder is domiciled does not recognize same - sex marriage . generally , an applicant in a same - sex marriage is not eligible for survivors' benefits if the number holder has died in a state that does not recognize same - sex marriage . for an applicant to receive benefits based on the work record of his spouse ( referred to as number holder ) , the applicant and the number holder must qualify as married under the social security act and state law . under ssa's current interpretation of the social security act's definition of family status found in section 216 ( h ) , the agency would not recognize the same - sex marriage because the state where the number holder has died does not recognize same - sex marriage . the duration - of - marriage requirement for spousal benefits is one continuous year before the day on which the application is filed . for widow ( er ) 's benefits , the duration requirement is nine months immediately prior to the day in which the number holder died ( certain exceptions apply ) . ssa considers the date the couple was married in determining the duration of the marriage ; it does not rely on the date of the windsor decision . generally , biological or adoptive children of number holders are considered children for purposes of entitlement to child's benefits under the social security act . stepchildren are typically entitled to benefits on a number holder's record if their relationship to the number holder was created by the number holder's marriage to the child's biological or adoptive parent . stepchildren must also be dependent on the number holder and meet other eligibility requirements . for a stepchild to qualify for benefits on a number holder's record based on a same - sex marriage , the number holder's state of domicile must recognize the same - sex marriage or nonmarital legal relationship between the number holder and the child's biological or adoptive parent . however , due to variation in state laws , ssa may need to obtain a legal opinion on a case - by - case basis to process some child claims in which entitlement depends on a same - sex marriage .