two bills ( h.r . 609 and s. 287 ) introduced in the 114 th congress proposing the restructuring of federal oversight of food would impact the federal government's enforcement of various food safety issues . 609 / s. 287 , known as the safe food act of 2015 , would create a single agency that administers and enforces food safety laws and oversees the implementation of federal food safety inspections , labeling requirements , enforcement , and research efforts . under the proposed bills , related food safety agencies , currently within the jurisdiction of the department of agriculture , department of commerce , and the fda , would transfer certain responsibilities to this proposed agency . the bills would also grant the new food safety agency several enforcement authorities , including mandatory recall authority . the section then examines the legal standard for condemning seized goods . the section concludes by analyzing the due process issues related to seizure proceedings . the fda's office of criminal investigations conducts and coordinates criminal investigations and prosecutions against individuals and corporations for violations of the ffdca . potential defendants of a criminal prosecution are strictly liable for these violations . ignorance of the violation , a lack of intent to commit the violative act , or the absence of personal involvement are not defenses against ffdca violations under the strict liability standard . this section of the report highlights two aspects of the criminal investigation process of particular relevance to fda enforcement and food safety . the u.s. district court where the article is found has jurisdiction over the seizure proceeding . after a hearing on a seizure action , a district court may decree the "condemnation" of seized articles of food and order the destruction , sale , reconditioning , or export of such food . the ffdca prohibits multiple proceedings , including seizure actions , against an article of food based upon the same alleged misbranding , except when the fda has probable cause to believe that the misbranded article is dangerous to health , exhibits fraudulent labeling , or is materially misleading causing injury to the consumer or purchaser . section 304 does not prohibit multiple seizures of adulterated articles of food . this section of the report first describes the types of seizures conducted by the federal government and the condemnation proceedings the federal government must follow when conducting a seizure . the section first examines the ffdca's section 305 hearings , a prerequisite to any criminal proceeding . the section then analyzes the supreme court's park doctrine , which grants the government the ability to prosecute both corporations and corporate officials . the section concludes with a brief discussion on statutory penalties . food safety and oversight , including enforcement actions such as those described above , are of a continual interest to congress . the ffdca broadly defines interstate commerce as "commerce between any state or territory and any place outside thereof. goods destined for sale in a state other than the place from which they are shipped qualify as goods in "interstate commerce," even though they may not have yet physically crossed a boundary .