bereavement resolutions . under house precedents , resolutions expressing the condolences of the house of representatives over the death of a representative or of a president or former president have been treated as privileged . measures related to house organization . certain organizational business of the house — such as resolutions traditionally adopted at the beginning of a session to notify the president that the house has assembled and to elect house officers , as well as concurrent resolutions providing for a joint session of congress — have been treated as privileged business . in the 113 th congress , 174 measures , representing 18% of the measures receiving floor action , came before the house on their initial consideration by virtue of their status as "privileged business. all of these 174 measures were non - lawmaking forms of legislation , that is , simple or concurrent resolutions . the most common type of measure brought up in the house as "privileged business" during the 113 th congress was special orders of business ( special rules ) reported by the rules committee , followed by resolutions assigning representatives to committee . a special rule is a simple resolution that regulates the house's consideration of legislation identified in the resolution . such resolutions , as noted above , are sometimes called "order of business resolutions" or "special orders," although members and staff frequently simply refer to them as "rules. special rules enable the house to consider a specified measure and establish the terms for its consideration — for example , how long the legislation will be debated , what ( if any ) amendments may be offered to it , and whether points of order against the measure or any amendments to it are waived . under clause 1 ( m ) of house rule x , the committee on rules has jurisdiction over the "order of business" of the house , and it reports such procedural resolutions to the chamber for consideration . in current practice , although a relatively small percentage of legislation comes before the house via special rule , most measures that might be characterized as significant , complicated , or controversial are brought up in this way . providing for adjournment . under article i , section 5 , clause 4 , of the constitution , neither house can adjourn for more than three days without the consent of the other . concurrent resolutions providing for such an adjournment of one or both chambers are called up as privileged . questions of the privileges of the house . under clause 2 of house rule ix , resolutions raising a question of the privileges of the house affecting "the rights of the house collectively , its safety , dignity , and the integrity of its proceedings" are privileged under specific parliamentary circumstances described in the rule . such resolutions would include the constitutional right of the house to originate revenue measures . in the 113 th congress , 148 measures , or 16% of all legislation receiving house floor action , were initially brought before the chamber under the terms of a special rule reported by the rules committee and agreed to by the house .