research . other accounts that fund r&d at the nsf include the mrefc account , which supports large construction projects and scientific instruments . 114-113 provides $200.3 million for mrefc , an amount approximately the same as the fy2015 and request levels . the administration requested $200.3 million for mrefc in fy2016 , which is close to the fy2015 estimate of $201 million . in fy2016 , mrefc funding would pay for the final year of national ecological observatory network ( neon ) construction , and would provide ongoing support for the large synoptic survey telescope ( lsst ) and daniel k. inouye solar telescope ( dkist ) . both the house - passed and senate committee on appropriations - reported versions of h.r . these reports can be accessed via the crs website at http: / / www.crs.gov / cli / clis ? also , the status of each appropriations bill is available on the crs webpage , status table of appropriations , available at http: / / crs.gov / pages / appropriationsstatustable.aspx . congress supports research and development in the department of defense ( dod ) primarily through its research , development , test , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) appropriation . the appropriation supports the development of the nation's future military hardware and software and the technology base upon which those products rely . nearly all of what dod spends on rdt&e is appropriated in title iv of the defense appropriation bill . ( see table 8 . ) however , rdt&e funds are also appropriated in other parts of the bill . for example , rdt&e funds are appropriated as part of the defense health program , chemical agents and munitions destruction program , and the national defense sealift fund . the defense health program ( dhp ) supports the delivery of health care to dod personnel and their families . dhp funds ( including the rdt&e funds ) are requested through the defensewide operations and maintenance appropriations request . the program's rdt&e funds support congressionally directed research in such areas as breast , prostate , and ovarian cancer and other medical conditions . congress appropriates funds for this program in title vi ( other department of defense programs ) of the defense appropriations bill . the chemical agents and munitions destruction program supports activities to destroy the u.s. inventory of lethal chemical agents and munitions to avoid future risks and costs associated with storage . funds for this program are requested through the defensewide procurement appropriations request . congress appropriates funds for this program also in title vi . the national defense sealift fund supports the procurement , operation and maintenance , and research and development of the nation's naval reserve fleet and supports a u.s. flagged merchant fleet that can serve in time of need . the rdt&e funding for this effort is requested in the navy's procurement request and appropriated in title v , revolving and management funds , of the appropriation bill . the joint improvised explosive device defeat fund ( jieddf ) also contains rdt&e monies . however , the fund does not contain an rdt&e line item as do the programs mentioned above .