unlike h.r . 972 , s. 1016 included an express exclusionary rule for evidence obtained in violation of the act . representative ted poe introduced the preserving american privacy act of 2013 ( h.r . 637 ) , which would have regulated both public and private use of drones under various mechanisms . as to law enforcement use , h.r . 637 would have created a general prohibition on the use of drones to collect covered information or disclose covered information so collected . "covered information" was defined as "information that is reasonably likely to enable identification of an individual" or "information about an individual's property that is not in plain view. this prohibition was subject to the following exceptions: ( 1 ) law enforcement obtains a court - issued warrant and serves a copy of the warrant on the target of the search within 10 days of the surveillance . however , notice need not be provided if it would jeopardize an ongoing criminal or national security investigation . ( 2 ) law enforcement obtains a court - issued order based upon "specific and articulable facts showing a reasonable suspicion of criminal activity and a reasonable probability" that the operation "will provide evidence of such criminal activity. the order may authorize surveillance in a stipulated public area for no more than 48 hours which may be renewed for a total of 30 days . notice of the operation must be provided to the target no later than 10 days after the operation . alternatively , notice may be provided not less than 48 hours before the operation in a major publication , on a government website , or with signs posted in the area of the operation . ( 3 ) operation is within 25 miles of national border . ( 4 ) the targeted individual has provided prior written consent . ( 5 ) emergency situation involves danger of death or serious physical injury , conspiratorial activities threatening the national security interest , or conspiratorial activities characteristic of organized crime , where a warrant cannot be obtained with due diligence . law enforcement must then obtain a warrant within 48 hours of such operation . any evidence obtained in violation of this act would not have been admissible in any trial or adjudicative proceeding . additionally , h.r . 637 would have required any governmental entity applying for a certificate or license to operate a uas to also file a data collection statement with the attorney general , which would have included the purpose for which the uas will be used ; whether the uas is capable of collecting covered information ; the length of time the information will be retained ; a point of contact for citizen feedback ; the particular unit of governmental entity responsible for safe and appropriate operation of the uas ; the rank and title of the individual who may authorize the operation of the uas ; the applicable data minimization policies barring the collection of covered information unrelated to the investigation of crime and requiring the destruction of covered information that is no longer relevant to the investigation of a crime ; and applicable audit and oversight procedures .