see figure 1 . reasons cited for bee population declines include a wide range of possible factors . potential identified causes include bee pests and diseases , diet and nutrition , genetics , habitat loss and other environmental stressors , agricultural pesticides , and beekeeping management issues , as well as the possibility that bees are being harmed by cumulative , multiple exposures and / or the interactive effects of each of these factors . one issue widely reported in the media is the potential role that pesticides — in particular , neonicotinoid pesticides — might play in overall bee health . as one of the potential causes of honey bee colony declines , this report addresses what role , if any , pesticides play in influencing the health and wellness of bees . regarding honey bee health , the current state of knowledge of pesticides was summarized in a 2013 report by usda and epa: there is broad consensus among all stakeholders that pesticide use should not affect honey bees in such a way that ( 1 ) honey production is reduced or ( 2 ) pollination services provided by bees are threatened... . however , it is not clear , based on current research , whether pesticide exposure is a major factor associated with u.s. honey bee health declines in general , or specifically affects production of honey or delivery of pollination services . it is clear , however , that in some instances honey bee colonies can be severely harmed by exposure to high doses of insecticides when these compounds are used on crops , or via drift onto flowers in areas adjacent to crops that are attractive to bees . this report examines in greater detail the role of pesticides , providing a summary of selected scientific literature . the relative importance of pesticides in u.s. or global bee health is a subject of numerous research projects , some of which are discussed in this report . some groups have expressed concern about the assessment of most experts that the causes of pollinator health concerns are multifaceted and may involve the interaction of multiple factors , since this may deflect attention from the potential role of exposure to pesticides . on the other hand , some groups appear unwilling to acknowledge that pesticide exposure may play an important role in pollinator health concerns , especially if this acknowledgment leads to restrictions or reductions in the use of certain pesticides or related crop pest controls . this report provides information regarding the potential role of pesticides in the health of bee colonies , and also the importance of pesticides relative to other influences on bee health . the report provides general information about the nature of pesticides , pesticide uses , and pesticide regulation in the united states , as well as more specific information about the registration status of a class of pesticides known as neonicotinoids , which have been implicated in some studies concerning honey bee colony declines . this report also describes a range of options to address pesticide exposure by bees , including implementing crop - and / or product - specific best management practices ( bmps ) regarding pesticide use and applications .