this report focuses on these issues . it first provides agency deferred maintenance estimates for fy2018 , the most recent fiscal year for which this information is available . it also discusses changes in deferred maintenance over the past decade ( fy2009-fy2018 ) and then identifies some of the factors that likely contributed to these changes . the agencies typically identify deferred maintenance through periodic condition assessments of facilities . fs currently reports an annual deferred maintenance dollar total composed of estimates for 10 classes of assets . these classes include roads , buildings , trails , bridges , and water systems , among others . doi currently reports annual deferred maintenance composed of estimates for four broad categories of assets: ( 1 ) roads , bridges , and trails ; ( 2 ) irrigation , dams , and other water structures ; ( 3 ) buildings ; and ( 4 ) other structures . the "other structures" category includes a variety of assets ( eg , recreation sites and hatcheries ) . for each of the 10 years covered by this report , fs has reported the amount of deferred maintenance as a single figure . doi agencies began reporting deferred maintenance as a single figure in fy2015 . in prior years , doi agencies reported estimates as a range . for fy2014 , for instance , the range had an "accuracy level of minus 15 percent to plus 25 percent of initial estimate. according to doi , a range had been used because "due to the scope , nature , and variety of the assets entrusted to doi , as well as the nature of deferred maintenance itself , exact estimates are very difficult to determine. fs estimates of deferred maintenance included in this report generally are taken from the agency's annual budget justifications to congress . the doi budget office provided the congressional research service ( crs ) with a deferred maintenance range for each doi agency for each fiscal year from fy2009 to fy2014 . from these ranges , crs calculated mid - range figures . for instance , doi estimated nps deferred maintenance for fy2014 at between $9.31 billion and $13.70 billion . the crs - calculated mid - range figure is $11.50 billion . this report reflects crs's mid - range calculations for fy2009-fy2014 to facilitate comparison with fs estimates . since fy2015 , the doi budget office has provided crs with a single estimate for each doi agency , and those figures are used in this report . they represent deferred maintenance as of the end of the fiscal year ( i.e. , september 30 ) . for both fs and doi agencies , the deferred maintenance estimates generally reflect project costs . finally , totals shown in the body and in tables of this report may not add to 100% due to rounding . fluctuations in deferred maintenance estimates are likely the result of many factors , among them estimation methods , levels of funding , and asset portfolios , as discussed below . the asset portfolios of the four agencies vary considerably in terms of number , type , size , age , and location of agency assets .