appendix a . other federal programs that may provide primary care to the underserved the federal government supports a number of facilities that provide primary care to low - income or otherwise medically underserved populations that are similar to health centers , but are not authorized in phsa section 330 . for example , the aca authorized funding for school - based health centers and nurse - managed health clinics . both of these facilities serve underserved populations but have different requirements than facilities authorized in phsa section 330 . the federal government also provides support for facilities that provide care to targeted populations such as american indians , alaska natives , and native hawaiians ; facilities located in rural areas ; facilities that provide mental health services ; and facilities that provide free care . this appendix describes these types of facilities , their authorization , and program requirements . the authors of the north carolina study suggest that health centers provide health care at a lower cost because they can offer discounted services through federal programs ( see " which federal programs are available to health centers ? they also suggest that health centers may provide less costly overall care because their providers work on a salaried basis , and so do not have financial incentives to order additional tests or procedures . this may not be the case in other outpatient settings because providers generally work under a fee - for - service model , where they may receive additional remuneration for providing more services . other studies note that differences in the cost of services ( i.e. , the fee for a particular procedure or visit ) do not explain the difference because health centers are paid the fqhc rate , which should likely be comparable to , or higher than , the rates reimbursed in other outpatient settings . given differing explanations of how health centers may reduce health care costs , the researchers state that health center costs may be lower because they avert more costly emergency room visits , specialty care , or hospital stays . health centers aim to provide care to underserved populations and , in doing so , may increase health care access . by definition , health centers are located in areas with few providers , including rural and inner city areas . these locations may provide access for populations that are otherwise underserved , for example , because of geography or income . health centers also serve a more diverse population than do office - based physicians ; results from one study indicate health center patients were more likely to be hispanic or african american . health centers may also increase access for specific racial and ethnic groups . for example , one study found that health centers increase health care access for asian americans , native hawaiians , and other pacific islanders . some research has suggested that health centers may reduce health disparities because they provide care to a population that might otherwise have difficultly accessing health care . relative to other providers ( such as office - based physicians ) , health centers are more likely to accept new patients and are required to accept patients who are unable to pay for services ( i.e.