appendix a . president's science and technology policy advisors appendix b . historical ostp fundin . the following sections address each of these issues . under president obama , john holdren served as both ostp director and assistant to the president for science and technology ( apst ) . in contrast , under president george w. bush , john marburger was given only the title of ostp director . some experts in the s&t community have proposed that the ostp director always be given the title of apst or be given cabinet rank . the ability of ostp to perform its statutory duties depends , in part , on the size of its budget and staff . figure 2 and figure 3 , above , illustrate ostp's historical budget and staffing . between fy1996 and fy2013 , the budgets of presidents clinton , george w. bush , and obama included requests for the authorization of 32-40 full - time equivalent ( fte ) positions while the actual number of ostp - funded staff ranged from 23 to 33 . in addition , some members of the s&t policy community have suggested that the ostp director play a greater role in eop policy bodies involved in priority - setting and budget allocation , such as the omb , nec , ceq , dpc , and nsc . for example , congress could require the ostp director to play a greater role ( eg , certification of priorities or budgets ) in setting priorities at the federal agencies , particularly for multi - agency and inter - agency activities . another recommendation found in these s&t community reports is to make the nstc's authority equivalent to that of the nsc . the nstc , they assert , lacks the influence of nsc . the differences in statutory authority , staff , and budget are among the reasons cited for this disparity . the nstc has participated in presidential decision - making processes in different ways in different administrations . 5116 , 111 th congress ) would have required the ostp director to appoint an associate director to serve as the coordinator for societal dimensions of nanotechnology . the prds served as the basis for gathering information and policy options for the president . president clinton then had this information available as he developed eight presidential decision directives ( pdds ) establishing new policy . the nstc has not developed prds or their equivalents since the end of the clinton administration . policy tensions and power struggles between ostp and other eop offices and between presidential administrations and the science community are not new . during the george w. bush administration , detailees and fellows provided approximately half of ostp's total staff ; during the clinton administration , detailees and fellows accounted for approximately two - thirds of total ostp staff ; toward the end of the obama administration , detailees , fellows , and ipas account for approximately two - thirds of total ostp staff . some in the s&t community have expressed concerns that ostp needs to have more career civil service professional staff and a larger budget .