the amount ms . swift gets paid for both her musical works and her sound recordings depends on market forces , contracts among a variety of private - sector entities , and federal laws governing copyright and competition policy . congress wrote these laws , by and large , at a time when consumers primarily accessed music via radio broadcasts or physical media , such as sheet music and phonograph records , and when each medium offered consumers a distinct degree of control over which songs they could hear next . with the emergence of music distribution on the internet , congress updated some copyright laws in the 1990s . it attempted to strike a balance between combating unauthorized use of copyrighted content — a practice some refer to as "piracy" — and protecting the revenue sources of the various participants in the music industry . it applied one set of copyright provisions to digital services it viewed as akin to radio broadcasts , and another set of laws to digital services it viewed as akin to physical media . since that time , however , music distribution has continued to evolve . in addition to streaming radio broadcasts ( "webcasting" ) and downloading recorded albums or songs , consumers can stream individual songs on demand via music streaming services . the result , as the u.s . copyright office has noted , has been a "blurring of the traditional lines of exploitation. figure 1 illustrates the evolution of music consumption over the last 40 years . in 1999 , recording industry revenues reached their peak of $21.3 billion . that same year , the free napster peer - to - peer file - sharing service was introduced . in 2003 , after negotiating licensing agreements with all of the major record labels , apple launched the itunes music store to provide consumers a legal option for purchasing individual songs online . the year 2012 marked the first time the recording industry earned more from retail sales of digital downloads ( $3.2 billion ) than from physical media such as compact discs , cassettes , and vinyl records ( $3.0 billion ) . apple had approximately a 65% market share of digital music downloads . after peaking in 2012 , however , sales from digital downloads began to decline , as streaming services such as spotify , which entered the u.s. market in 2011 , became more popular . facing a mounting threat to its itunes store , apple launched its own subscription streaming music service , apple music , in 2015 . the popularity of subscription music services has significantly altered music consumption patterns . according to the recording industry association of america ( riaa ) , the proportion of total u.s. recording industry retail spending coming from webcasting , satellite digital audio radio services and cable services ( digital subscriptions ) , and streaming music services increased from about 9% in 2011 ( out of $7.6 billion total ) to about 67% in 2017 ( out of $8.5 billion total ) . after 11 consecutive years of declining revenues , consumer spending on music was flat between 2014 and 2015 , grew 10% between 2015 and 2016 , and grew 14% between 2016 and 2017 .