for presidents clinton and g.w . bush the percentage of vacant circuit court judgeships considered judicial emergencies increased by 25.6% and 19.7% , respectively . bush presidencies , respectively . bush presidencies ( 33.3% and 22.9% , respectively ) . as with circuit court vacancies , the percentage of vacant district court judgeships on january 1 of a president's sixth year in office was greatest during the clinton and obama presidencies ( 9.3% and 11.1% , respectively ) . on january 1 of a president's seventh year in office , the percentage of vacant district court judgeships was greatest during the reagan and clinton presidencies ( 7.2% and 6.4% , respectively ) . the percentage of vacant district court judgeships at the beginning of president obama's seventh year in office , 4.9% , was the lowest percentage of vacant judgeships on january 1 of any of the presidents' sixth or seventh years in office . as of this writing , the reinterpretation continues to be in effect during the 114 th congress . the statistics and analysis presented in this section account only for those nominees who were confirmed by the senate during a president's first six years ( thus excluding from the analysis nominees who were never confirmed or who were later confirmed in a president's term , i.e. , during his seventh year or later , and , for president obama , those nominations for which final disposition has not yet been determined ) . figure 1 tracks by president the average and median number of days from nomination to confirmation for all circuit and district court nominees confirmed during a president's first six years in office . if a nominee was nominated more than once by a president during his first six years ( and he or she was also confirmed within those six years ) , the first date he or she was nominated was used to calculate the days elapsed from nomination to confirmation . the percentage of vacant circuit and district court judgeships varies over the course of a presidency and is affected , in part , by the pace at which a president selects nominees for vacancies as well as the speed by which the senate considers the president's nominees . table 3 compares for the four presidents: ( 1 ) the percentage of vacant u.s. circuit and district court judgeships on january 1 of a president's sixth year in office ; ( 2 ) the percentage of vacant u.s. circuit and district court judgeships vacant on january 1 of a president's seventh year in office ; and ( 3 ) the change in the percentage of vacant u.s. circuit and district court judgeships from january 1 of a president's sixth year to january 1 of his seventh year in office . note that an increase ( or decrease ) in the percentage of vacant judgeships over a particular period of time is not solely a reflection of relatively fewer ( or greater ) number of nominations being confirmed by the senate . it may be the case , for example , that the percentage of vacant judgeships increased during a particular period because a greater number of judges stepped down from active service than during the preceding period — thus , creating more vacancies .