perkins loans are available to undergraduate and graduate and professional students . they must be made reasonably available to all eligible students , with priority given to students with exceptional financial need . interest on perkins loans is fixed at a rate of 5% per year , and no interest accrues prior to a student beginning repayment , nor while repayment is suspended during deferment . individuals who have engaged in a variety of public service endeavors ( eg , full - time elementary or secondary school teachers employed at a public or private nonprofit school in which low - income students are more than 30% of total enrollment , full - time law enforcement officers ) are eligible to have part or all of their perkins loan cancelled . the fcc is allocated according to statutorily prescribed procedures . after making loans , ihes recapitalize their loan funds by depositing the principal and interest repaid by students who borrowed under the program , as well as any other charges or earnings associated with the operation of the program . the secretary of education ( the secretary ) is required to reimburse ihes for perkins loans cancelled for students engaged in public service . funds for reimbursing institutions for loan cancellations may not come from appropriations designated for fccs ; rather , these funds are appropriated under a separate authorization . in academic year 2013-2014 , approximately 1,500 ihes disbursed $1.2 billion in new perkins loans to approximately 539,000 students . the authorization of appropriations under hea section 461 ( b ) ( 1 ) , for the purpose of enabling the secretary to make fccs to ihes for their revolving perkins loan funds , expired at the end of fy2014 . however , section 422 of the general education provisions act ( gepa ) provides that , generally , in the absence of legislation to extend or repeal a program administered by the department of education ( ed ) , the authorization of appropriations , or the duration of a program , is extended for one additional fiscal year beyond its terminal year . the authorized level of appropriations for a program in the additional year shall be the same as that for the terminal year of the program . thus , because congress did not extend or repeal the perkins loan program prior to its expiration on september 30 , 2014 , the authorization of appropriations for the program was automatically extended for an additional year , through fy2015 . ed considers the authorization of appropriations under hea section 461 ( b ) ( 1 ) to control the duration of the perkins loan program and has interpreted this section , along with the automatic one - year extension under gepa section 422 , to mean that the perkins loan program is authorized through september 30 , 2015 . hea section 461 ( b ) ( 1 ) authorizes discretionary appropriations to enable the secretary to make fccs to student loan funds established and operated at individual ihes . under this section $300 million in appropriations are authorized annually for fy2009 through fy2014 , and through fy2015 under gepa section 422 . however , discretionary appropriations for fccs were last provided in fy2004 .