once again , the fcc used a revenue - based definition . figure 1 illustrates these general trends . based on surveys conducted by pew research center , the percentage of adults citing local broadcast television as a news source declined from 65% in 1996 to 46% in 2016 . nevertheless , local television still outranks other local news sources . the percentage of respondents who stated that they "got news yesterday" from online sources grew from 2% in 1996 to 38% in 2016 . in contrast , those citing printed newspapers as a source they "read yesterday" or use regularly declined from 50% in 1996 to 20% in 2016 . these trends raise questions as to whether common ownership of multiple media outlets in the same market might limit diversity of viewpoints as much today as two decades ago . two characteristics of broadcast television and broadcast radio stations determine whether or not the media ownership rules described in later sections of this report are triggered: ( 1 ) the geographic range ( or contours ) of their signals , and ( 2 ) the limits of their media markets as determined by the nielsen company , a market research firm . many owners of commercial broadcast stations have relationships that fall short of the fcc's definition of common ownership , yet allow the owner of one station to exert substantial influence over the operation and finances of another station . to minimize such behavior , the fcc has developed attribution rules "to identify those interests in or relationships to licensees that confer a degree of influence or control such that the holders have a realistic potential to affect the programming decisions of licensees or other core operating functions. the following summarizes the media attribution rules , as described and modified in the 2014 quadrennial review second report and order , and related fcc policies . the fcc has five distinct sets of rules governing ownership of multiple media outlets in a single market: ( 1 ) local television ownership rules ( known as the television duopoly rules ) ; ( 2 ) local radio ownership rules ; ( 3 ) radio / television cross - ownership rules ; ( 4 ) newspaper / broadcast cross - ownership rules ; and ( 5 ) the dual network rule . in 2004 , 2011 , and 2016 , the u.s. court of appeals , third circuit , directed the fcc to review its broadcast ownership diversity policies in conjunction with the media ownership rules . specifically , the u.s. court of appeals ordered the fcc to consider a range of standards for defining entities that would be eligible for exceptions to its media ownership rules , and what the exceptions might be . as evidence of the fcc's "statutory obligation to promote minority and female broadcast ownership," the third circuit cited two sections of the communications act of 1934 . due to the manner in which the fcc licenses new broadcast stations , however , it is possible that only one of these two sections currently applies .