a variety of policy issues surrounds convention financing . before public funding for convention operations was eliminated , some observers questioned why federal funds subsidized conventions , considering the availability of substantial private resources and that they are party , rather than governmental , events . others contended that private funds , particularly so - called "soft money," which falls outside the scope of federal campaign finance law , had become too pervasive in conventions and that tighter restrictions were needed . these divergent views on the use of public funds to support party conventions also appear in other contexts in the debate surrounding campaign finance policy . for historical discussion of policy debates that preceded the decision to repeal pecf convention funds , see archived crs report rl34630 , federal funding of presidential nominating conventions: overview and policy options , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . for discussion of increased private fundraising limits for political parties , including for party conventions , see crs report r43825 , increased campaign contribution limits in the fy2015 omnibus appropriations law: frequently asked questions , by [author name scrubbed] . public money funded convention operations through the pecf from 1976 through 2012 . the 2014 elimination of convention financing means that , barring a change in the status quo , the 2016 conventions will be the first in more than a generation financed entirely with private funds . this report has provided historical background in the event congress chooses to reconsider public financing . the role of the federal government in funding convention security is a fairly new development since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 . as federal , state , and local governments further refine their homeland security activities generally , and specifically convention security operations , congress may consider different options for how the federal government provides funding for state and local costs incurred in securing convention venues . two taxpayer - supported revenue sources were available to conventions until recently: ( 1 ) presidential public campaign funds and ( 2 ) security funds . approximately $136.5 million from those sources went toward the 2012 democratic and republican national conventions . no third parties received convention funds for the 2012 election cycle . of that $136.5 million total , the 2012 democratic and republican conventions received a total of approximately $36.5 million from the presidential election campaign fund ( which generally excludes security costs ) . although convention financing has been eliminated , congress has chosen to continue appropriating separate security funds . before proceeding , it is important to note the distinction between presidential public funds and security funds . presidential public funds and security funds came from separate revenue sources . they were allocated differently , were used for different purposes , and were subject to different points of debate . although both presidential public funds and security funds support ( or supported ) conventions , congress may reassess them separately . because public funding for convention operations has now been eliminated , this report provides a historical overview of how pecf convention funding functioned and describes private funding sources that remain available . congress appropriates separate federal funding for the securing of the convention venues .