singapore is another example . a singaporean land reclamation project in the straits of johor became the subject of an international legal case between singapore and malaysia that was settled in 2005 . what are the appropriate responses for the united states ? crs consulted with u.s. government and outside experts on the legal , military / operational , diplomatic , and economic implications of china's activities . among crs's findings are the following . although others , including vietnam , malaysia , the philippines , and taiwan , have also reclaimed and / or reinforced land features in the area , china's reclamation is by far the most extensive any nation has undertaken on disputed features in the south china sea . it is difficult to judge the legality of the chinese reclamation activity , given that sovereignty over the features affected is not settled . reclamation , per se , is not illegal on features over which a nation has sovereignty . however , each of the features is claimed by at least two parties , so each is clearly disputed . moreover , some features in their original form may not have extended above water at high tide , meaning no sovereignty claim to those features is recognized under the united nations convention on the law of the sea ( unclos ) . under unclos , the reclamation does not allow china to claim broader 200-nautical - mile eezs around the reclaimed landmasses . the most that a nation could claim around any of the features is territorial waters extending 12 nautical miles from the feature , and this is only claimable if , before reclamation began , the reef included features above water at all times . so far china has not asserted new legal claims based on its artificial island building . china has so far confined its latest wave of reclamation and construction work to features it already occupied in the spratly island chain . it does not appear to have sought to carry out such work on features it did not previously control , including those occupied by other claimants . the reclamation arguably violates the spirit of the 2002 declaration on the conduct of parties in the south china sea ( doc ) between china and the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) and makes discussions over a potential code of conduct more difficult . the reclamation includes areas under consideration in an ongoing unclos arbitration case , in which the philippines seeks a ruling on the legality of chinese claims and behavior in the south china sea . the philippines has asked for a ruling on the legal status of each of the features under reclamation , among others . such a ruling could clarify the rights of all parties in areas surrounding the features . the reclamation efforts could improve china's ability to maintain ship and aircraft operations in the region on a day - to - day basis , including patrols of disputed features in the south china sea , and to conduct combat operations in the region .