warning list . an informational warning list ( or gray list ) of species might be created by the collaboration of federal and state agencies . the warning list might include species currently restricted under state laws , species thought to be newly arrived from other countries , and other species felt to merit special attention by regulators . although a gray list would lack regulatory force at the federal level , it could be designed to provide information on species whose eradication or control is in its early phases . review of industries dependent on importing and transferring non - native species . such a review could include a focus on cooperative methods to reduce releases after the point of sale . the focus of past efforts has tended to be on the entry of these species into the united states . to protect their businesses , import - dependent industries naturally have tried to reduce current obstacles and to prevent imposition of new ones . yet there are other avenues to reduce risk besides prohibition . these avenues might include incentives for the sale of sterile animals or plants only or efforts to create point - of - sale educational programs about the risk of , or penalties for , releasing pets or plants into the wild . measures to reduce the risk of exporting invasive species . the united states might take further internal steps to avoid exporting potentially invasive species to other countries . these measures could be as simple as preventing their accidental export in bilateral aid programs or certifying that identified u.s. products ( eg , used tires ) are free of pests . such certification is done for agricultural shipments . a review might examine disaster aid and emergency relief , for example ; in the rush to provide humanitarian relief , shipments of supplies , equipment , and personnel may inadvertently introduce diseases or pests unknown in the receiving country . because such supplies sometimes are prepared for shipment in advance , they could be examined to reduce the risk of such transfers . multi - agency federal or cooperative center for first - strike prevention and control . since the creation of nisc , agencies have begun to respond across a broad front in the days , weeks , or months after an invasion is discovered . nisc is beginning to model its efforts on interagency fire management , a federal program that has long faced similar issues . it seems possible that a similar center devoted to first - strike prevention and control of invasive species , regardless of affected industry , ecosystem , or lead agency , could provide critical support at a time when eradication of a new animal or plant invader still might be possible . these options are not mutually exclusive . education al campaign . an educational campaign to prevent inadvertent acts by the public might help prevent some invasive species introductions . this type of approach might be particularly effective at preventing releases of exotic pets and aquarium species after the point of sale . they likely would be under the jurisdiction of multiple committees in both the house and senate . research to identify pathways .