an example may be useful . say that the united states set a minimum tax threshold of 20% of net income . if a corporation where to report $100 million of income as being earned in a country with a tax rate of 15% , the corporation would then be subject to a 20% u.s. tax in the year the income was earned . however , the united states would credit the corporation for the 15% in taxes paid abroad , leaving the company with a residual u.s. tax of 5% . the foreign tax credit prevents double taxation of income and also ensures that the firm's total tax rate is no greater than 20% ( 15% to the foreign country plus 5% to the united states ) . the minimum tax could also apply only to particular types of income , such as passive income or income associated with intellectual property . this provides an opportunity to shift profits to low - tax countries . an alternative would be to pool profits earned around the world and then allow countries to tax a share of the total profits , eliminating the need for transfer pricing . the share each country could tax would be determined by a formula that measures real business activity conducted in each country . to understand how formula apportionment works , it may help to consider an example of a sales - based approach . under this method , if a u.s. company earned $100 million of profits worldwide and 60% of its sales occurred domestically , then the united states would have the right to tax $60 million ( $100 million multiplied by 60% ) . the remaining $40 million could be subject to taxation in the jurisdictions where the 40% of foreign sales occurred . more realistically , the formula used to apportion profits might depend on more than just sales , such as the location of assets and employees . in this case , known as a multi - factor formula , taxable profits would be determined by the weighted average of factor activity occurring in each country . for example , if a company had 60% of its sales , 30% of its assets , and 25% of its employees in the united states , then the share of income that would be taxable in the united states would be $100 million multiplied by ( 0.6+0.3+0.25 ) / 3 , or $38.3 million . there is currently a debate among economists over desirability of switching to a formula apportionment regime and its ability to reduce profit shifting . if the apportionment formula can be easily manipulated then its impact on profit shifting may be limited . it has been argued that a sales - based formula would be less susceptible to manipulation . at the same time , it has been argued that without extensive recordkeeping or a tracking system , nothing would stop an mnc from setting up a chain of subsidiaries in low - tax countries to which intermediate components are sold on their way to their final destination , which could be a high - tax country .