economic development has brought social and environmental costs . hundreds of thousands of cambodians reportedly have been displaced as government , business , and foreign entities , often in collusion , have confiscated their land and homes , sometimes forcibly or without proper compensation , to make way for agricultural , mining , logging , tourism , and urban development projects . although forced relocations have continued , the number of cases reportedly has declined in recent years . cambodia has one of the highest deforestation rates in the world and illegal logging continues , due to strong demand for wood from china and vietnam , corruption , and suppression of environmental activists . labor relations have shown some signs of strain in recent years , particularly as the garment industry has developed . garment workers participated in large - scale demonstrations for higher wages in 2013-2014 , which coincided with antigovernment demonstrations led by the cnrp . cambodia's national assembly adopted a new law on trade unions in 2016 , which some analysts say imposes greater restrictions on labor rights . in august 2017 , the cambodian government announced that it would enact a national minimum wage law , which some analysts surmise was done to boost labor support for the cpp . the prc has become cambodia's largest economic benefactor at a time when major oda donors have become increasingly critical of hun sen's authoritarian policies . china's economic support has lessened the influence of foreign assistance conditions imposed by western aid donors and given hun sen more political room to maneuver , both domestically and internationally , according to some analysts . in return , cambodia has appeared increasingly willing to accommodate or support beijing's positions on various regional issues , including territorial disputes in the south china sea . cambodia is said to be the southeast asian country upon which china exerts the greatest influence , and to be china's "most reliable partner in southeast asia. according to one assessment , china has provided cambodia about $15 billion in assistance and concessionary loans over the past two decades , and around 42% of the kingdom's external debt is owed to china . kem was released on bail and placed under house arrest in september 2018 . a u.s. embassy spokesperson stated , "we continue to call on the government of cambodia to drop all charges against mr. sokha , remove restrictions on the political rights of him and other opposition leaders , and engage opposition leaders in an urgent dialogue aimed at building genuine national reconciliation. beginning in 2015 with new government restrictions on nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) , and during the lead - up to the 2018 national elections , the cambodian government placed increasing restrictions on political and social activism , civil society , free speech , and foreign - funded democracy programs . during 2015-2017 , more than 25 opposition members and government critics were arrested , and many fled the country . in june 2016 , government critic kem ley was killed under suspicious circumstances .