text box , above ) . some privacy advocates complain that neither the common rule nor hipaa adequately protects patient privacy , while researchers claim that hipaa impedes their access to data and places limitations on its secondary use . there are also concerns about inconsistencies between the two sets of standards . foia established , for any person — corporate or individual , citizen or otherwise — presumptive access to existing , unpublished agency records on any topic . in a "points to consider" memorandum regarding data sharing concerns , the nih stated that "datasets submitted to nih" will be "u.s. government records that are subject to" foia . foia , however , specifies nine categories of information that may be exempted from the rule of disclosure , including trade secrets and information related to national security . disputes between requesters and agencies over the accessibility of requested records may be settled in federal court or may be mediated in the office of government information services ( ogis ) . the sharing of genetic and genomic data among private individuals , researchers , and the federal government has , at times , prompted concerns that the information , if collected or retained by a federal executive branch agency , could be subject to public release pursuant to foia . as noted above , although the information submitted to nih is considered de - identified , researchers have demonstrated an ability to identify individual genomic or genetic material despite attempts to anonymize the data . public release of the de - identified data , therefore , may generate unease about personal privacy protection as well as lead to calls for legislation further clarifying public access to such information . among foia's nine exemptions that permit agencies to withhold applicable records , two categories are more likely to affect the disclosure of genetic or genomic material: exemption 3: data specifically exempted from disclosure by a statute other than foia if that statute meets criteria laid out in foia ; and exemption 6: personnel , medical , or similar files , the disclosure of which would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy . an example exemption 3 statute , in the context of potentially withholding genetic material , might include 42 u.s.c . §242m ( d ) ( a provision of the public health service act , as amended ) , which protects from public release certain information that would allow an individual to be identified if that information was collected for epidemiological or statistical activities . these types of exemption 3 statutes are often referred to as b ( 3 ) exemptions because they are authorized in 5 u.s.c . title ii of gina includes provisions that address both access to and appropriate use of genetic information by employers . specifically , title ii of gina prohibits discrimination in employment because of genetic information and , with certain exceptions , prohibits an employer from requesting , requiring , or purchasing genetic information . the law prohibits the use of genetic information in employment decisions — including hiring , firing , job assignments , and promotions — by employers , unions , employment agencies , and labor - management training programs .