background . historically , under the securities act of 1933 , banks and bhcs , similar to nonfinancial firms , generally were required to register securities with the sec if they had total assets exceeding $10 million and the shares were held ( as per shareholders of record ) by 500 shareholders or more . banks and bhcs also were allowed to stop registering securities with the sec , a process known as deregistration , if the number of their shareholders of record fell to 300 shareholders or fewer . title vi of the jumpstart our business startups act ( jobs act ) raised the sec shareholder registration threshold from 500 shareholders to 2,000 shareholders and increased the upper limit for deregistration from 300 shareholders to 1,200 shareholders for those banks and nonfinancial firms . in other words , the jobs act made it easier for banks and bhcs to increase the number of their shareholders while remaining unregistered private banks and , if already registered , to voluntarily deregister while also adding more shareholders . mutual holding companies ( mhcs ) . section 107 of the competitive equality banking act of 1987 provided for the formation of mutual holding companies ( mhcs ) . mhcs are savings and loan holding companies in mutual form , some of which own mutually held federally insured savings and loan associations , and state - chartered mutual savings banks . most banks in the united states are held either publicly or privately by shareholders . the provision went into effect immediately upon the enactment of the jobs act on april 5 , 2012 . these changes made by the jobs act did not apply to savings and loan holding companies ( slhcs ) . a mutual savings bank can reorganize itself into an mhc by transferring all of the assets and liabilities to a newly formed stock institution , the majority shares of which are owned by the mhc . the holding company registration threshold equalization provisions amended the securities exchange act of 1934 by extending the higher registration and deregistration shareholder thresholds in the jobs act for banks and bhcs to slhcs . savings and loans ( also known as thrifts and savings banks ) are similar to banks in that they take deposits and make loans , but their regulation is somewhat different . dividends are distribution of earnings ( profits ) to shareholders , which are usually declared and paid quarterly . the board of directors determines the amount of dividends . if the mhc waives the right to receive dividends , depending upon the specifics of an institution's dividend arrangements , dividends may be distributed among the other equity holders or retained by the bank subsidiary . the federal reserve issued regulation mm , implementing its authority over mhcs and included in it a subsection , 12 c.f.r . 239.8 ( d ) , implementing the statutory requirements permitting mhcs to waive the right to receive dividends declared by a subsidiary of the mhc .