appendix b . acronyms used in this report appendix c. differences between pdg programs on december 10 , 2015 , the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) was comprehensively reauthorized by the every student succeeds act ( essa ; p.l . the essa includes a standalone authorization for a new preschool development grant program that differs in a number of ways from the predecessor pdg program that has been in place for fy2014-fy2016 . table c - 1 provides a comparison of different aspects of the two pdg programs . appropriations were not sufficient to fund new grantees . the maximum funding available for each state is based on its population of four - year - olds living in families at or below 200% of the federal poverty level , and only these children may be served by the pdg program . of the $250 million in fy2014 funding for pdg , $80 million was reserved for pdg - development grants and $170 million was reserved for pdg - expansion grants . remaining funds were reserved for national activities and for peer review of state applications . eight states and puerto rico submitted applications for pdg - development grants . as has been noted , pdg - development grants are designed for states with fewer than 10% of their four - year - olds in state - funded preschool that have not received a rtt - elc grant . as table 6 shows , in 2014 , five states were awarded these grants . pdg - preschool expansion grants are designed for states that already serve 10% or more of their four - year - olds in state - funded preschools or received a rtt - elc grant . twenty - seven states submitted applications for these grants and 13 states received them . the amount of funding awarded to each state in year 1 ( fy2017 ) and year 2 ( fy2015 ) of the program is provided in table 6 . recipients of pdg awards must submit an annual report to ed that describes the state's progress in achieving its goals , meeting its timelines , and staying within its requested budget . in addition , for each of the state's performance measures , it must indicate how its performance compares to the annual targets it established in its application . states are accountable for meeting the goals , timelines , budgets , and targets that they establish in their application . ed reviews a state's adherence to these commitments on a regular basis . if a state or its subgrantee does not meet the requirements that accompany acceptance of a grant , ed and hhs may take enforcement actions that can include withholding or suspending funds or recovering funds as the result of an audit . appendix a. glossary of terms absolute priority : a term used by ed and hhs in the notices inviting applications for all rtt - elc and preschool development grant competitions to denote a priority that all applications must meet in order to be considered for funding . children with high needs : children from birth through kindergarten entry who are from low - income families or are otherwise in need of special assistance or support .