eere has 13 program offices and three administrative offices . each program office has a set of goals and funding needs . doe's fy2016 request groups the 13 program offices under four separate functional themes: 1 . sustainable transportation , which includes the vehicles , bioenergy , and hydrogen / fuel cell programs . renewable electricity generation , which includes solar , geothermal , wind , and water programs . corporate management , which includes the three administrative programs: facilities , program direction , and strategic programs . table 5 , below , gives the eere breakdown of recent fiscal year appropriations — and the enacted fy2016 appropriation — by program office . for additional background on selected eere programs and funding aspects , see ( 1 ) crs report r43567 , energy and water development: fy2015 appropriations , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] . ( 2 ) crs report rs22858 , renewable energy r&d funding history: a comparison with funding for nuclear energy , fossil energy , and energy efficiency r&d , by [author name scrubbed] . ( 3 ) crs report r40670 , energy efficiency in buildings: critical barriers and congressional policy , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] . ( 4 ) crs report r42147 , doe weatherization program: a review of funding , performance , and cost - effectiveness studies , by [author name scrubbed] . eere also manages a portfolio of grant programs that support state and territorial governments . the office is led by the assistant secretary of energy efficie ncy and renewable energy , who manages several internal eere offices and programs . eere serves as the steward and primary client of the national renewable energy laboratory ( nrel ) , which is located in golden , co. nrel is the only national lab dedicated solely to rd&d on efficiency and renewables . in fy2015 , the amount of funding that eere passed through to nrel was nearly double the amount that the office provided to all other national labs combined . this section presents the key eere program funding increases requested and describes some highlights for each of those programs . eere principal deputy assistant secretary mike carr presented a summary of the eere request at a february 25 , 2015 , briefing for congressional staff sponsored by the environmental and energy study institute ( eesi ) . energy efficiency , which includes manufacturing , buildings , the federal energy management program ( femp ) , and the grant programs . the office of energy efficiency and renewable energy ( eere ) of the department of energy ( doe ) invests in high - risk , potentially high - value research , development , and deployment ( rd&d ) in the fields of energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies .