the thresholds are "to be regarded as ceilings. the formal eu - wide recommended definition for smes was updated in 2005 to account for inflation and to include a new micro enterprise category ( see table 1 ) . about 99.8% of all eu businesses qualify as a sme ( about 92.7% qualify as a micro business , 6.1% as a small business , and 1.0% as a medium - sized business ) . in comparison , about 98% of all american businesses qualify as small under the u.s. small business administration's ( sba ) size standards ; and about 99.7% of all employer firms in the united states have 500 or fewer employees ( the small business size standard typically used for research purposes ) . over the next several years , the european commission enacted policies to reduce regulatory burdens on smes and increase "the sme focus in major eu support programs. in 2008 , the european commission declared that it was time to "cement the needs of smes in the forefront of the eu's policy" and to make "the eu a world - class environment for smes" by adopting a small business act for europe . the small business act for europe is not an act , per se , as understood in the united states . it is a european commission initiative , endorsed by the council of the european union , which provides 10 "guiding principles" for its own policies , and those of its member states . as mentioned previously , it states in its introduction that it is based on the premise that "vibrant smes will make europe more robust to stand against the uncertainty thrown up in the globalised world of today. it later mentions that the symbolic name of an "act" given to this initiative underlines the political will to recognise the central role of smes in the eu economy and to put in place for the first time a comprehensive policy framework for the eu and its member states through a set of 10 principles to guide the conception and implementation of policies both at eu and member state level . the small business act for europe established the following guiding principles: 1 . create an environment in which entrepreneurs and family businesses can thrive and entrepreneurship is rewarded . ensure that honest entrepreneurs who have faced bankruptcy quickly get a second chance . promoting entrepreneurship , job creation and inclusive growth , by simplifying administrative requirements , ensuring that educational systems "truly provide the right skills to start and manage an sme," and removing barriers for entrepreneurs to "bring ideas to market. design rules according to the "think small first" principle . make public administrations responsive to smes' needs . specifically , the european commission proposed five new priority areas: 1 . making smart regulation a reality for european smes , including "a further strengthening of the application of the 'sme test' in its impact assessment procedure to ensure that impacts on smes are thoroughly analysed and taken into account in all relevant legislative and policy proposals , with a clear indication of quantified effects on smes , whenever possible and proportionate.