in contrast , h.r . 2576 would require risk evaluations to be published within three years after a manufacturer's request for an evaluation or within three years following an epa finding of potential for unreasonable risk . 2576 would require epa to initiate at least 10 risk evaluations ( not including manufacturer - requested evaluations ) per year , subject to the availability of appropriations . 2576 would not set a limit on manufacturer requests , except that the requested evaluation be paid for fully by the requesters . for new chemical substances and significant new uses , s. 697 and s. 725 would amend tsca section 5 to establish a process for epa to review a notice and information submitted by manufacturers and processors . 2576 would not amend tsca section 5 , leaving in place the current process for epa to have the initial opportunity to evaluate risks of new chemicals based on when a notice is submitted . under the senate bills , epa would be required to make a determination of whether regulatory action is warranted for new chemicals following the submission of a pmn . for new chemicals , both senate bills would direct epa to conduct an initial review and render a determination within 90 days of receiving a pmn ( and accompanying information ) and information that the substance is likely or not likely to attain the safety standard or that additional information is necessary to make such a determination . once the manufacture of a new chemical has commenced and that chemical is added to the tsca inventory , it would presumably be subject to the same prioritization , safety assessment , and safety determination procedures and conditions for existing chemical substances as proposed by s. 697 and s. 725 . instead , epa has generally made the other finding , which is based on the production volume of a chemical and the likelihood of exposure . the committee's report for the bill is h.rept . on june 23 , 2015 , the house passed h.r . 2576 , as amended , under suspension of the rules on a 398-1 vote . among the various issues regarding the federal role in regulating chemical substances under title i of tsca , the following topic areas are among the more debated: the prioritization of existing chemical substances for the evaluation of risks ; the regulatory threshold criteria under which epa would be authorized to restrict a chemical substance ; the regulatory options available to epa in restricting a chemical substance found to warrant regulation ; the authority of epa to require the development of new information regarding a chemical substance ; the preemption of state laws concerning the regulation of chemicals ; the disclosure and protection from disclosure of information submitted to epa ; and the resources that may be available for epa to administer the act . this report compares approaches among s. 697 , as reported , s. 725 , and h.r . 2576 , as passed by the house , in amending title i of tsca to address these key issues .