this prompted retaliatory action from turkey . the lira plunged in value , but recovered somewhat in the final months of 2018 after turkey's central bank raised its key interest rate by 6.25% in september . in november 2018 , the united states granted turkey ( along with seven other countries ) a six - month exception from u.s. sanctions on iranian oil . some observers speculate that turkey may need to turn to the international monetary fund ( imf ) for a financial assistance package . this would be a sensitive challenge for president erdogan because his political success story is closely connected with helping turkey become independent from its most recent imf intervention in the early 2000s . before the central bank's rate hike in september 2018 , some commentators voiced concerns about the bank's independence as erdogan publicly opposed increasing rates . in january 2019 , turkey's parliament voted to grant erdogan broader emergency powers in case of a financial crisis . some allegations of voter fraud and manipulation surfaced in both elections . u.s. and european union officials have expressed a number of concerns about rule of law and civil liberties in turkey , including the government's influence on media and turkey's reported status as the country with the most journalists in prison . while there may be some similarities between turkey under erdogan and countries like russia , iran , or china , some factors distinguish turkey from them . for example , unlike russia or iran , turkey's economy cannot rely on significant rents from natural resources if foreign sources of revenue or investment dry up . unlike russia and china , turkey does not have nuclear weapons under its command and control . additionally , unlike all three others , turkey's economic , political , and national security institutions and traditions have been closely connected with those of the west for decades . erdogan is a polarizing figure , with about half the country supporting his rule , and half the country against it . to obtain a parliamentary majority in the june 2018 elections , erdogan's islamist - leaning justice and development party ( adalet ve kalkinma partisi , or akp ) relied on a coalition with the nationalist action party ( milliyet halk partisi , or mhp ) . the mhp is the country's traditional turkish nationalist party , and is known for opposing political accommodation with the kurds . local elections scheduled for march 2019 could be a significant barometer of domestic support for erdogan under the difficult economic circumstances described below . the turkish economy appears to be slowing down , with negative consequences both for consumer demand and for companies seeking or repaying loans in global markets . economic growth was down from over 7% in 2017 to around 3% in 2018 , with forecasts for 2019 at or below 1% . by the end of 2018 , inflation had essentially doubled year - on - year to more than 20% . during 2018 , the turkish lira depreciated close to 30% against the dollar in an environment featuring a globally stronger dollar , rule of law concerns and political uncertainty , and significant corporate debt .