111-148 , as amended ) . recent health insurance marketplace changes include a different way to purchase health insurance ( exchanges ) and a new system of categorizing the generosity of plans' health coverage based on the names of various metals ( eg , bronze and silver ) . some consumers may face different choices of health insurance plans than in the past . not all consumers are comfortable with the various concepts governing which health insurance plan might be best for them . it would seem like calculating which plans are affordable might be fairly straightforward for the consumer , because the consumer can find out the potential premiums and general levels of cost sharing before purchasing a plan . in addition , the consumer also has some idea of his or her ( expected ) income , assets , and other items that he or she might want or need to buy . however , affordability encompasses much more than premiums , cost sharing , and maximum oop expenses . if the consumers to be covered already have chosen providers , or if they want to be able to choose providers at a later date ( perhaps when they become sick ) , they need to investigate the network status of providers . the consumers can decide to restrict their choice to plans with networks in which their current providers participate , pay the higher oop expenses associated with the use of out - of - network providers , or find new ( in - network ) providers . in particular , the consumer cannot know his or her oop costs in advance . despite the presence of clear cost - sharing rules , it is virtually impossible for the consumer to know how much and what type of health care he or she will need over the course of the year . children may or may not get an ear infection , and an adult may or may not get colon cancer . a minor cough could turn out to be a cold , where no visit to a provider is needed , or it could be the flu , where a visit to a provider might be needed . as discussed in " the challenges of purchasing health care ," a consumer can only approximate his or her health status and use of health services over the year , and therefore can only roughly approximate the affordability of various health insurance plans . in some cases , esi offers the best value for health insurance policies . but although there are advantages to obtaining esi coverage , there are challenges as well . from the vantage point of the consumer , one of the biggest disadvantages is the general lack of portability . because esi coverage is tied to the job and not the person , any change in employment ( such as going from full - time to part - time status or changing jobs ) may alter the health plans , health care providers , or services to which the worker has access . indeed , the consumer may no longer be offered esi after an employment change . in addition , the consumer's total compensation package may change when the employer offers esi .