the airlines have called for "fair skies. some other u.s. air carriers , as well as groups representing airline passengers and cargo shippers , have accused advocates of "fair skies" of seeking to limit international competition . in one case , representatives of three major u.s. airlines — american airlines , delta air lines , and united airlines — and airline labor unions allege that three carriers based in the persian gulf region have received subsidies and government support that contravene article 11 of the u.s. - united arab emirates ( uae ) open skies agreement and identical language in the u.s. - qatar agreement . the language in question states the following: "each party shall allow a fair and equal opportunity for the designated airlines of both parties to compete.... " the other case , also initiated by u.s. network airlines and labor unions , involves norwegian air international ( nai ) , which seeks to operate transatlantic flights to u.s. destinations . from the persian gulf carriers' hubs in dubai , abu dhabi , and doha , 80% of the world's population lives within an eight - hour flying distance . this has helped the persian gulf carriers to benefit from the growth in traffic between u.s. and european points and asia , especially the indian subcontinent . these carriers are also changing the landscape of international aviation . first , by connecting passengers via their hubs in the persian gulf , they alter global aviation connectivity and put pressure on major traditional international air travel hubs such as paris and frankfurt . in a wall street journal article , lufthansa said that its frankfurt hub has lost nearly a third of its market share on routes between europe and asia since 2005 , and that more than 3 million passengers now fly annually from germany to other points via persian gulf hubs . lufthansa said the market share erosion would affect its north american partners such as united airlines and air canada as it cuts flights and reduces connections for north american passengers who change planes in germany en route to points in europe , africa , and south asia . second , by acquiring stakes in or forming partnerships with other airlines , the persian gulf carriers are challenging the established global alliances while raising concerns over the role they would play in the existing network alliances . for example , etihad has been expanding its network and operations through investments in relatively small european airlines , as well as by purchasing equity in india's jet airways ( 24% ) and virgin australia ( 22% ) . it has acquired a 49% stake in the italian carrier alitalia , and also holds stakes in other "partner airlines. alitalia is a member of the skyteam alliance , whose members include delta and air france - klm . air berlin , in which etihad owns a 29.21% stake , is in the oneworld alliance , whose members include american airlines , british airways , and qatar airways . however , aside from the opposition from europe and the united states , the persian gulf carriers face issues that may challenge their future growth .