, no containment is assumed ) . it supports many plutonium missions . some involve pit production , such as pit fabrication ( casting pits from molten plutonium ) and purifying plutonium for use in pits ; others include preparing plutonium - 238 ( pu - 238 ) for use as a power source for space probes , disassembly of pits and conversion of their plutonium to plutonium oxide , and surveillance of pits to check their condition . techniques to increase space margin include removing contaminated gloveboxes , setting up a production line able to make 50 ppy with one shift per day and operating it with two shifts per day , and building a module for pu - 238 work . which combination of techniques would be most cost - effective ? building a module , whether at los alamos or elsewhere , for pu - 238 work would move a substantial amount of mar out of pf - 4 and would free up some space there as well . would that module be cost - effective , or would other alternatives provide enough space and mar margin so as to render the module unnecessary ? or would other advantages argue for building a pu - 238 module even if sufficient margin could be obtained by other means ? using calcium chloride instead of sodium chloride and potassium chloride in electrorefining would reduce the amount of plutonium to be recovered through aqueous processes ; near net shape casting would do so as well . both together may permit a reduction in the space needed for aqueous processes , and a reduction in mar as well , since aqueous processes are high in mar . alternatively , would it be cost - effective to recover the plutonium remaining in the salt and in the ingot of impure plutonium after electrorefining runs ? if not , these materials could be packaged and shipped to wipp . some techniques offer increases in both space margin and mar margin , such as removing contaminated gloveboxes . some techniques may increase margin at little or no cost , and may provide savings . using conservative rather than very conservative assumptions in calculating dose could reduce the need for costly physical changes , such as construction or procurement . the cost to remove contaminated gloveboxes is essentially zero , as the boxes would need to be removed at the end of pf - 4's life , and removing them would avoid the risk of contamination accidents that are costly and time - consuming to clean up . in sum , while arriving at a satisfactory package will require complex analyses , many options offer the potential to boost u.s. pit production capacity toward , if not to , the congressionally mandated capacity of 80 pits per year . terms are listed in the order in which they appear in table 2 . material at risk ( mar ) : the amount of material , in this case plutonium , acted upon by an event . it is measured in units of grams of pu - 239 equivalent , a standard used to compare the radioactivity of diverse materials .