finally , h.r . 956 would require military sex offenders entering the united states to register with the secretary of defense . , but not prostitution or human trafficking . 114-22 , as proposed in s. 178 and h.r . 181 , permits federal court - ordered interceptions in connection with investigations involving peonage ( 18 u.s.c . 1581 ( peonage ) , 1584 ( involuntary servitude ) , 1589 ( forced labor ) , and 1592 ( trafficking - related document misconduct ) ) . it also permits state prosecutors to engage in state court - supervised interceptions in cases of human trafficking , child pornography production , and child sexual exploitation to the extent that state law permits . the federal sex offender registration and notification act ( sorna ) , as the name implies , requires individuals convicted of a federal , state , tribal , foreign , or military sex offense to register with , and continue to provide current information to , state or tribal authorities ( jurisdictions ) in any location in which they live , work , or attend school . the reporting obligations apply to those convicted of qualifying sex offenses either before or after the enactment of sorna . sorna accomplishes its notification goal through the creation of a system which affords public online access to state and tribal registration information . all but the tax crime proposal appears in p.l . forfeiture is the confiscation of property based on its proximity to a criminal offense . confiscation may be accomplished either as a consequence of the property owner's conviction ( criminal forfeiture ) or in a civil proceeding conducted against the property in rem ( civil forfeiture ) . in either case , the proceeds from most federal forfeitures are deposited either in the justice department's asset forfeiture fund or the department of the treasury's forfeiture fund , and are available for law enforcement purposes . the forfeiture - triggering relationship between property and confiscation varies from one crime to another . forfeitures relating to financial crimes sometimes apply to property "involved in" the offense . for example , property "involved in" a money laundering transaction is subject to confiscation . in the case of human trafficking , property that constitutes the proceeds from , that was used , or that was intended for use , to commit or facilitate , a trafficking offense is subject to criminal and civil forfeiture . 296 suggested , p.l . 114-22 makes property "involved in" or proceeds "traceable to" a trafficking offense subject to criminal and civil forfeiture as well . defendants convicted of human trafficking offenses must be ordered to pay victim restitution . as a general rule , the attorney general may transfer forfeited property to pay victim restitution . 296 proposed , and p.l . 114-22 requires , such a transfer , without reducing or mitigating the defendant's restitution obligations . subject to annual appropriations , the attorney general may use the justice department asset forfeiture fund for informants' fees in drug and money laundering cases . the secretary of the treasury enjoys comparable authority with respect to the treasury fund , although apparently without the need for annual appropriations .