would that suffice ? techniques to increase space margin include removing contaminated gloveboxes , setting up a production line able to make 50 ppy with one shift per day and operating it with two shifts per day , and building a module for pu - 238 work . which combination of techniques would be most cost - effective ? in section 3112 of p.l . 113-291 , the carl levin and howard p. "buck" mckeon national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 , congress directed nnsa to demonstrate the capacity to produce at a rate of 80 ppy for at least a 90-day period in 2027 . accordingly , this report takes as its focus how to move toward that requirement . producing 80 ppy requires enough "material at risk" ( mar ) and space . doe defines mar as "the amount of radioactive materials … available to be acted on by a given physical stress," such as an earthquake . it is measured in units of pu - 239 equivalent ( pe ) . space is laboratory floor space available for plutonium operations . this report uses "margin" to measure "enough. margin is space available for pit production and supporting tasks minus space required for them to be able to produce at a specified rate , and mar available for pit production and supporting tasks minus mar required for them to do so . space and mar margins are separate ; both must be greater than zero to produce pits at the specified rate . mar and space also figure in analytical chemistry ( ac ) , a production support function . ac determines the composition of very small samples of plutonium . the radiological laboratory - utility - office building ( rluob ) , which was completed in 2010 and is near pf - 4 , is to house most ac . there are figures for available space and mar , but figures for space and mar required to produce 80 ppy have never been calculated rigorously , so this report cannot determine what options would provide enough margin for producing 80 ppy . nor can it address whether certain options could meet the 2027 date because time to implement them cannot be determined . instead , the report presents 16 options that increase the feasibility of producing at a rate of 80 ppy rate by 2027 . a decision will likely weigh such factors as margin , cost , schedule , throughput , and safety . this report shows options , many of which nnsa and its labs are pursuing , that can help move toward the ability to manufacture pits at a rate of 80 per year by 2027 . one option by itself will not suffice to meet that requirement . as a result , nnsa faces the prospect of assembling a package of options , and congress faces the prospect of evaluating , perhaps amending , and approving it . any package would need to optimize among such goals as margin , cost , worker safety , and throughput . questions and tradeoffs to consider in formulating a package include: mar reduction techniques include strengthening pf - 4 , using special containers for plutonium not in use , and removing contaminated gloveboxes .