others include the following . this tax credit , first enacted in 2004 , allows class ii and class iii railroads to reduce their taxes by 50% of the cost of track maintenance expenses incurred in a year , up to a limit established by multiplying the railroad's track mileage by $3,500 . the cost to the federal government in forgone tax revenue is estimated at $165 million to $202 million per year , which represents investments of roughly $300-$400 million annually . in contrast to the rrif program , this tax credit is targeted exclusively to short line railroads . it does not require the recipient to undertake an uncertain loan application process , with its attendant costs , or to comply with requirements for rrif loans , such as the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) and the rrif program's buy america policy . the tax credit expired on december 31 , 2016 . legislation to extend the credit has been introduced in the 115 th congress ( h.r . congress created a national infrastructure investment discretionary grant program within the office of the secretary of transportation in 2009 . this program , popularly known as the transportation investment generating economic recovery ( tiger ) grant program , made over $5 billion in grants through fy2017 . grants require a 20% match in urbanized areas ; in rural areas , no local match is required . although only governmental entities are eligible to receive grants , applications may represent public - private partnerships . passenger and freight rail infrastructure projects are eligible uses of tiger funds . freight rail projects ( including port improvement projects with a rail component ) have received nearly $810 million in grants ; short line railroad improvement projects have received more than $270 million . the program is very competitive , with several times as much funding requested each year as the $500 million typically available for grants . the tifia loan program , like the rrif program , was authorized by congress in 1998 . as of the end of calendar year 2016 , the program had assisted 56 projects with a total value of over $82 billion ; the federal value of credit assistance provided was more than $20 billion , at a direct cost of more than $1 billion ( representing the cost of the credit risk premium and the administrative costs of processing applications ) . eligible projects include "rail projects involving the design and construction of intercity passenger rail facilities or the procurement of intercity passenger rail vehicles" and "intermodal freight transfer facilities. although five intermodal projects involving rail freight have received assistance , no tifia loans have been approved for pure rail projects . congress appropriates funding to cover the credit risk premium cost of tifia loans , reducing the cost of loans to recipients . see table 2 for a summary of differences between the rrif and tifia programs . in the fast act , the 2015 surface transportation authorization legislation , congress authorized $1.435 billion through fy2020 to administer the program and cover the credit risk premium .