appendix b . obligations trends by psc product and service codes ( pscs ) are used "to describe the products , services , and research and development ( r&d ) purchased by the federal government. fpds sorts contract obligations into 33 overarching pscs: nine product codes , 23 service codes , and one r&d code . each of the nine product codes are represented by numbers from 1-9 . each of the service codes is represented by a single letter , and r&d is represented by the letter "a. . data reliability is essential to the utility of fpds . as gao has stated , "[r]eliable information is critical to informed decision making and to oversight of the procurement system. according to officials within the white house's office of federal procurement policy , "[c]omplete , accurate , and timely federal procurement data are essential for ensuring that the government has the right information when planning and awarding contracts and that the public has reliable data to track how tax dollars are being spent. if the data contained in fpds are not sufficiently reliable , the data may not provide an appropriate basis for measuring or assessing federal contracting , making policy decisions , or providing transparency into government operations . the result could be the implementation of policies that squander resources and waste taxpayer dollars . according to gao , "[f]ederal agencies are responsible for ensuring that the information reported in [the fpds] database is complete and accurate. since 1982 , the gsa has operated the system on behalf of the ofpp . today , fpds is the only government - wide system that contains all publicly available federal procurement data . fpds data are used by other federal - spending information resources , including usaspending.gov . almost from fpds's inception , the gao expressed concerns about the accuracy of the information in the database . omb attempted to eliminate many of the errors in fpds by introducing a successor system — the federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds ) , which began operation on october 1 , 2003 . fpds was to "rely less on manual inputs and more on electronic 'machine - to - machine' approaches. despite the systems update , gao said "[i]nformation in fpds can only be as reliable as the information agencies enter though their own systems. in september 29 , 2009 , testimony before the senate homeland security and governmental affairs subcommittee on contracting oversight , william t. woods , gao's director of acquisition and sourcing management , said the following about fpds information: our past work has found that federal contracting data systems , particularly fpds - ng , contain inaccurate data . fpds - ng is the primary government contracting data system for obligation data . despite its critical role , gao and others have consistently reported on fpds - ng data quality issues over a number of years . a 2012 gao report reiterated its finding that dod needs to "obtain better data on its contracted services to enable it to make more strategic workforce decisions and ensure that it maintains appropriate control of government operations.