section 107 of h.r . 5278 mandates that the territory's government designate a dedicated funding source for the board , which ( under the unified budget concept ) would increase federal revenues by an estimated $370 million . the net effect on the federal budget , therefore , is estimated to be zero . congress could also encourage the puerto rican government to pursue economic development strategies more in line with the island's economic comparative advantages rather than its tax advantages . puerto rico has long relied on special provisions in the u.s. tax code and in its own tax laws to stimulate investment . many of the tax advantages available to corporations or subsidiaries located in puerto rico , such as internal revenue code section 936 , which until it was phased out between 1996 and 2005 , essentially exempted income of u.s. firms operating in u.s. possessions , have reduced the u.s. treasury's receipts . the irs's unwillingness to challenge the creditability of puerto rico's act 154 taxes against u.s. tax liability provides indirect support for the island's public finances that is nearly offset by the loss of revenues foregone by the u.s. treasury . puerto rico's act 22 , which provides certain tax exemptions to wealthy persons who establish residency in puerto rico , may also affect u.s. treasury receipts . congress could also consider options that might address structural issues that may have hindered puerto rico's economic growth . congress could consider several regulatory policies , such as jones act restrictions on shipping between puerto rico and the mainland . congress has already waived jones act requirements for the u.s. virgin islands and could extend that waiver to puerto rico . several past studies have noted that labor participation rates for puerto rico are well below those on the mainland . representative duffy introduced h.r . 5278 , a revised version of h.r . 4900 , on may 18 , 2016 . the house committee on natural resources marked up h.r . 5278 on may 25 , 2016 . amendments agreed to include technical corrections , extensions of certain studies on the puerto rico government and economy , among others . the major provisions of the bill , however , were unaffected . the committee approved the measure on a 29-10 vote . the plan also calls on congress to grant a 10-year waiver of minimum wage increases for workers under the age of 25 . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) judged that the oversight board that h.r . 5278 would establish should be considered part of the federal budget according to the "unified budget concept" set forth in the 1967 president's commission on budget concepts . cbo estimated that operating the oversight board for puerto rico would cost $370 million over the period fy2017-fy2022 . some have suggested that social insurance may play a role in discouraging employment outside the underground economy . the economic and fiscal recovery working group plan of september 2015 proposes establishment of an earned income tax credit , a restructuring of the nutritional assistance program ( nap ; the island analogue to the food stamps / supplemental nutrition assistance program ) , and changes to public housing policies — all designed to bolster incentives to work .