1 would have restricted cash accounting for some businesses . it would have required certain partnerships , s corporations , and pscs that currently use the cash method to use the accrual method if their average gross receipts exceed $10 million . 2 in the 110 th congress and h.r . 4840 in the 108 th congress — proposed indexing the $5 million threshold to inflation . second , congress could simply increase the threshold to a level deemed appropriate . as proposed , no inflation adjustment would occur . however , one option would be to combine the two methods , increasing the threshold and adjusting for inflation . there are other reasons why cash accounting may be a less burdensome accounting method for small businesses . excluding the cash method of accounting can be a tool for congress to increase tax revenue and reduce the scope for tax planning and avoidance . many small businesses , regardless of legal structure , are more likely to require payment upon delivery of goods or when services are performed than to sell these items on credit . payment upon delivery or performance eliminates the need for tracking payments . in addition , unlike publicly traded companies that are required to issue public financial statements under the accrual method , most small businesses have no need to release public financial statements under the accrual or the cash method . as previously discussed , cash accounting is a departure from normal tax law according to the jct , and thus , a tax expenditure . cash accounting is a less accurate measure of economic income , as it does not require matching of income and expenses under the standard of "economic performance. acceleration or deferral of income and expenses under cash accounting might result in deferral of tax liability . the jct estimates that allowing cash basis accounting results in foregone revenue of $10.9 billion from fy2014 through fy2018 . cash accounting is one tax benefit for small businesses . various other provisions in the tax code support small business . for example , small businesses organized as pass through entities are subject to a single layer of taxation . small businesses organized as corporations benefit from a graduated corporate rate structure . in addition , the ability to expense certain otherwise depreciable assets is mainly targeted at small businesses and confers a tax deferral . this is considered a tax preference because expensing allows for full and immediate depreciation while the associated asset may have a useful life of many years . thus , taxable income is reduced in the year the asset is expensed . although taxable income will be higher in later years , the earlier deduction will allow the asset's owner to benefit from the time - value of money and realize a higher after - tax return on investment . another option is to increase the $5 million average gross receipts threshold , while leaving all other current rules in place that exclude certain businesses from using the cash method . over time , some businesses have been pushed over the $5 million threshold since the enactment of tra86 because it did not link the $5 million threshold to inflation .