appendix b . constitutional authority for federal regulation of the business of insurance pursuant to the commerce clause of the u.s. constitution , it is generally constitutional for the federal government to regulate the business of insurance because , according to relevant supreme court precedent and subsequent decisions explaining the controlling case , the business of insurance is commerce . it therefore may be regulated by the federal government in a manner coextensive with congress's constitutional authority to regulate any other economic activity with international and interstate aspects . the authority of the federal government to regulate the business of insurance as interstate commerce was not always clear . the supreme court in paul v. virginia had previously held that "[issuing] a policy of insurance is not a transaction of interstate commerce. the case challenged the constitutionality of a virginia law that made it more difficult for insurance companies incorporated outside of virginia to do business within the commonwealth . the insurance industry argued that the statute violated the dormant commerce clause , a legal concept rooted in the commerce clause of the constitution , which prohibits states from discriminating against foreign ( out - of - state ) corporations . the court found that the virginia law could not violate the commerce clause because insurance was not commerce . in making this determination , the court appeared to rely on a rather narrow and mechanical definition of commerce . these contracts are not articles of commerce in any proper meaning of the word . they are not subjects of trade and barter offered in the market as something having an existence and value independent of the parties to them... . they are not commodities to be shipped or forwarded from one state to another... . they are like other personal contracts between parties which are completed by their signature and transfer of consideration . such contracts are not inter - state transactions , though the parties may be domiciled in different states . subsequent supreme court decisions affirmed the holding in paul that the business of insurance was not commerce , and states relied upon this interpretation as they built regulatory systems for the business of insurance . seventy - five years after paul , in united states v. south - eastern underwriters associations , the supreme court ruled differently , holding that the business of insurance is , in fact , commerce and its interstate characteristics may be subject to federal regulation . the case , while not explicitly overruling paul v. virginia , abrogated the paul decision considerably . south - eastern underwriters presented the supreme court squarely with the question of whether congress had the power to directly regulate the insurance industry for the first time . in the case , the department of justice had brought suit against certain insurance companies for violations of the sherman antitrust act . the insurance companies that were accused of violating the antitrust laws argued that because the business of insurance was not interstate commerce , the sherman antitrust act did not apply to the activities of the companies .