it is not clear how epa may carry out this action . depending on how the reset is applied , there could be interest in its impact on public and private investment for biofuels . there might also be interest in the reset's potential impact on the transition of the program from mostly conventional biofuel to mostly advanced biofuel by 2022 . additionally , there may be interest about whether a reset could address the concerns expressed by some obligated parties ( i.e. , refiners ) about high compliance costs . going forward , reset implementation could have implications for the entire fuel industry , given the potential for epa to reduce the applicable volumes or maintain ambitious targets . the administrator has not granted a biomass - based diesel waiver . waiver authority is intended , in part , to assist epa with implementation of the rfs . the rfs is a complex and highly technical policy initiative . if a waiver is issued , it expires after one year ( 60 days for the biomass - based diesel waiver ) , unless the administrator renews the waiver . additionally , starting in 2016 , the waiver provision allows for a modification of applicable volumes . the waivers and the modification of applicable volumes are described in further detail in the following sections of this report . it deals with multiple sectors of the economy and requires the use of some advanced renewable fuel production technologies that have yet to reach maturity . the rfs also incorporates thresholds for greenhouse gas emission reduction . this complexity is exacerbated by multiple stakeholders with differing perspectives on what the rfs should accomplish , how it should be implemented , and whether it should exist , which leads to debate about the rfs and its future . congressional debate about the rfs is expected to continue with special attention to how epa administers the program . as congress continues its oversight of the rfs , it may be useful to understand the rfs waiver authority granted to epa . this report discusses the waiver provisions of the rfs , including the modification - of - applicable - volumes ( "reset" ) section . epact05 established a renewable fuel program requiring that transportation fuel sold or introduced into commerce in the united states , on an annual average basis , contain a specified amount of renewable fuel . the rfs mandate , as amended by eisa , calls for the consumption of 9 billion gallons of total renewable fuel in 2008 , ascending to 36 billion gallons in 2022 , with epa determining the annual volume after 2022 . the statute identifies four categories of renewable fuels that must be used to meet the mandate . however , these four categories can be aggregated into two major categories: unspecified biofuel ( mainly cornstarch ethanol ) and advanced biofuel ( eg , cellulosic biofuel , biomass - based diesel , and other advanced biofuels ) , shown in figure 1 . over time , the growth in the rfs transitions from biofuels that , in practice , are made mostly from food and feed crops to biofuels made from nonfood and nonfeed crops .