several factors can affect labor force participation . demographics such as age and gender have played an important role in the recent decline in the overall labor force participation rate . this report provides an overview of the employment - population ratio . it opens with a discussion of its value as a labor market indicator , noting its key features and limitations . this is followed by an examination of long - term and recent trends . the contribution of demographic and economic factors to recent patterns is explored at the close of the report . several features of the employment - population ratio make it an attractive employment indicator for labor market analysis . in addition to providing a long - term view of the employment - population ratio , the figure illustrates the indicator's cyclical nature . sharp declines in the ratio coincide with each of the 10 recessions shown in the figure , followed by growth during expansions . between 1960 and 2000 , the employment - population ratio more than recovered from each economic downturn and followed an upward trend . after peaking at 64.7% in april 2000 , however , the trend reversed . although the employment - population ratio continued to rise during periods of expansion , its gains were not sufficient to offset the large declines that occurred during the 2001 and 2007-2009 recessions . consequences of the new employment - population ratio trend depend importantly on what is driving the change , and whether recent developments are permanent or transitory . some information about drivers and the permanency of the new trend can be gained from a look at the employment - population ratio's principal components: the unemployment rate and the labor force participation rate . figure 3 compares the standard employment - population ratio ( for individuals 16 and older ) and the employment - population ratio for the prime - age population . there are some similarities in employment - population ratio patterns across the two groups of workers: the employment - population ratios for both prime - age individuals and the full adult population declined sharply during the most recent recession and for a short period thereafter and have been slow to approach their pre - recession values . the trends differ in notable ways as well: prime - age workers' employment - population ratio fell by 4.9 percentage points — a 6.1% loss — between november 2007 ( 79.7% ) and december 2009 ( 74.8% ) , when its decline came to a halt . over the same period , the employment - population ratio for the full adult population fell by 4.6 percentage points ( a 7.3% decline ) . figure 2 plots the employment - population ratio ( blue line , left axis ) and the unemployment rate ( red line , right axis ) from january 1995 to april 2015 . it shows that , until recently , movements in the employment - population ratio mirrored those of the unemployment rate , falling with a rising unemployment rate and rising as the unemployment rate falls . the close tracking of the employment - population ratio and unemployment rate can be seen until the beginning of 2010 .