it is clearly a balance . within the department of homeland security there are components that long predated the department of homeland security . and so what we are not asking components to do is to all act and behave together . they are distinct cultures... . but what we are asking and expecting our component leadership to do is participate with us in a more strategic approach to promote greater efficiency in how we operate , how we conduct ourselves , particularly in our budget process and in our acquisitions . the memorandum laid out four areas of initial focus . the first was to bring together senior leaders of the department in two groups: a senior leaders council to discuss "overall policy , strategy , operations and departmental guidance," and a deputies management action group ( dmag ) to "advance joint requirements development , program and budget review , acquisition reform , operational planning , and joint operations. the second area was to make improvements to the departmental management processes for investments . specifically , incorporating strategic analysis and joint requirements planning into the annual budget development process , directing the dmag to develop and facilitate a component - driven joint requirements process , and reviewing and updating the dhs acquisition oversight framework . the third was developing a stronger strategy , planning , and analytic capability within the office of policy . the fourth was to improve coordination of cross - component operations . bipartisan support for these reforms was shown in several hearings in the 113 th congress , and the fy2015 homeland security appropriations act included funding requested for this initiative . both house and senate appropriations committee reports included language supportive of the department's managerial reorganization . several of the action items included in the memorandum were completed in 2014 , such as the establishment of a cost analysis division in the office of the chief financial officer in may 2014 . the role of this division is to ensure life - cycle cost estimates are part of major acquisition plans . dhs also completed development of a southern border and approaches campaign plan — a four - year strategic framework for joint operations securing the southern border of the united states . the department is continuing to seek legislation to authorize certain aspects of the proposed reforms , and to help make permanent other changes . this was further compounded by inherited financial management problems that existed at several major legacy components , including the coast guard , fema , and elements that formed ice . the department tried to develop its own financial management system in - house through a project known as "emerge2," but failed . a second attempt was made to implement a department - wide system through contracting with outside developers under the transformation and systems consolidation initiative , or tasc . after gao ruled that dhs had improperly awarded the initial $450 million contract — the latest result from a series of protests and legal challenges that had delayed the project — the award was cancelled and the project shelved .