appendix a . scripts of parliamentary language used on the floor parliamentary language used when a member gives notice of a resolution in most cases , a member ( other than the majority leader of minority leader ) must first give notice of his or her intention to offer the resolution . the parliamentary language used in such situations is generally some variation of the following: member: mr. speaker , pursuant to clause 2 ( a ) ( 1 ) of rule ix , i rise to give notice of my intent to raise a question of the privileges of the house . the form of my resolution is as follows: ( at this point , the member reads the resolution in its entirety , although he or she may also ask unanimous consent to dispense with the reading . ) speaker: under rule ix , a resolution offered from the floor by a member other than the majority leader or the minority leader as a question of the privileges of the house has immediate precedence only at a time designated by the chair within two legislative days after the resolution is properly noticed . the resolution presents a question of the privileges of the house . pursuant to clause 2 of rule ix , the gentlelady ( or gentleman ) from ( member's home state ) and the gentlelady ( or gentleman ) from ( member's home state ) each will control 30 minutes . the chair recognizes the gentlelady ( or gentleman ) from ( member's home state ) . appendix b . questions of the privileges of the house ( 105 th congress - 113 th congress [1995-2014] ) . pending that designation , the form of the resolution noticed by the gentlelady ( or gentleman ) from ( member's home state ) will appear in the record at this point . the chair will not at this point determine whether the resolution constitutes a question of privilege . that determination will be made at the time designated for consideration of the resolution . ( w ithin two legislative days the member will be notified of the date and time when he or she should rise to offer the resolution. ) parliamentary language used when a member offers the resolution when the resolution is offered , the parliamentary language used in such situations is generally some variation of the following: member: mr. speaker , i rise to a question of the privileges of the house and offer the resolution previously noticed . speaker: the clerk will report the resolution . ( the c lerk reads the resolution. ) does the gentlelady ( or gentleman ) from ( member's home state ) wish to present argument on the parliamentary question whether the resolution presents a question of the privileges of the house ? member: yes . speaker: the gentlelady ( or gentleman ) from ( member's home state ) is recognized for that purpose . member: i rise today to ... ( in the event that a member's remarks deviate from the subject of a question of the privileges of the house , the speaker pro tempore will remind the member to confine his or her remarks to the question . )