statements by u.s . permanent representative to the u.n. nikki haley decrying human rights violations nonetheless suggest some continuity with the previous administration's burundi policy ( see " u.s. policy and aid " ) . the obama administration framed its approach to burundi through two stated policy initiatives: an effort to prevent "mass atrocities" abroad , and a principled opposition to efforts by some african presidents to abrogate or circumvent legally established term limits . some members of congress have supported such policies with regard to burundi and more broadly . in the 114 th congress , the house passed h.res . 310 , which called on the obama administration's interagency atrocities prevention board to pay "particular regard" to certain "troubled countries," including burundi , and the house and senate each passed resolutions urging respect for constitutional term limits in neighboring democratic republic of congo ( drc ) . the 115 th congress may assess the future prospects for , effectiveness of , and resources devoted to such policies . in advance of the 2015 elections , the cndd - fdd split over the issue of nkurunziza's candidacy , with several leading figures ( including top military commanders ) signaling objections . large demonstrations erupted in the capital , bujumbura , and other cities following nkurunziza's nomination in april 2015 . after a failed coup attempt by senior military officers in may 2015 , the government purged the army of suspected opponents . holdovers from the largely tutsi pre - civil war army were reportedly initial targets , followed by suspected ruling party dissidents , including officers who had fought alongside the president in the cndd - fdd rebellion . security services arrested , attacked , and intimidated protesters , civil society , and independent media , which the government accused of supporting the coup . an ensuing election boycott by most opposition parties cleared the way for dominance by nkurunziza and the cndd - fdd , which won 77 out of 100 directly - elected legislative seats . despite supporting the boycott , an opposition coalition between long - time former governing party uprona ( tutsi - led ) and the hutu - led former rebel fnl party won 21 seats . after the fnl decided to take up its seats , leader agathon rwasa — previously seen as a key nkurunziza rival — became the deputy speaker of parliament , further dividing the opposition . all but three of the uprona representatives elected under the coalition declined to participate in the government . political and security conditions have deteriorated since the election . armed groups , some led by cndd - fdd dissidents , have emerged , stoking state repression of the opposition and embroiling the country in a low intensity conflict . elements in both government and opposition camps have reportedly used violence , including extrajudicial killings , assassinations , grenade attacks , and torture . on the pro - government side , the internal security forces have reportedly worked with the cndd - fdd youth wing , the imbonerakure ( "those who see far" ) , to target perceived political opponents .