similar to s. 697 , h.r . 2576 would prohibit epa from taking into account information on cost and other factors not directly related to health or the environment in conducting risk evaluations , give epa a mandate and framework to conduct such risk evaluations , and remove the "least burdensome requirements" language from tsca's risk management provisions for chemicals found to present an unreasonable risk . 2576 would instead require that chemical rules be cost - effective , unless epa determines that additional or different requirements are necessary to protect against the identified risk . 2576 and referred to the full committee on energy and commerce . the committee ordered the bill to be reported on june 3 , 2015 , on a 47-0 vote , with one abstaining , and the bill was reported on june 23 , 2015 . the bill , as amended , was debated on the house floor and passed the house on june 23 , 2015 , on a 398-1 vote . 2576 address many of the same topics and provisions of tsca , with important similarities and differences in their approaches . for additional discussion of select issues addressed by the bills , see crs report r44434 , proposed amendments to the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) in the 114th congress: h.r . 2576 compared with the senate substitute amendment , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . s. 697 generally takes a more comprehensive and detailed approach to amending tsca . it would add , among other new definitions , a definition of the term "safety standard" to mean a standard that ensures , without taking into consideration cost or other nonrisk factors , that no unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment , including to any relevant "potentially exposed or susceptible population," will result from exposure to a chemical substance under the conditions of use . epa would be required to establish a risk - based screening process to identify chemicals as high or low priorities for assessment , and then to conduct assessments on the high priority chemicals , with at least 25 assessments initiated by five years after enactment ( along with other deadlines ) . chemicals found not to meet the safety standard would have to be regulated ; epa would not be limited to the "least burdensome requirements" as under current tsca , although it would have to take into account costs , benefits , and alternatives . s. 697 would make changes to the new chemical provisions , including imposing new duties on epa to review such chemicals against the safety standard . new provisions on policies and guidance , including pertaining to use of science , would also impose duties on epa . based on amended reporting requirements , epa would be required to identify chemicals that have not recently been in u.s. commerce as "inactive. 2576 would make fewer changes to tsca . unlike s. 697 , it would not change tsca's new chemical provisions . nor would it add a detailed new prioritization scheme for evaluating chemicals ( although epa could likely continue its existing prioritization efforts , the tsca work plan for chemical assessments ) .