this is a valid concern . even in instances where a risk and needs assessment instrument is shown to have no inherent racial biases , the application of an instrument can have a disparate racial effect . however , while there might be concerns about racial bias in risk and needs assessment instruments , it is argued that utilizing actuarial rather than clinical ( i.e. what explains these contradictory results ? in short , algorithms used in risk assessment cannot meet both propublica's ( minimizing error rates ) and northpointe's ( predictive parity ) definition of fairness . researchers at stanford university who reexamined the data from propublica's study found the following: within each risk category ( "low" and "medium - high" ) , the proportion of defendants who reoffend was approximately the same regardless of race ( northpointe's definition of fairness ) . the overall recidivism rate for black defendants was higher than for white defendants ( 52% compared to 39% ) . black defendants were more likely to be classified as medium - or high - risk ( 58% compared to 33% ) . black defendants who did not reoffend were more likely to be assessed as medium - or high - risk than white defendants who did not reoffend ( propublica's criticism of the algorithm ) . these researchers note that [i]f the recidivism rate for white and black defendants is the same within each risk category , and if black defendants have a higher overall recidivism rate , then a greater share of black defendants will be classified as high risk . and if a greater share of black defendants are classified as high risk , then ... a greater share of black defendants who do not reoffend will also be classified as high risk . if northpointe's definition of fairness holds , and if the recidivism rate for black defendants is higher than for whites , the imbalance propublica highlighted will always occur . another study reexamined the data propublica used in their research and found no evidence of racial bias in the compas instrument . among several criticisms of propublica's methodology , the authors of the study assert that propublica did not test for bias within accepted standards ( i.e. , the standards for educational and psychological testing ) . their examination of the data , conducted using published standards , showed that black defendants were more likely to be rearrested , both for any reason and for violent offenses ; low - , medium - , and high - risk black defendants were more likely to be rearrested ( both for any arrest and for violent arrests ) than similarly assessed white defendants ; compas was a good predictor of both types of arrest and it predicted outcomes equally well across both races ; compas did not predict outcome differently across groups of black and white defendants ; in other words , a given compas score translated into roughly the same likelihood of recidivism , regardless of race .