egypt has been authorized to benefit from cff arrangements since 1979 . other countries , such as turkey , greece , and portugal , have used cff to finance purchases of the f - 16 fighter jet . the defense security cooperation agency ( dsca ) and the defense finance and accounting service ( dfas ) administer foreign military sales using cff . if a foreign government has insufficient u.s. military aid ( which is nearly always foreign military financing or fmf ) to meet its cff commitments for a given fiscal year ( perhaps due to appropriations decisions by congress ) , then the cash flow amount must be paid from the purchaser's national funds . if a foreign government cancels an existing cff defense contract , funds may be provided to u.s. defense contractors from what is known as a "termination liability reserve. foreign governments must set aside a portion of their annual cff funds to contribute to the reserve . advocates of cff have touted it for facilitating the sale of technologically advanced but high - cost u.s. weapons systems , particularly u.s. fighter aircraft , to friendly foreign nations . for example , presidential authorization of cff for israel has enabled israel to purchase u.s. combat aircraft such as the f - 15 and f - 16 , and more recently the f - 35 joint strike fighter , while still continuing purchases of other critical u.s. - supplied weapons . however , at times some lawmakers and observers have criticized the use of cff , arguing that as a policy tool , it effectively commits congress to future appropriations in order to pay for previously purchased , high - priced defense systems . over 20 years ago , former representative and house appropriations chairman david obey remarked that , "it is , in fact , going to be virtually impossible for this committee to consider reductions in aid to that region [middle east] over the next decade if those military contracts continue to be signed because of the principle of so - called cash flow financing. in the early 1980s , the then - general accounting office ( now u.s. government accountability office or gao ) published a report on u.s. foreign assistance to israel in which it stated , "cash flow financing implies a strong commitment by the united states to provide large amounts of credit in future years , limiting , in our view , the prerogatives of the congress in authorizing the u.s. security assistance program. the 1979 peace treaty between israel and egypt led to a dramatic expansion in what had previously been limited amounts of u.s. foreign assistance to egypt . in 1979 , president carter authorized cff for egypt , and the reagan administration and successive administrations have continued the practice , though recent announcements by the obama administration ( see below ) indicate the practice will be discontinued in fy2018 .