, audits ) . in other words , recovered amounts of the credit are subtracted from erroneous claims of the credit to calculate improper payments . 112-240 ; atra ) . in addition , as with the research on the health implications of the eitc , researchers are unable to decouple the income effects of the credit from its labor supply effects . while it remains unclear how credits may improve student achievement , these studies indicate that the eitc ( and the child tax credit ) may contribute to the improvement of academic achievement among low - income children . research has also found that the eitc also improves the college attendance rates of low - income high school students . one recent study found that among low - income high school seniors , an increase in their family's eitc by $1,000 increases their chances of enrolling in college by 1.3 percentage points . ( depending on what proportion of a family's eitc is spent on college costs , the authors note that their estimated impact of the eitc on college enrollment may be comparable to traditional student aid. ) in contrast , the authors note that their research suggests there is no effect on enrollment decisions from tax refunds received in the spring of the high school student's junior year . hence the timing of when the credit is received — around the time college enrollment decision are being made — may be a large factor in why the credit influences enrollment decisions . in their comprehensive survey of the eitc literature , nichols and rothstein note that "[t]aking all of the estimates together , these is robust evidence of quite large effects of the eitc on children's academic achievement and attainment , with potentially important consequences for later - life outcomes. the authors continue , "[t]he effects are large enough to demand an explanation for the relatively small estimates of effects of family income on student outcomes that come from non - eitc settings. these studies are illustrative of relatively recent eitc research that examines a broader impact of retributive policies on social outcomes , like health and education . while the eitc was not designed as a health or education benefit , current research suggests that it may improve the health and educational achievement of low - income populations . tax burdens are the percentage of a taxpayer's income that is paid in taxes . in this report , the terms tax burdens , effective average tax rates , and average tax rates are used interchangeably . the eitc changes the distribution of the tax burden across taxpayers at different income levels . data from the tax policy center ( tpc ) , summarized in table 3 , illustrate the impact of the eitc on the average tax rates paid by tax units in different income classes . tpc estimates that in 2017 , the eitc lowered the average tax rates for tax units with income below $100,000 , providing the greatest benefit to those with income between $20,000 and $40,000 .