the first , p.l . 113-164 , the fy2015 continuing appropriations resolution , provided funding from october 1 , 2014 , through december 11 , 2014 , at fy2014 levels , less an across - the - board ( atb ) rescission of 0.0554% ( unless otherwise specified ) . congress enacted two additional crs , p.l . prior to enactment of p.l . 113-235 , the government had been funded with three continuing resolutions ( crs ) . the bill proposed that $60 million be appropriated to carry out icdbg funded activities . in addition , the bill proposed language that would have continued to prohibit entitlement communities from transferring cdbg funds to another community in exchange for other funds , credits , or non - federal considerations . the senate bill would have also prohibited the awarding of cdbg funds to for - profit entities for economic development projects unless a project had been evaluated in accordance with guidelines outlined under the rules governing the program . like its house counterpart , the bill also proposed a general provision ( section 232 ) that would have prohibited hud from using any funding provided in the bill to terminate the designation of a community as an entitlement community for the purposes of cdbg eligibility . the bill proposed language supporting the continued conversion of section 108 loan guarantees to a fee - based structure and recommended a loan guarantee ceiling of $300 million . this was consistent with the administration's request and the house - passed bill . the final fy2016 appropriations law , consistent with the language included in the house bill , appropriated $3.060 billion for cdbg activities , including $60 million for icdbg activities and $3 billion for cdbg formula allocations . this is consistent with the amount proposed by the house . the law does not include a provision included in the senate committee bill that would have transferred the icdbg activities to the indian housing block grant account . the act limits the percentage of funds grantees may use for planning and administrative expenses to no more than 20% of a grantee's cdbg allocation . the act includes a provision , consistent with language included in the senate committee bill , that continues to prohibit entitlement communities from transferring cdbg funds to another community in exchange for other funds , credits , or non - federal considerations . the act also includes a provision included in the senate committee bill prohibiting the awarding of cdbg funds to for - profit entities for economic development projects unless a project is evaluated in accordance with guidelines outlined under the rules governing the program . in addition , the act authorizes a loan commitment ceiling of $300 million for section 108 loan guarantees . the act includes a general provision allowing certain communities in a designated rural promise zone or distressed county as defined by the appalachian regional commission to be considered in compliance with the requirement that cdbg funding must be spent to principally benefit low and moderate income families .