app. , inspector general act of 1978 , §3 ) . the farm credit administration consists of three members ( no more than two may be from the same political party ) who serve six - year terms . a member may not succeed himself or herself unless he or she was first appointed to complete an unexpired term of three years or less . a member whose term expires may continue to serve until a successor takes office . one member is designated by the president to serve as chair for the duration of the member's term . the federal communications commission consists of five members ( no more than three may be from the same political party ) who serve five - year terms . when a term expires , a member may continue to serve until the end of the next session of congress , unless a successor is appointed before that time . the president designates the chair . the federal deposit insurance corporation board of directors consists of five members , of whom two — the comptroller of the currency and the director of the consumer financial protection bureau — are ex officio . the three appointed members serve six - year terms . an appointed member may continue to serve after the expiration of a term until a successor is appointed . not more than three members of the board may be from the same political party . the president appoints the chair and the vice chair , with the advice and consent of the senate , from among the appointed members . the chair is appointed for a term of five years ( 12 u.s.c . the president also appoints the inspector general , with the advice and consent of the senate . app. , inspector general act of 1978 , §3 ) . the federal election commission consists of six members ( no more than three may be from the same political party ) who may serve for a single term of six years . when a term expires , a member may continue to serve until a successor takes office . the chair and vice chair , from different political parties and elected by the commission , change each year . generally , the vice chair succeeds the chair . the federal energy regulatory commission , an independent agency within the department of energy , consists of five members ( no more than three may be from the same political party ) who serve five - year terms . when a term expires , a member may continue to serve until a successor takes office , except that such commissioner may not serve beyond the end of the session of the congress in which his or her term expires . the president designates the chair . the federal labor relations authority consists of three members ( no more than two may be from the same political party ) who serve five - year terms . after the date on which a five - year term expires , a member may continue to serve until the end of the next congress , unless a successor is appointed before that time . the president designates the chair .