an identical resolution , h.j.res . 44 , was introduced and referred to the house committee on government oversight and reform on april 14 , 2015 . however , neither committee advanced or considered the measure within the 30-day congressional review period mandated under the district's home rule act . ( emphasis added ) . the statute is phrased in clear mandatory terms: a proposed amendment is precluded by law from going on the ballot through the charter - amending procedure of section 303 if the proposed amendment would "enact any law or affect any law with respect to which the council may not enact ... under the limitation specified in "sections 206.01-03 . for reasons we detail below it is precisely these limitations , reserving to congress , among other things , the authority to change the laws governing the role played by congress and the president in the district's budget that in the considered judgment of this office , preclude using the charter amendment procedures , including the placement on a ballot for the electorate for the proposed amendment . likewise , it is our view that under those express limitations , congress or a court reviewing the merits of the legal issue would find the amendment to be outside the scope of the charter amending process in section 303 and also contrary to other federal laws , those found in title 31 of the u.s. code . these objections were reiterated and expanded upon in an april 8 , 2014 legal analysis by the office of attorney general . the gao analysis articulated the following objections to the proposed charter amendment: the act is null and void because the council exceeded its authority in enacting it and because it violates federal law . the act violates the limitations of section 602 ( a ) ( 3 ) because it changes the functions of the united states and because it is not restricted in its application exclusively or to the district . the act violates the limitations of section 603 ( a ) because it changes the longstanding roles and procedures of congress , the president , and other federal entities in the formation of the district's total budget . the act violates the limitations of section 603 ( e ) by using the ratification process to establish local budget autonomy . on may 18 , 2015 , the district court in wrenn v. district of columbia issued a preliminary injunction against the district that prohibits it from enforcing the requirement that applicants demonstrate they have a good reason or cause for needing a license to carry concealed as doing so would violate rights protected under the second amendment . however , on june 29 , 2015 , this preliminary injunction was overturned by the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit , therefore allowing dc to enforce this concealed carry provision pending a final ruling from the court . on may 6 , 2014 , district of columbia councilman david grasso introduced the reproductive health non - discrimination amendment act of 2014 ( b20-790 ) ( rhndaa ) .