although most of the programs are not statewide , some are . are garnishment limits too high ? should cse agencies provide work - related services to noncustodial parents ? is there inequitable treatment among various categories of nonpaying noncustodial parents ? as stated above , in fy2014 , $114.8 billion in child support arrearages was owed to families receiving cse services , but less than 7% ( $7.6 billion ) of those arrearages was actually paid . a significant accumulation of child support arrearages is a concern because it means that children and families are not getting a large amount of income to which they are entitled , income that could significantly improve their well - being . in fy2014 , 63% of noncustodial parents with arrearages continued to make payments on their child support arrearages . one interpretation of this information is that many noncustodial parents want to fulfill their child support obligations but simply have too many financial obligations ( eg , food and shelter for themselves ) to cover with their limited incomes ; therefore , they may always be a little or a lot behind in meeting their child support obligations . there is widespread agreement that preventing the buildup of unpaid child support through early intervention rather than traditional enforcement methods is essential to the future success of the cse program . some commentators point out that such a proactive approach to addressing the huge accumulation of child support arrearages may help many low - income children whose parents are unemployed or underemployed . over the years , the ocse has proposed the following procedures for reducing high child support arrearages: update child support guidelines regularly and simplify child support order modification . modify orders to ensure that child support obligations stay consistent with the noncustodial parent's ability to pay . use automated systems to detect noncompliance as early as possible and contact noncustodial parents soon after a scheduled child support payment is missed . use automated systems to detect changes in circumstances and intervene early to review and modify child support orders . update child support guidelines to recognize modern family dynamics and realities ( eg , shared custody , incomes of custodial parents ) . consider creative ways to promote regular payment of current support , even if it means "compromising" uncollected child support arrearages , to bring the noncustodial parent back to consistently paying current child support payments . with regard to the last proposal , in an effort to reduce or eliminate child support debt some states use debt compromise , a process whereby a state forgives a portion or all of the child support debt owed to the state by the noncustodial parent in exchange for the noncustodial parent's participation in specified employment , training , or other activities . research from the university of wisconsin suggests that reduction of large child support debts may increase child support payments . the study suggests that higher arrears , in themselves , substantially reduce both child support payments and formal earnings for the noncustodial parents and families that already likely struggle in securing steady employment and coping with economic disadvantage .