cosponsors do not sign the bill . does it have bipartisan appeal ? building a coalition of support for a proposal can take time , and some amount of bipartisan cooperation may be required to secure final passage . measures that are limited in scope but have broad bipartisan appeal are often brought to the house floor under suspension of the rules , a parliamentary procedure that limits debate and amendment and requires a supermajority vote of two - thirds for a measure to pass . what are the budgetary implications ? the house places a number of restrictions on legislation with budgetary consequences . for instance , if a proposal adds to the federal deficit , it may be subject to a point of order on the chamber floor for violating congressional budget rules ( many of which are codified in the congressional budget act of 1974 ) . support for a measure may also hinge on how its costs are paid for . members may agree about the merits of a bill but disagree with how its provisions are funded . should companion legislation be introduced in the senate ? to become law , a bill or joint resolution must pass both houses of congress in identical form ( the same text and bill number ) and be signed by the president . for this reason , house sponsors sometimes encourage allies in the senate to introduce identical or similarly worded legislation to expedite bicameral consideration . companion bills might also attract wider public and member attention to the issues addressed in the legislation . is the measure best introduced at the beginning , in the middle , or toward the end of a congress ? timing the introduction of a measure can be important . comprehensive legislation is likely to require a great deal of time to work through , both in committee and on the floor . an early introduction will give the house more time to examine the measure's provisions . advantage might also be gained by being the first to address an issue . those who move first tend to attract media attention and may be seen by their colleagues as exercising leadership in that particular policy area . strategic delay is another option . this approach might provide more time for an individual or committee to study the issue and build support for a preferred solution . to be sure , many bills do not follow a linear ( or "regular order" ) legislative process — introduction , consideration in committee , and arrival on the floor for further debate and amendment . for example , a legislative proposal that had languished in committee might suddenly be taken up because it deals with an unfolding crisis or emergency . there is no house rule that introduced bills and resolutions must be prepared by the house office of the legislative counsel , but the office plays an important role by providing members and staff , at their request , with drafts of legislation . use of the office by members and staff is nearly universal . its staff attorneys are both subject matter specialists and experts in legislative drafting , and they focus almost exclusively on policy issues within their areas of expertise .