however , there was no such coup . according to the opposition leader , khaleda zia , sheikh hasina has been "buying" the loyalty of the armed forces by approving military procurement deals and promotions . tensions between security forces and the government over corruption and low wages led members of a paramilitary unit , known as the bangladeshi rifles ( bdr ) , to mutiny in february 2009 , killing 74 people , including 57 officers . according to the state department , the court has carried out five executions from 2010 through 2016 . four of those individuals were ji members ; the other one was from the bnp . in may 2016 , the ict executed matiur rahman nizami , the amir ( or president ) of ji . the rapid action battalion ( rab ) is an elite unit of bangladesh's security forces that has been implicated in a number of human rights violations . the al government has reportedly used accusations of terrorist activity , seen by many as unfounded , to mobilize the rab against elements within the opposition , including ji members . ( the bnp also reportedly used the rab as a "death squad" when it controlled the government. ) amnesty international found that , of the 20 disappearance cases it investigated between 2012 and 2014 , several seemed to suggest that the police or rab were involved . in the first nine months of 2016 , between 118 and 150 individuals were killed in "crossfire" incidents — which are deaths resulting from purported shootouts between suspects and security forces . the rab , allegedly , was responsible for 34 of those deaths . observers say that the "crossfire" incidents are likely extrajudicial killings . in january 2017 , the narayanganj district and sessions court "sentenced 26 people , including 16 rab members , to death for their role" in the killing of a local politician . however , such convictions are rare . bangladesh has of late been clamping down on the country's media , according to observers . in 2016 , two editors — who worked for leading newspapers in the country — were charged with several crimes , including criminal defamation and sedition . since 2013 , the staff of one of those newspapers , proth o m alo , has faced more than 100 criminal cases . freedom of expression has come under increasing threat from islamist extremists in bangladesh — as evidenced by the recent killing of dr. avijit roy , a secular blogger who was bangladeshi - american . he was killed by an islamist extremist group and , in the view of one analyst , roy's murder , and others like it , "have opened a new front between the values of syncretic , secular , humanistic bangladeshi culture against a rigid worldview incapable of allowing difference to coexist. although bangladesh was founded as a secular country , some say that islamist extremists have discredited secularism in the eyes of many bangladeshis . "the politics has been turned into the secular versus the islamists," according to abdur rashid , who is a retired army major general and the executive director of the institute of conflict , law and development studies in dhaka .