appendix a . composition of election committee hong kong's chief executive election ordinance ( ceeo ) allocates the 300 seats in each of the four sectors stipulated in annex i of the basic law into 35 subsectors as indicated in the tables below . also listed is the number of registered voters — with corporate and individual voters in separate columns — for each subsector in the 2011 election committee elections , according to the hong kong's electoral affairs commission . appendix b . legislative council members: pro - establishment and pan - democrat factions the 70 members of hong kong's legislative council are frequently divided into two factions — the pro - establishment members and the pan - democrats . the table below provides a list of the current legco members and their party affiliation , divided into pro - establishment and pan - democrat members . appendix c. functional constituency members by constituency and electorate the table below lists the 35 functional constituency members of hong kong legislative council by the official name of the functional constituency they represent . the house committee on foreign affairs subcommittee on asia and the pacific held a hearing entitled , "hong kong: a broken promise ? on december 2 , 2014 . the senate committee on foreign relations subcommittee on east asian and pacific affairs held a hearing entitled , "evaluating the impact of the 'umbrella movement,'" on december 3 , 2014 . in addition , the congressional - executive commission on china ( cecc ) held a hearing entitled , "the future of democracy in hong kong," on november 20 , 2014 . on february 27 , 2015 , representative christopher smith introduced the hong kong human rights and democracy act ( h.r . the act reaffirms u.s. interest in "the continued vitality , prosperity , and stability of hong kong," and "support for democratization" as "a fundamental principle of united states foreign policy. it also states that it is u.s. policy "to support the establishment by 2017 of a genuine democratic option to freely and fairly nominate and elect the chief executive of hong kong.…" the provisions of h.r . the delimitation of the various sectors of the nominating committee , the organizations in each sector eligible to return nominating committee members and the number of such members returned by each of these organizations and how to return them shall be prescribed by an electoral law enacted by the hong kong special administrative region in accordance with the principles of democracy and openness . corporate bodies in various sectors shall , on their own , elect members to the nominating committee , in accordance with the number of seats allocated and the election method as prescribed by the electoral law . members of the nominating committee shall discharge their duties in their individual capacities . a person seeking nomination by the nominating committee may be recommended jointly by not less than 120 members and not more than 240 members of the nominating committee . each member may recommend only one person . the nominating committee shall , from the persons recommended as aforesaid , nominate two to three persons seeking nomination to become chief executive candidates by secret ballot . leung].