114-22 addresses both . 114-22 addresses three victim - related matters . it expands the rights of those victimized by federal crimes , trafficking and otherwise ; creates a domestic trafficking victims fund fed by special assessments levied against trafficking offenders ; and adjusts federal forfeiture law to ensure victim restitution . 114-22 bolsters existing law enforcement tools in the area of bail , wiretapping , and sex offender registration . the federal sex offender registration and notification act ( sorna ) , as the name implies , requires individuals convicted of a federal , state , tribal , foreign , or military sex offense to register with , and continue to provide current information to , state or tribal authorities ( jurisdictions ) in any location in which they live , work , or attend school . the reporting obligations apply to those convicted of qualifying sex offenses either before or after the enactment of sorna . existing federal law states that an individual charged with a federal offense should be released on his own recognizance , unless the magistrate is convinced that certain conditions must be imposed to insure individual or community safety or to insure the appearance of the accused at subsequent judicial proceedings . the government may seek pretrial detention of an accused charged with a crime of violence , a federal crime of terrorism , or with commercial sex trafficking . 114-22 amends the definition of "a crime of violence" for these purposes to include any of the human trafficking offenses . in the investigation of certain serious federal and state crimes , the electronic communications privacy act , sometimes referred to in part as title iii , authorizes federal and state law enforcement officials to engage in court - supervised surreptitious interception of telephone , face - to - face , or electronic communications . the list of these federal crimes includes commercial sex trafficking ( 18 u.s.c . 1591 ) , but not any of the other offenses outlawed in the slavery , peonage , and forced labor chapter of the federal criminal code . the list of state crimes includes murder , robbery , kidnaping , etc. , but not prostitution or human trafficking . 114-22 permits federal court - ordered interceptions in connection with investigations involving peonage ( 18 u.s.c . 1581 ( peonage ) , 1584 ( involuntary servitude ) , 1589 ( forced labor ) , and 1592 ( trafficking - related document misconduct ) . it also permits state prosecutors to engage in state court - supervised interceptions in cases of human trafficking , child pornography production , and child sexual exploitation , to the extent that state law permits . sorna accomplishes its notification goal through the creation of a system which affords public online access to state and tribal registration information . the system allows the public to determine either where a particular sex offender lives , works , and attends school , or the names and location of sex offenders who live , work , or attend school within a particular area . sorna requires jurisdictions to satisfy minimum standards for the information they collect and maintain .