neither are coal's . the choice of fuel resources , fuel extraction processes , transport options , and power plant technologies for both coal and natural gas returns significant differences in life - cycle ghg emissions estimates . effective policy considerations would require appropriate specificity and detail . due to its potency as a ghg , the amount of methane lost to the atmosphere during the production and transport of fossil fuels can greatly impact the life - cycle ghg emissions estimates for power generation . in order to fully understand the climate implications of switching from coal to natural gas in the domestic power sector , improvements are required in the measurement and validation of emissions inventories ( i.e. , for both coal production and natural gas production ) . effective policy considerations would require strategies to attain these inventory improvements . see figure 1 . ) the methodology of this report is as follows: 1 . the report begins by assessing the ghg emissions associated with the burning of various fossil fuels on a per - unit - of - energy basis , focusing on natural gas and coal . the report then proceeds with an analysis of the ghg emissions associated with the burning of these fuels in various types of electric power generating facilities . the report then expands its analysis beyond the combustion of fuels at the power plant to incorporate an lca of the fuels' entire supply chains ( i.e. , inclusive of the ghg emissions released during the fuels' extraction , processing , and transport , as well as the transmission of electricity ) . the findings are offered to help inform the larger conversation . congressional interest in u.s. energy policy has focused in part on ways through which the united states could secure more economical and reliable fuel resources both domestically and internationally . for some , the issue of energy policy centers on economic growth and domestic job creation ; for others , it focuses on national security ; for still others , it calls attention to public health , safety , and environmental concerns . for many , the recent increase in domestic natural gas production has been a panacea , and they have advocated strongly for policies to accelerate this development . while natural gas production in the united states is driven primarily by market forces , a number of recent proposals by congress and the obama administration have either explicitly or implicitly supported its development . they include , but are not limited to , the following: bills that would amend various provisions in the tax code to incentivize natural gas production and use ( including h.r . 905 , s. 344 , and s. 948 ) ; bills that would support increased natural gas production on federal lands ( including h.r . 2295 , s. 15 , s. 411 , s. 1196 , and s. 1276 ) ; bills that would streamline the approval , permitting , and / or construction of natural gas infrastructure ( including h.r . 1487 , s. 33 , s. 280 , s. 1210 , s. 1228 , and s. 1581 ) ; bills that would transfer federal natural gas regulation , guidance , or permitting to state authorities ( including h.r .