the essa made few changes to the title i - a formulas . changes to the title i - a formulas under the essa will take effect beginning in fy2017 . the esea was comprehensively reauthorized by the every student succeeds act ( essa ; p.l . 114-95 ) on december 10 , 2015 . this report provides final fy2015 state grant amounts under each of the four formulas used to determine title i - a grants . for a general overview of the title i - a formulas see crs report r44164 , esea title i - a formulas: in brief , by [author name scrubbed] . for a more detailed discussion of the title i - a formulas , see crs report rl34721 , elementary and secondary education act: an analytical review of the allocation formulas , by [author name scrubbed] . under title i - a , funds are allocated to leas via state educational agencies ( seas ) using four different allocation formulas specified in statute: basic grants , concentration grants , targeted grants , and education finance incentive grants ( efig ) . annual appropriations bills specify portions of each year's title i - a appropriation to be allocated to leas and states under each of these formulas . in fy2015 , about 45% of title i - a appropriations were allocated through the basic grants formula , 9% through the concentration grants formula , and 23% through each of the targeted grants and efig formulas . once funds reach leas , the amounts allocated under the four formulas are combined and used jointly . for each formula , a maximum grant is calculated by multiplying a "formula child count," consisting primarily of estimated numbers of school - age children in poor families , by an "expenditure factor" based on state average per pupil expenditures for public k - 12 education . in some formulas , additional factors are multiplied by the formula child count and expenditure factor . these maximum grants are then reduced to equal the level of available appropriations for each formula , taking into account a variety of state and lea minimum grant provisions . in general , leas must have a minimum number of formula children and / or a minimum formula child rate to be eligible to receive a grant under a specific title i - a formula . some leas may qualify for a grant under only one formula , while other leas may be eligible to receive grants under multiple formulas . under three of the formulas — basic , concentration , and targeted grants — funds are initially calculated at the lea level . state grants are the total of allocations for all leas in the state , adjusted for state minimum grant provisions . under efig , grants are first calculated for each state overall and then are subsequently suballocated to leas within the state using a different formula . final fy2015 grants included in this report were calculated by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) . the percentage share of funds allocated under each of the title i - a formulas was calculated by crs for each state by dividing the total grant received by the total amount allocated under each respective formula .