112-25 ) as amended . the president's fy2019 budget request proposed increasing caps on defense discretionary base budget authority by $84 billion ( 15% ) to $660 billion in fy2020 and by $87 billion ( 15% ) to $677 billion in fy2021 . it also proposed defense funding for overseas contingency operations ( oco ) totaling $73 billion in fy2020 and $66 billion in fy2021 . should we bankrupt our country in the process ? lawrence korb , an assistant secretary of defense during the reagan administration , said the bca has "affected defense capability somewhat," but noted congress has blunted the law's impact by increasing the caps and by exempting from the restrictions funding for overseas contingency operations ( oco ) , allowing the department of defense ( dod ) to use such funds for base - budget activities . attempts to fully repeal bca have not succeeded . lawmakers have enacted increases to the defense and nondefense sending caps for each year from fy2013 to fy2019 . the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l . 112-25 ) contained several measures intended to reduce deficits by a total of at least $2.1 trillion from fy2012 to fy2021 , with approximately half of the savings to come from defense . a key component of the legislation set limits on discretionary budget authority to reduce projected spending by $0.9 trillion over the period . as backup budgetary enforcement measures , the bca also required at least $1.2 trillion in additional savings if a congressionally mandated panel , the joint select committee on deficit reduction , did not reach agreement on a deficit - reduction plan . the spending limits ( or caps ) apply separately to defense and nondefense discretionary budget authority . the caps are enforced by a mechanism called sequestration , which automatically cancels previously enacted spending by an amount necessary to reach prespecified levels . the defense discretionary spending limits apply to national defense ( budget function 050 ) but not to funding designated for overseas contingency operations ( oco ) or emergencies . because the committee did not agree on a plan to reduce the deficit , the bca required steeper reductions to the discretionary spending limits each year from fy2013 through fy2021 ( see table 1 ) . congress has repeatedly amended the budget control act of 2011 ( p.l . 112-25 ) to revise the discretionary spending limits . table 1 depicts the limit s as amended ( in bold and shaded ) for the defense category , which includes discretionary programs of the national defense budget function ( 050 ) and excludes funding for overseas contingency operations ( oco ) or emergencies . the bca stipulates that certain discretionary funding , such as appropriations designated as overseas contingency operations ( oco ) or emergency requirements , allow for an upward adjustment of the discretionary limits . oco funding is therefore described as "exempt" from the discretionary spending limits . the bca does not define what constitutes oco funding . instead , it includes a requirement that congress designate oco spending on an account - by - account basis , and that the president subsequently designate the spending as such .