broadbandusa . based on the expertise acquired from administering the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l . 111-5 ) broadband stimulus program ( specifically the broadband technology opportunities program ) , the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) established an information and best - practices resource available to communities seeking to develop broadband public - private partnerships . broadbandusa offers online and in - person technical assistance to communities ; hosts a series of regional workshops around the country ; and publishes guides and tools intended to help communities address problems in broadband infrastructure planning , financing , construction , and operations across many types of business models . broadbandusa is also developing a community connectivity initiative , an online tool that provides a planning and assessment framework that can be used by local communities seeking to accelerate broadband access . the federal government has also affected municipal broadband through broadband funding programs . while municipal broadband projects are locally directed and funded , the federal government has supported these efforts by helping to finance some of the middle - mile fiber networks that municipal networks can interconnect with . a major funding vehicle for middle - mile fiber networks was the $7 billion broadband stimulus program established by the arra . arra awards were made in fy2009 and fy2010 , and projects are completed or in the final stages of completion . going forward , the arra broadband programs have concluded and no more funding will be awarded . currently , there are three ongoing programs at the rus that provide funding for broadband infrastructure ( although at funding levels significantly less than what was provided in the arra broadband programs ) . these are farm bill broadband loans and loan guarantees ( $20.6 million loan level in fy2016 ) , telecommunications infrastructure loans and loan guarantees ( $690 million loan level yearly ) , and community connect grants ( $10.4 million in fy2016 ) . while local governmental entities are eligible to apply for these programs , funding has tended to go to private providers . the other major existing federal vehicle for funding broadband infrastructure is the connect america fund ( caf ) . while rus grants and loans are used as up - front capital to invest in broadband infrastructure , the caf provides ongoing subsidies to keep the operation of broadband networks in high - cost areas economically viable for providers . four bills ( s. 240 , s. 597 , h.r . 6013 ) were introduced , and one draft measure ( h.r.__ ) was released , in the 114 th congress that addressed the municipal broadband debate . provisions in these measures range from those that restrict states and localities from enacting laws that prohibit public ( municipal ) broadband ( s. 240 , h.r . 6013 ) to those that prevent the fcc from preempting current or future state and local laws that prohibit municipal broadband ( s. 597 , h.r . 1106 ) and in the case of the discussion draft ( h.r .