appendix a . key definitions the following definitions are described in the context of how they are discussed in this report ; they are not meant to be precise legal or finance definitions . adoption — the acceptance of ifrs as the accounting standard for publicly listed firms . arm ' s length — parties to a transaction that are independent and on equal footing without any special relationship or having another agreement on the side . capital allocation — the process of allocating investments across borders , business units , or departments to maximize returns on the investments . convergence — convergence might be described as a process by which a jurisdiction incorporates specific standards from international financial reporting standard ( ifrs ) or modifies some or all of its generally accepted accounting principles ( gaap ) to more closely resemble ifrs . conservatism p rinciple — in accounting , under the conservatism principle , if the probability of loss in value of an asset is high , then the loss should be recognized . conversely , if the likelihood of a gain is low , then the gain should not be recognized . similar application is required for recognizing estimates and profit ( loss ) . due process — due process could be described as a principle of fairness in all legal matters that aspires to safeguard both private and public rights against unfairness . from this basic principle of fairness , many decisions including procedural and substantive rights and process are determined . cost of capital — one of many possibilities is that increased interest from investors can lower a firm's cost of raising capital either in debt or equity . in simple terms , a firm could pay a lower interest rate when issuing debt or issue fewer shares of stock at a higher price due to increased demand . listed firms — firms that are listed on a stock exchange ( eg , new york stock exchange [nyse] , national association of securities dealers automated quotations [nasdaq] ) . market liquidity — market liquidity is defined as assets that can be easily purchased or sold without significant change in the assets' price . principles - based accounting standards — they provide a framework for decisionmaking but do not provide specific guidance or a list of detailed rules to follow , and they are widely used to describe ifrs . rules - based accounting standards — they rely on specific guidance and a list of detailed rules on how accounting principles should be applied to economic events . they are widely used to describe u.s. gaap . venue shopping — choosing an accounting standard that reflects the firm's performance in the best light possible to investors and regulators . appendix b . acronym . these different options are discussed in detail below . congress and the sec could allow firms to choose either u.s. gaap or ifrs . allowing firms the choice of accounting standards would give firms the flexibility to be more responsive to the desires of the investing community ; in other words , let market demand determine which standard becomes pervasive in the united states .