reorganization plan no . 4 brought together environmental agencies from within the department of commerce , such as the national weather service , and from other departments and agencies , such as the department of the interior's bureau of commercial fisheries and the national science foundation's national sea grant program . the reorganization was intended to unify the nation's environmental activities related to oceanic and atmospheric research and to provide a systematic approach for monitoring , analyzing , and protecting the environment . one of noaa's main challenges is related to this diverse mission of science , service , and stewardship . a review of research undertaken by the agency found that "the major challenge for noaa is connecting the pieces of its research program and ensuring research is linked to the broader science needs of the agency. noaa's administrative structure has evolved into five line offices: the national ocean service ( nos ) ; national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) ; office of oceanic and atmospheric research ( oar ) ; national weather service ( nws ) ; and national environmental satellite , data , and information service ( nesdis ) . in addition to noaa's five line offices , program support ( ps ) provides cross - cutting services for the agency and includes the office of marine and aviation operations ( omao ) , corporate services , the office of education , and facilities . the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2015 ( p.l . 113-235 ) provided $5.441 billion for noaa . president obama has requested $5.975 billion for noaa's fy2016 budget . this amount is $533.7 million ( 9.8% ) more than the fy2015 enacted appropriation level . on june 3 , 2015 , the house passed the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations act , 2016 ( h.r . the house - passed bill would provide a total of $5.169 billion for noaa in fy2016 . this amount is $271.7 million ( 5.0% ) less than the fy2015-enacted appropriation level and $805.4 million ( 13.5% ) less than the administration's fy2016 request . on june 16 , 2015 , the senate committee on appropriations reported the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations act , 2016 . the senate committee - reported bill ( s.rept . 346 would restrict funding to further implement coastal and marine spatial planning and ecosystem - based management components of the national ocean policy developed under executive order 13547 . on july 19 , 2010 , president obama signed executive order 13547 , which established a national policy for stewardship of the ocean , coasts , and great lakes . the president established the national ocean council ( noc ) to coordinate and implement the national ocean policy . on april 16 , 2013 , the noc released the national ocean policy implementation plan , which describes specific federal actions needed for enacting the policy . the administration has presented the national ocean policy as a planning framework that operates within existing authorities . some have questioned whether the administration's proposal to implement such a policy is a new regulatory program and whether the administration has the statutory authority to take these actions .