in four instances the president has vetoed reconciliation legislation . once reported , the conference report must be approved by both chambers . conference reports are privileged and debatable in both the house and senate , but they may not be amended . reconciliation directives include submission deadlines to the committee ( s ) . these have been set for various dates and so have allowed for varying periods of time for the development of legislative language by committees . while the budget resolution may direct a committee to report reconciliation legislation that would achieve a certain budgetary goal over a specified period , the budget act does not impose any additional requirements on committees . the directed committees , therefore , employ the same rules and practices used otherwise in their legislative work . if a reconciliation directive instructs a committee to report legislation increasing revenues by a specific amount , that amount would be considered the minimum by which the legislation should increase revenues . conversely , if a reconciliation directive includes instructions to decrease revenue , that amount would be considered the maximum by which revenue should be decreased . there is a statutory limit on the total amount of debt that the federal government may incur at any time . in the event that congress determines the debt limit to be too high or too low , legislation can be enacted to alter it . the reconciliation process is one of three methods congress has utilized used to consider debt limit legislation over the last four decades , although it is the least frequently used , being employed only four times . once a committee has developed legislative language in response to its reconciliation instructions , the committee will then meet to mark up and vote whether to report that language . the committee may vote to report the language favorably or unfavorably , the latter meaning that although it satisfied its directive , the committee did not support the language . although committees have often responded to their directives early and on time , there is no procedural mechanism to compel committee action prior to the date specified in the budget resolution or even at all . committees have responded to their directive after the date specified , with no impact on whether the submitted language could be included in a reconciliation bill , if it had not yet been reported by the budget committee . a late response has also not had an impact on whether the resultant legislation could be considered as a reconciliation bill . in other words , late or incomplete responses to a reconciliation directive have not caused a measure to lose its privileged status as a reconciliation bill . once a reconciliation measure has been reported , it is placed on the appropriate calendar of the house or senate and becomes available for consideration by the full chamber . as with all legislation , any differences in reconciliation legislation as passed by the two chambers must be resolved before the bill can be sent to the president for the final stage of the process .