each of these statutory provision types is discussed below . in many instances , congress has mandated that appointees to particular leadership positions meet specified requirements . some statutory qualification provisions , like those for the administrator of the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , require that appointees have certain experience , skills , or educational backgrounds that are associated with competence . other qualification provisions address a variety of characteristics , such as citizenship status , residency , or , for the purpose of maintaining political balance on regulatory boards , political party affiliation . congress has , however , used qualification provisions selectively ; most executive branch positions do not have statutory qualifications . statutory qualifications associated with a particular position might affect the selection and senate consideration of nominees . the administration's selection process might be limited to a smaller group of potential candidates for the position than would otherwise be the case . on one hand , such a limitation might yield a nominee who has the profile envisioned when the office was established . on the other hand , the statutory requirement might prevent the nomination of an individual who did not meet one or more of the qualifications , but is otherwise well - suited for the post . should the president elect to nominate an individual whose qualifications are perceived to fall short of the statutory requirements , the senate must then determine whether to take note of that fact and whether to confirm the nominee nonetheless . most boards and commissions are required , by statute , to have a political balance among their members ( eg , no more than three of five , or five of seven , may be from the same political party ) , so the white house has often negotiated over nominations to these positions with leaders of the opposition party in congress . these negotiations involve both political and policy considerations , especially when the board or commission is involved in areas that , at the time , may be particularly sensitive . this has sometimes resulted in a packaging process in which the president has submitted several nominations together for positions on a particular board or commission , and the senate has then considered and confirmed them as a group . some advice and consent positions have statutorily set terms of office , typically periods of four to seven years . such a term may be set to coincide with the presidential election cycle , as it does for the director of the office of personnel management ( opm ) , or to overlap administrations , as it does with the director of the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) . as discussed below , fixed terms are common for members of collegial boards and commissions , and the terms of the members of such a body are often designed to expire in a staggered manner . even though they have statutorily established terms of office , appointees to many fixed - term positions serve at the pleasure of the president . this means that incumbents can be removed by the president at any time for any reason ( or no stated reason ) , as is the case with most presidential appointments .