what congressional actions might bolster such efforts ? has the u.s. sale and granting of major military supplies to pakistan over the past 15 years substantively improved that country's counterterrorism capabilities ? what role can and should congress play in oversight of this program ? pakistan has a leading role in south asia's security interactions . any ( further ) stiffening of the official pakistani perspective on the peace process with neighboring rival india — perhaps to include intransigence on the major issue of kashmir and / or restrictions on commercial relations — could be harmful to the already hamstrung development of south asian regionalism , as well as hamper a u.s. policy that seeks to better link india with central asia . geopolitically , it could boost new delhi's motivation to develop iran's chabbahar port , bypassing pakistan for access to central asia . this could risk u.s. opprobrium by engaging in mutually beneficial ties with a u.s. adversary , as well as reinforce the rivalry between india and china , pakistan's main international benefactor . this has been among the most important u.s. foreign policy efforts in the post - 9 / 11 period . senior u.s. officials commonly emphasize that the united states has vital interests at stake in u.s. engagement with pakistan . these are related to regional and global terrorism ; efforts to stabilize neighboring afghanistan ; nuclear weapons proliferation ; pakistan - india tensions and conflict ; democratization and human rights protection ; and economic development . as a haven for numerous islamist extremist and terrorist groups , and with the world's fastest growing arsenal of nuclear weapons , pakistan is at the top of many governments' international security agendas . the may 2011 revelation that al qaeda founder osama bin laden had enjoyed apparently years - long and undisturbed refuge inside pakistan led to intensive u.s. government scrutiny of the bilateral relationship , and sparked much congressional questioning of the wisdom of providing significant u.s. foreign assistance to a government and nation that may not have the intention and / or capacity to be an effective u.s. partner . long - held doubts about islamabad's commitment to core u.s. interests deepened over the course of 2011 , with u.s officials more often describing pakistan's military and intelligence services as too willing to distinguish among islamist extremist groups , maintaining links to afghan insurgent and anti - india militant organizations operating from pakistani territory as a means of promoting what pakistan perceives to be its security interests . several most - wanted enemies of the united states still are widely believed to reside in pakistan , among them al qaeda chief ayman al - zawahiri , afghan taliban chief mullah omar , and afghan insurgent haqqani network leader sirajuddin haqqani . in june 2014 , after years of u.s. government prodding , the pakistani military launched major offensive operations against islamist militant groups sheltered in the country's remote federally administered tribal areas ( fata ) abutting afghanistan . the action has buoyed u.s. officials' confidence in pakistan's cooperation with international efforts to stabilize afghanistan . the u.s. government has sought to help develop pakistan's economy and boost the effectiveness of its security forces .