a final decision is expected by the end of june . the central issue in the case is whether the affordable care act ( aca ; p.l . 111-148 , as amended ) gave authority to the u.s. department of the treasury to make premium tax credits available to eligible individuals in every state ( including the district of columbia ) or just the states that chose to establish their own health insurance exchanges ( state - based exchanges , or sbes ) . additionally , hhs administers the federally facilitated exchanges . health i nsurance e xchanges ( also referred to as marketplaces ) , whether state - based or federally facilitated , are expected to operate within the parameters established under the aca and its implementing regulations , such as adhering to the annual and special open enrollment periods set in regulations . however , the aca and its implementing regulations give exchanges some discretion over certain operational decisions , particularly with respect to how exchanges interact with insurers . private h ealth i nsurers offering coverage through exchanges must ensure that the coverage they offer complies with state and federal regulations and all exchange - related requirements , whether set by hhs or the exchange . states , in general , have the authority to regulate their private health insurance markets . depending on the state , the authority may be more or less under the control of the state legislature . with respect to exchanges , a state that elects to operate an exchange must do so within established exchange parameters . these parameters are included in statute and described in regulations and guidance issued by hhs . the supreme court is expected to issue a decision in king v. burwell by the end of its term in june 2015 . figure 1 and table 1 show selected activities currently required to be carried out by one or more of the stakeholders and the time frame in which the activities are expected to occur . these activities are not dependent on the court decision ; instead , they represent the current status of regulations , guidance , and other time - sensitive rules that stakeholders may consider if and when they decide to respond to the decision . in this case , insurers sell health insurance plans for purchase by consumers and employers . the market for health insurance , like other forms of insurance , is regulated primarily at the state level . however , the federal government has expanded its role in the regulation of this industry , most recently with the enactment and continuing implementation of the aca . the aca itself contains multiple provisions that impose requirements on most of these stakeholders , create new stakeholders ( eg , exchanges ) , and link requirements across stakeholders . the stakeholders are identified below , and their role in or potential to affect the private health insurance market is briefly described . to the extent any of the stakeholders respond to the court's decision , their motivation and ability to do so is subject to a variety of parameters , including requirements and flexibilities under current law and the actions taken by other stakeholders .