amended h.r . 2051 , the agriculture reauthorizations act of 2015 , included provisions to reauthorize mandatory price reporting , the u.s . grain standards act , and the national forest foundation act , three laws that were set to expire on september 30 , 2015 . on september 21 , 2015 , the senate passed the bill by unanimous consent , and the house passed the senate - amended bill on september 28 by voice vote . the agriculture reauthorizations act of 2015 ( p.l . 114-54 ) was signed into law on september 30 , 2015 . a simple reauthorization of mandatory reporting would amend the termination date in section 260 of the agricultural marketing act of 1946 ( 7 u.s.c . however , like past reauthorizations , livestock industry stakeholders suggested changes that were intended to improve mandatory reporting and to address issues that emerged since the last reauthorization . several of the issues are discussed below . during the nearly 15 years that lmr has been in place , livestock producers , processors , and industry analysts have come to rely on the ams mandatory price reporting data to make marketing decisions . many livestock contracts between buyers and sellers are based on prices reported under lmr . in october 2013 , during the government shutdown when most federal operations came to a standstill , meat packers continued to report lmr data to ams , but mandatory daily and weekly reports were not published . in addition to the loss of price information for producers , the gap in lmr data affected the futures market because the cme group uses lmr data to settle live hog contracts . cme also uses lmr - reported cattle carcass characteristics to settle live cattle futures contracts . cme has noted that lmr price data are trusted and that few other public alternatives to the lmr data exist . during the reauthorization debate , livestock stakeholders urged usda to deem mandatory reporting an "essential" service in order to avoid the loss of livestock price information if another government shutdown , such as in october 2013 , occurs due to a lapse in appropriations . many contend that any gap in mandatory reporting is disruptive to livestock markets . although the house - passed version ( h.r . 2051 ) contained such a provision , it was not included in the final bill . the nppc recommended that ams add another purchase category for swine called negotiated formula purchase . under this purchasing arrangement , a producer negotiates the sale of swine on a lot - by - lot basis , but the price will be determined by formula at a later date . nppc believes this represents a negotiated sale , but under ams reporting it is classified as a swine or pork market formula purchase because there is no established price at the time of purchase . negotiated purchases , or cash sales , are often viewed as the true measure of price discovery , but negotiated purchases as a share of total hog sales has dropped to less than 4% .