types of plans offered through the exchange . it briefly addresses funding for the exchanges . currently , these user fees are the primary source of funding for ffes ; they are estimated to account for 70% of all ffe funding in fy2018 . , unspecified ) appropriation for hhs grants to states to support the planning and establishment of exchanges . for each fiscal year between fy2011 and fy2014 , the hhs secretary determined the total amount that was made available to each state for exchange grants . however , none of these exchange grants could be awarded after january 1 , 2015 , and exchanges were expected to be self - sustaining beginning in 2015 . exchanges may generate funding to sustain their operations , including by assessing fees on participating health insurance plans . to raise funds for the exchanges it oversees , hhs assesses a monthly fee on each health insurance issuer that offers plans through an ffe or sbe - fp . the fee is a percentage of the value of the monthly premiums that the issuer collects on exchange plans in a given state , and hhs updates the percentage each year through rulemaking . ( see table 2 . ) most sbes also assess user fees on issuers participating in their exchanges , often 1% - 3% of premiums or a monthly flat fee . states also can use other state funding to support their exchanges , and some have become ffes or moved to the federal it platform due to challenges and / or costs of maintaining their exchanges . user fees also have been assessed on issuers participating in shop exchanges . however , in the 2019 payment notice , hhs announced that the fees won't be assessed for issuers selling plans under the new model of reduced federal it support ( see " changes in shop exchange web portal functionality " in this report ) . for more information about certain issues addressed in or relevant to this report , see the following crs reports: crs report r45146 , federal requirements on private health insurance plans crs report r44425 , health insurance premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies crs report r44438 , the individual mandate for health insurance coverage: in brief appendix a . exchange types by state appendix b . the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l . 111-148 , as amended ) requires health insurance exchanges ( also known as marketplaces ) to be established in every state . aca exchanges are virtual marketplaces in which consumers and small businesses can shop for and purchase private health insurance coverage and , where applicable , be connected to public health insurance programs ( eg , medicaid ) . exchanges are intended to simplify the experience of obtaining health insurance . they are not intended to supplant the private market outside of the exchanges but rather to provide an additional source of private health insurance coverage options . this report provides an overview of key aspects of the health insurance exchanges . the report includes summary information about the major functions of exchanges and how they are structured .