others take the opposite view . finding offsets , either in mandatory programs or by raising taxes to offset increases above bca caps , could be problematic . if there is an impasse over funding levels , congress may turn to a cr or consolidated appropriations act , which , if vetoed , could create the prospect of a government shutdown . underlying the debate about the transfer of defense base budget funds to oco - designated accounts is the issue of whether current defense bca caps reflect an acceptable level of defense spending . while some policymakers and observers argue that maintaining current bca caps would be inadequate in light of ongoing conflicts and threats , others contend that defense spending levels would remain at historically high levels in real terms and that defense planning has largely accommodated bca caps . in response to a question from senate armed services committee chair john mccain , the joint chiefs of staff testified that maintaining the current bca defense caps would jeopardize the ability of dod to carry out the national military strategy . in a 2014 report to congress , dod outlined how it would meet "sequester" caps for the fy2015-fy2019 period . dod's proposal concentrated cuts on weapon system modernization , primarily by delaying or stretching out procurement plans ; shielding early - stage research , development , and testing and evaluation ; and generally cutting service readiness programs more heavily than other non - readiness related operation and maintenance activities . a variety of other approaches have been proposed for meeting bca limits , ranging from reducing force structure ( the size of military forces ) to trimming military compensation to achieving "efficiencies" in back - office administrative activities . the administration is concerned that congress has been unwilling to adopt some of its proposals for lower pay levels and changes in military health care benefits , a new round of base closures , and retiring some military systems , such as a - 10 ground attack aircraft . such debate about the appropriate level of defense spending , and how a particular level can be reached , is not unusual . while the proposed transfer of base funds to oco could avoid that decision , temporarily , some observers would argue that consensus on levels over the next several years of the bca decade would help dod make balanced decisions about matching resources with the pace of achieving modernization , readiness , and compensation goals , as well as re - evaluating the goals themselves . over the past 14 years of war , decisions about what to consider war funding as opposed to normal day - to - day expenses have shifted . both congress and the administration have adopted different definitions at different points in time . dod broadened its definitions in 2006 , which were then constrained by omb in 2009 .