first , h.r . 656 ) congresses . a competing bill , the law enforcement access to data stored abroad ( leads ) act ( s. 512 , h.r . 1174 ) , which covers , among other things , the extraterritorial reach of ecpa orders , was first introduced in the 113 th congress and has been re - introduced in the 114 th congress . section 2 of s. 356 , h.r . 699 would amend section 2702 ( a ) ( 3 ) of ecpa to provide that both an ecs and an rcs would be prohibited from voluntarily disclosing to a governmental entity the content of any communication and any non - content information such as subscriber information or other communications metadata . this blanket prohibition is subject to various exceptions under existing law , including required disclosure to the government under section 2703 . section 3 of these bills contains three major reforms to accessing the content of communications under ecpa . first , it would place both an ecs and rcs under the same legal requirements . second , they would eliminate the current 180-day rule found in section 2703 ( a ) . again , under section 2703 ( a ) as currently written , emails stored for 180 days or less are subject to the warrant requirement ; while emails either opened or stored for more than 180 days are subject to less stringent process . these bills would eliminate this temporal requirement ; thus , access to emails would require a warrant no matter how long they have been stored . third , this section would remove the interpretive difficulty of determining whether a particular communication is in "electronic storage. recall that federal courts have disagreed whether an opened email was being held in "electronic storage. this bill expands the scope of protection to include not only messages in "electronic storage," but also those "stored , held , or maintained by the provider. this would appear to bring any opened emails under the warrant umbrella . as under existing law , the government would be authorized to access non - content information , described as a "record or other information pertaining to a subscriber or customer," with a warrant , a section 2703 ( d ) order , consent of the subscriber , or upon a formal written request if the crime being investigated is telemarketing fraud . the government would be authorized to access basic subscriber information — such as name , address , local and long distance telephone records , and means and source of payment — with a warrant , a section 2703 ( d ) order , or with lesser process such as a federal or state administrative subpoena , a grand jury , a trial , or a civil discovery subpoena . accordingly , the letter argued , the sec has historically relied on authority under section 2703 ( b ) to obtain the contents of electronic communications from service providers during its investigations . the legislation would foreclose the sec from doing so in the future , thereby weakening its investigative authority .