114-113 as enacted . the total fy2016 request for the supreme court , $88.2 million , was contained in two accounts: ( 1 ) salaries and expenses of $78.2 million and ( 2 ) care of the building and grounds of $10.0 million . the house committee - reported level totaled $88.0 million and the senate committee - reported level totaled $88.4 million . 114-113 provides a total of $88.4 million . this court , consisting of 12 judges , has jurisdiction over and reviews , among other things , certain lower court rulings on patents and trademarks , international trade , and federal claims cases . the fy2016 budget request was $33.8 million . the house committee - reported bill would have provided $33.2 million . the senate committee - reported provided $33.8 million , which was the total provided by p.l . this court has exclusive jurisdiction nationwide over civil actions against the united states and its agencies and officers , certain civil actions brought by the united states arising out of import transactions , as well as the administration and enforcement of federal customs and international trade laws . the fy2016 request was $20.2 million . the status is summarized in table 1 . this overview is followed by a section on prior - year actions and funding . the report then provides an overview of judiciary accounts . appropriations for the judiciary comprise approximately 0.2% of total budget authority . two accounts that fund the supreme court ( the salaries and expenses of the court and the expenditures for the care of its building and grounds , which are the responsibility of the architect of the capitol ) together total approximately 1% of the total judiciary budget . the rest of the judiciary's budget provides funding for the lower federal courts and related judicial services . the largest account , approximately 73% of the total fy2016 enacted level , is the salaries and expenses account for the u.s. courts of appeals , district courts , and other judicial services . this covers the "salaries of circuit and district judges ( including judges of the territorial courts of the united states ) , justices and judges retired from office or from regular active service , judges of the u.s. court of federal claims , bankruptcy judges , magistrate judges , and all other officers and employees of the federal judiciary not otherwise specifically provided for," and "necessary expenses of the courts. two other large accounts provide funds for defender services ( 13.7% ) and court security ( 7.4% ) . the remaining judiciary budget is divided among the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit ( 0.5% of fy2016 enacted ) , u.s. court of international trade ( 0.3% ) , fees of jurors and commissioners ( 0.6% ) , administrative office of the u.s. courts ( 1.2% ) , federal judicial center ( 0.4% ) , u.s . sentencing commission ( 0.2% ) , and judicial retirement funds ( 1.8% ) .