mandate . according to title 10 , u.s. code , section 153 ( b ) , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff is required annually to assess the risks associated with accomplishing the national military strategy . this requirement was introduced in the fy2000 national defense authorization act , which specified that the chairman was to "submit to the secretary of defense a report providing the chairman's assessment of the nature and magnitude of the strategic and military risks associated with executing the missions called for under the current national military strategy. department of defense strategic choices and management review  ( scmr ) the scmr ( "skimmer" in common parlance ) , like the comprehensive review , was an internally driven exercise nominally concerned with both strategy and resourcing . requirement: the scmr had no external mandate . instead , it was conducted based on direction given by new secretary of defense chuck hagel in march 2013 , not long after he assumed office . contents of the mandate: secretary hagel assigned responsibility for the conduct of the scmr to deputy secretary of defense ashton carter , in coordination with the joint staff , and established a deadline for completion of may 31 , 2013 . osd cape ( cost assessment and program evaluation ) was given day - to - day management responsibility for the effort , and the process , like recent qdr processes , was designed to be participatory . a number of participants later suggested that the scmr was fundamentally budget - driven — designed to examine , in deputy secretary carter's words , "every nickel" that dod spends . dod officials indicated that the review would be used to inform revisions to the fy2014 defense request should sequestration continue ; to inform the fiscal guidance given to military services as they build their fy2015 and associated five - year budget plans ; and to serve as the anchor for the 2014 qdr process . according to dod officials , the scmr considered three potential budget scenarios: the president's fy2014 budget , the bca's sequester - level topline caps , and an "in - between" scenario . the review examined three substantive areas — management efficiencies and overhead reductions , compensation reforms , and changes to force structure and modernization plans . in the force structure and modernization arena , the scmr considered the two sides of a core trade - off , between the size of the force and high - end technology . execution: dod concluded the scmr on schedule , briefed the results to president obama , and then briefed the major conclusions to congress and also to the public . dod officials noted that the scmr took the 2012 dsg as its baseline . yet the tenor of the july 31 roll - out and associated discussions underscored that the primary focus of the review was budgetary — "the purpose" of the scmr "was to understand the impact of further budget reductions on the department , and develop options to deal with these additional cuts.