appendix a . history of uscis fee funding in its original version , the immigration and nationality act of 1952 ( ina ) prescribed fees for certain immigration services . furthermore , a general "user" statute in title v of the independent offices appropriations act of 1952 granted government agencies the authorization to charge fees for services performed . legislation in 1968 removed the enumeration of statutory fees under the ina , and subsequently immigration fees were prescribed in regulations under the authorization of the latter "user" statute . following the 1968 legislation , the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) continued to periodically adjust fees as it deemed necessary . however , the second term of the reagan administration saw more concerted efforts to make ins adjudication functions fee - reliant . at the same time that congress passed the immigration reform and control act of 1986 ( irca ) , which included a legalization program for certain unlawfully present aliens , the ins decreased fees for stays of deportation but increased them for certain other deportation - related motions . in the publication of the final fee schedule after passage of irca , the agency stated that it believed it was legally required to recover all of its costs for services it provided . the 1987 amendment to the fee schedule added fees for the legalization program under irca , and despite opposition to the $185 filing fee , the ins maintained the charge was needed to ensure the program was self - funding . in 1988 , congress mandated the creation of the immigration exam fee account ( iefa ) in the departments of commerce , justice , and state , the judiciary , and related agencies appropriations act of 1989 , such that the funding for the legalization fees could be isolated and a portion of those fees retained by the agency . these fees would then be available to the ins to recover some of the costs associated with providing immigration services . the following fiscal year , the iefa was amended in the departments of commerce , justice , and state , the judiciary , and related agencies appropriations act of 1990 , giving ins the authority to retain and expend all of the adjudication fees collected . the purpose of this change was that funding for the adjudications and naturalization program of the ins would be financed solely through this mechanism . following the passage of the immigration act of 1990 , the ins experienced a period of unprecedented growth in applications and petitions for immigration services . this growth was further compounded in 1995 when approximately 3 million individuals who had legalized under irca became eligible to naturalize . at roughly the same time , gao released a report on the financial practices of the ins that found inadequate controls over fee funding and vulnerability to fraud and other abuses . gao also found that despite a large increase in fee funding , the agency suffered from inadequate service processing times and weak leadership and management . the ins responded to this report through centralization initiatives and by stating that its new fee schedule of 1991 would reduce the growing applications backlog .