uses of information . what limitations should be placed on how shared information is used ? standards and practices . what improvements to current standards and practices are needed to ensure that information sharing is useful and efficient for protecting information systems , networks , and their contents ? what are the risks to privacy rights and civil liberties of individual citizens associated with sharing different kinds of cybersecurity information , and how can those rights and liberties best be protected ? liability protections . what , if any , statutory protections against liability are needed to reduce disincentives for private - sector entities to share cybersecurity information with each other and with government agencies , and how can the need to reduce such barriers best be balanced against any risks to well - established protections ? an in - depth discussion of these issues is beyond the scope of this report . however , the points described below may be relevant for congressional debate . for discussion of legal issues associated with privacy , civil liberties , and liability protections , see crs report r43941 , cybersecurity and information sharing: legal challenges and solutions , by [author name scrubbed] . information that may be usefully shared can be complex in type and purpose , which may complicate determining the best methods and criteria for sharing . information sharing can involve a broad variety of material communicated on a wide range of timescales , from broad cybersecurity policies and principles to best practices to information on threat intelligence , vulnerabilities , and defenses to computer - generated data transmitted directly from one information system to another electronically . the level of sensitivity of information can also vary — for example , it may be classified , proprietary , or personal . information of any class will also vary in its value for cybersecurity and the degree to which it needs human processing to be useful . shared information can be used for a variety of purposes relating to cybersecurity . a widely recognized objective is to inform situational awareness — an understanding of the components , operational roles , and current and projected states of systems and networks being protected ; events occurring within and across them ; and threats , vulnerabilities , and other elements of risk , all in the context of the larger cyberspace environment . shared information may also be used for identifying specific defensive actions or measures , and for planning and capacity - building , among other objectives . in addition , the same information may have different utility for different users — for example , threat signatures relating to attacks on one critical infrastructure sector may be of marginal concern for another , and best practices may be much more useful for small businesses than signatures associated with advanced targeted threats . also , shared information may prove of little use if it is delayed , provided without relevant contextual detail , or provided in a form that requires substantial additional processing to determine its applicability . if recipients find that the information they are provided is of little use to them , they may be less likely to participate in or continue with information - sharing initiatives .