the u.s. government has no statutory authority over the dns . however , because the internet evolved from a network infrastructure created by the department of defense , the u.s. government originally funded and operated ( primarily through private contractors ) many of the key components of the network architecture that enabled the domain name system to function . in 1998 , with the internet expanding beyond the academic and governmental spheres , the u.s. government transitioned the management of the dns to a newly created not - for - profit international organization based in california called the internet corporation for assigned names and numbers ( icann ) . as such , congress has keenly monitored the progress of the transition , primarily through congressional committees with jurisdiction over ntia . these include the house energy and commerce committee and the senate commerce , science , and transportation committee . additionally , the house and senate appropriations committees — which determine and control ntia's annual budget — could impact ntia's ability to relinquish its existing authority over the iana functions . the future of how icann and the dns will be governed is highly relevant to the broader question of how the internet should be governed . while it is true that icann's jurisdiction is limited to the technical underpinnings of the internet ( unique internet identifiers such as domain names and addresses ) , it is also true that icann policy decisions ( such as new gtlds ) can affect other areas of internet policy such as intellectual property , cybersecurity , privacy , and internet freedom . as the internet expands and becomes more pervasive throughout the world in all aspects of modern society , the question of how it should be governed becomes more pressing , with national governments recognizing an increasing stake in icann policy decisions , especially in cases where internet dns policy intersects with national laws and interests . the board formally transmitted the transition and accountability plans to ntia for approval . concerns have arisen in congress over the proposed transition . some members have argued that the transition requires additional scrutiny by congress , while others have questioned whether the transition should take place at all . while the u.s. government has no statutory authority over icann or the dns , congress does have legislative and budgetary authority over ntia , which is seeking to relinquish its contractual authority over the iana functions . icann is viewed by many as a ground - breaking example of multistakeholder governance . while icann does not "control" the internet , how it is ultimately governed may set an important precedent in future policy debates — both domestically and internationally — over how the internet might be governed , and what role governments and intergovernmental organizations should play . domain names — management of the dns authoritative root zone file . the iana functions contract gives the u.s. government , through ntia , the authority to approve various technical functions such as modifying the root zone file ( which would include , for example , adding additional generic top level domains [gtlds] to the root zone ) . in this narrow sense , ntia's role is strictly clerical and administrative .