dot . although the program is , by description , intended to fund projects of national , regional , and metropolitan area significance , in practice its funding has gone more toward projects of regional and metropolitan area significance . in large part this is a function of congressional intent , as congress has directed that the funds be distributed equitably across geographic areas , between rural and urban areas , and among transportation modes , and has set relatively low maximum ( $15 million ) and minimum ( $1 million for rural projects ) grant limits . congress has continued to support the tiger program through annual dot appropriations . there have been seven rounds of tiger grants ( from arra funding and from fy2010-fy2015 annual appropriations ) . after the restructuring of dot programs in the 2012 surface transportation reauthorization , the tiger program is virtually the only remaining discretionary grant program for surface transportation other than the federal transit administration's capital investment grant program ( popularly referred to as new starts ) , discussed below . it is heavily oversubscribed ; for example , dot announced that it received a total of $10.1 billion in applications for the $500 million available for fy2015 grants . the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) has reported that , while dot has selection criteria for the tiger grant program , it has sometimes awarded grants to lower - ranked projects while bypassing higher - ranked projects without explaining why it did so , raising questions about the integrity of the selection process . dot has responded that its project rankings are based on transportation - related criteria ( eg , safety , economic competitiveness ) , but that it must sometimes select lower - ranking projects over higher - ranking ones to comply with other selection criteria established by congress , such as geographic balance and a balance between rural and urban awards . there has also been criticism that tiger grants go disproportionately to urban areas compared to rural areas . however , for several years congress has directed that at least 20% of tiger funding should go to projects in rural areas . according to the 2010 census , 19% of the u.s. population lives in rural areas . as table 5 illustrates , the tiger grant appropriation process has followed a pattern for several years: the administration requests as much as or more than congress has previously provided ; the house zeroes out the program or proposes a large cut ; the senate proposes an amount similar to the previously enacted figure ; and the final enacted amount is similar to the previously enacted amount . in addition to the reduced funding , the house - passed bill would reduce the federal matching share for tiger grants from 80% to 50% ( though it could go higher for projects in rural areas ) . the senate - reported bill keeps the matching share at 80% ( or more , in the case of rural areas ) , and directs that at least 30% of funding go to projects in rural areas . the eas program seeks to preserve commercial air service to small communities by subsidizing service that would otherwise be unprofitable .