appendix a . membership in the european union , schengen area , and the u.s. visa waiver program the following chart details participation of european countries in the 28-member european union , the schengen area of free movement , and the u.s. visa waiver program ( vwp ) . * monaco , san marino , and vatican city are considered de facto members of the schengen free movement area ; they do not have border controls with the schengen countries that surround them , but they are not official schengen members because they have not signed the schengen agreement . appendix b . foreign fighter recruitment patterns the dynamics of the syrian conflict are such that the predominantly sunni muslim insurgents' requests for material support often make reference to islamic religious injunctions to defend co - religionists . such requests appear to have strong appeal in some muslim communities around the world . nevertheless , one also could argue that the power of these requests to convince individuals to become foreign fighters may be relatively limited , given that while foreign fighter flows to syria have been large relative to similar flows to other conflicts in the past , these flows are relatively small when considered as a proportion of the large global sunni muslim population ( which may exceed one billion people ) . groups or individuals sympathetic to syrian insurgents also have other means of providing support , including political advocacy and financial donations . imbalances in the relative flow of fighters to syria from particular countries or communities may suggest important differences in underlying social and political conditions in those areas or differences in the approaches taken by domestic authorities to prevent foreign fighter recruitment and / or restrict foreign fighter travel . in august 2014 , the islamic state organization issued a lengthy appeal to potential foreign recruits in its english - language web magazine ( see figure b - 1 ) . the appeal described travel to iraq and syria by foreign recruits in support of the islamic state as analogous to the hijrah , a centerpiece of islam's foundational story in which the prophet mohammed and his earliest supporters fled persecution in mecca for the relative safety of yathrib ( medina ) and later used yathrib as a base for their subsequent military campaign against their detractors in the arabian peninsula . other salafist - jihadist groups have used similar analogies in other contexts as a means of associating their appeals for military and financial support with religious and historical imagery intimately familiar to many muslims . in the words of the islamic state's appeal: every muslim professional who delayed his jihad in the past …should now make his number one priority to repent and answer the call to hijrah , especially after the establishment of the khilafah [caliphate , announced by the islamic state in june 2014] . this khilafah is more in need than ever before for experts , professionals , and specialists , who can help contribute in strengthening its structure and tending to the needs of their muslim brothers . … so abandoning hijrah – the path to jihad – is a dangerous matter .