warning list . an informational warning list ( or gray list ) of species might be created by the collaboration of federal and state agencies . the warning list might include species currently restricted under state laws , species thought to be newly arrived from other countries , and other species felt to merit special attention by regulators . although a gray list would lack regulatory force , at least without legislation at the federal level , it could be designed to provide information on species whose eradication or control is in its early phases . unification of data and reporting from many agencies would add greatly to the utility of such a list . review of industries dependent on importing and transferring non - native species . such a review could include a focus on cooperative methods to reduce introductions or releases after the point of sale . the focus of past efforts has tended to be on the entry of these species into the united states . to protect their businesses , import - dependent industries naturally have tried to reduce current obstacles and prevent imposition of new ones . in this effort , the pet , hobby aquarium , and nursery businesses have been relatively successful . yet there are other avenues to reduce risk besides prohibition . these avenues might include incentives for the sale of sterile animals or plants only or efforts to create point - of - sale educational programs about the risk of releasing pets or plants into the wild and any penalties for doing so . multi - agency federal or cooperative center for "first strike" prevention and control . congress could authorize the creation of a first strike center along the lines of the national interagency fire center . since the creation of nisc , agencies have begun to respond across a broad front in the days , weeks , or months after an invasion is discovered . the prompt notification and agency attention to the discovery of northern snakeheads in maryland is an example of such a response . ( ultimately , the effort was too late , and the fish spread widely in the chesapeake bay area. ) however , although constraints on coordination and jurisdiction interfere with prompt responses less than in the past , much more progress is possible . nisc is beginning to model its efforts on interagency fire management , a federal program that has long faced similar issues . it seems possible that a similar center devoted to first strike prevention and control of invasive species , regardless of affected industry , ecosystem , or lead agency , could provide critical support at a time when eradication of a new animal or plant invader might still be possible . in recent years , the national park service ( nps ) has adopted roughly this approach for plant pests . emergency plant management teams address not only crises but also ongoing problems . while the current 16 teams work primarily on nps lands , they also may work with adjoining landowners . expansion of this program , perhaps with multi - agency teams , could provide a more efficient method of addressing new or incipient invasions .