one notable difference is in the u.s. and foreign demand for services . since u.s. demand for imported services is less sensitive to changes in income compared with foreign demand for u.s. services exports , the u.s. surplus in services would be expected to increase over time , assuming constant prices and similar rates of economic growth between the united states and its trading partners . in addition , the proliferation of global value chains , or complex cross - border production networks in which goods and services can cross national borders multiple times through various stages of production , is blurring the distinction between the domestic content value of exports and imports and raising questions about how accurately bilateral trade balances reflect actual trade relationships . additionally , most economists argue that both exports and imports benefit the economy , because nations export in order to import those goods and services they either do not produce , or cannot produce as efficiently as another country . as a result , trade allows the economy to specialize in producing those goods and services in which it has an international competitive advantage , thereby maximizing the total amount of goods and services that are available to its citizens . the countries and the year in which the agreement received congressional approval are listed in table 1 . the u.s. census bureau is the official source for data on u.s. import and export statistics for goods and services . in this memorandum , u.s. merchandise trade data are represented by census bureau data on u.s. total merchandise exports and u.s. total merchandise imports . the value of trade has varied , likely due to the drop and subsequent rise in commodity and oil prices , especially since 2014 , reflecting changes in the direction of china's economic policies , among other factors . the slowdown and subsequent increase in trade volumes likely reflects the progressive increase in economic growth since 2012 in both developed and developing economies . as table 2 indicates , the united states experienced an overall merchandise trade deficit in 2016 of $734.3 billion and a surplus in services trade of $247.7 billion , for a combined total of - $486.6 billion . during the same year , the united states ran a merchandise trade deficit of - $71.3 billion with the 20 fta partner countries and a services surplus of $68.9 billion , or a goods and services deficit of - $2.5 billion . the share of the u.s. trade deficit with fta partners , however , has fallen by nearly half over the 2007-2017 period , from 18% to about 10% of the total u.s. merchandise trade deficit , as indicated in figure 3 . in trade with the european union in 2016 , the united states ran a goods deficit of - $146 billion and a services surplus of $54.8 billion , or a combined goods and services deficit of - $91.5 billion , as indicated in figure 4 . with proposed tpp countries , the united states experienced a deficit in goods trade in 2016 of - $172 billion , mostly with japan , mexico , and vietnam , and a services surplus of $75 billion , or a combined total of - $97 billion .