congress has established fifteen regulatory exclusivities . in particular , the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) identifies twelve different sorts of regulatory exclusivities: ten - year transitional exclusivity ; seven - year orphan drug exclusivity ; five - year new chemical entity exclusivity ; five - year enantiomer exclusivity ; five - year qualifying infectious ( qi ) disease product exclusivity ; five - year qi act antibiotic exclusivity ; three - year qi act antibiotic exclusivity ; three - year new clinical study exclusivity for an original nda ; three - year new clinical study exclusivity for a supplemental nda ; two - year transitional exclusivity ; six - month pediatric exclusivity ; and 180-day generic exclusivity . in contrast , the grant of a regulatory exclusivity is a more straightforward and virtually uncontestable determination . in addition , the public health service act calls for three additional regulatory exclusivities which apply to biologics . some commentators have expressed concern , however , that regulatory exclusivities may expand the intellectual property rights given to brand - name firms to the detriment of public health . obtaining a balance between providing incentives for pharmaceutical innovation , on one hand , and ensuring public access to medications , on the other , remains an important legislative determination . under this usage , "data protection" merely prohibits generic firms from referencing the data package submitted by sponsors , while a "marketing exclusivity" provides a more patent - like protection against all competition . the confusion has reached the point where members of congress have written to the fda in order to advise the agency of the distinction between these two sorts of exclusionary interests . legislation could assign a specific name to each of the exclusivities . in addition , incidents such as the ongoing colchicine matter remind us that the award of regulatory exclusivities does not explicitly account for the interests of patients and other enterprises who had believed the drug to be available within the public domain . congress may wish to ensure that regulatory exclusivities incorporate exceptions that provide for the continued sale of safe and effective medicines that are currently available to the public . should the fda desire clinical testing on old drugs to confirm their safety and efficacy , publicly funded trials may provide an alternative financing mechanism . one comparative advantage of regulatory exclusivities is that their term is more certain than that of patents . courts may invalidate patents during litigation . patents are also subject to post - grant proceedings at the uspto that may result in their rejection . this certainty is undermined to a degree by certain regulatory exclusivities that act to prohibit generic firms from filing paperwork at the fda necessary to obtain marketing approval . for these regulatory exclusivities — notably the five - year new chemical entity exclusivity — the effective term of the exclusivity consists of the sum of ( 1 ) the specified statutory period during which generic firms may not file applications for marketing approval ; and ( 2 ) the period of time the fda requires to determine whether the application complies with regulatory requirement . as agency workloads vary so too will the effective period of the exclusivity .