some bills , h.r . used to advertise their services . he drove norman and b.l . to "outcall" appointments , and he took photographs of norman , which he had planned for use in advertisements . 285 and s. 572 , for example , would amend section 1591 ( a ) ( 1 ) to outlaw knowingly advertising a person , knowing the victim would be used for prostitution . proponents might suggest that "advertising" would seem to fit snugly within the litany of section 1591's action elements . section 1591 now requires the government to prove either that the defendant knew of the victim's underage or coerced status or recklessly disregarded it . the proposal would expose the trafficker and the profiteer to liability based on different levels of knowledge . the liability for advertising traffickers would require that they knew of or recklessly disregarded the victim's status . the liability for advertising profiteers would require that they knew of the victim's status . knowledge is obviously a more demanding standard than reckless disregard , but the dividing line between the two is not always easily discerned , in part because of the doctrine of willful blindness . the doctrine describes the circumstances under which a jury may be instructed by the court that it may infer knowledge on the part of a defendant . worded variously , the doctrine applies where evidence indicates that the defendant sought to avoid the guilty knowledge . since the element is worded in the alternative — knowing or in reckless disregard of the fact — the courts have rarely distinguished the two . one interpretation comes from comparable wording in an immigration offense which outlaws transporting an alien knowing or acting in reckless disregard of the fact that the alien is in this country illegally: "to act with reckless disregard of the fact means to be aware of but consciously and carelessly ignore facts and circumstances clearly indicating that the person transported was an alien who had entered or remained in the united states illegally. the courts refer to a similar unreasonable indifference standard when speaking of the veracity required for the issuance of a warrant . the mann act criminalizes , among other things , ( 1 ) interstate or foreign transportation of a child for purposes of prostitution or other unlawful sexual purposes ; ( 2 ) interstate or foreign travel for purposes of engaging in "illicit sexual activity" with a child ; and ( 3 ) overseas travel of u.s. nationals followed by illicit sexual activities with a child . 181 , and other bills would limit the defense to cases where the defendant establishes the reasonableness of his belief by clear and convincing evidence . the difference between preponderance of the evidence and clear and convincing is the difference between more likely than not and highly probable .