ii . the legal arguments advanced in support of the a ct are unpersuasive . a gao legal analysis also raised the same objection and questioned the legal standing of the proposed charter amendment . on april 17 , 2014 , the district of columbia council filed a suit in the united states district court for the district of columbia to compel the mayor to execute the charter amendment changes . on may 19 , 2014 , judge emmet g. sullivan of the united states district court for the district of columbia issued an opinion concluding that the local budget autonomy act was unlawful and that district officials were permanently enjoined from enforcing it . the council appealed the decision and on october 18 , 2014 , presented its case before a three - judge panel of the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia . before the panel issued a ruling a new mayor was elected , muriel bowser , who reversed mayor gray's decision not to enforce the budget autonomy act . on march 23 , 2015 , a suggestion of mootness and motion to dismiss was filed with united states court of appeals for the district of columbia . the motion claimed that since there was no dispute or disagreement between the council and the mayor , the judgment rendered by the district court for the district of columbia in april 2014 should be vacated , the appeal dismissed , and the case remanded to the d.c. superior court . in an unpublished order , the appeals court ruled on may 27 , 2015 , without elaboration , to vacate the district court's judgment , which held that the district's local budget autonomy act of 2012 was invalid . in addition , the appeals court ordered the case to be remanded to the district court with instructions to remand the case to the district of columbia superior court . on march 18 , 2016 , judge brian f. holman of the district of columbia superior court issued a ruling upholding the legality of the district's local budget autonomy act of 2012 . despite all that has transpired , including the ruling by judge holman , the issue of budget autonomy remains an open question . litigation initiated in 2015 , by clarice feldman , a resident of the district of columbia , following the filing of the motion of the suggestion of mootness by mayor bowser , was still pending in u.s. district court for the district of columbia . on february 1 , 2016 , in an effort to prevent the united states district court for the district of columbia from considering the merits of ms. feldman's challenge to the validity of the local budget act , both defendants , the mayor and the cfo , filed motions to dismiss contending that ms. feldman "lacked standing , the case was moot , and the court lacked subject matter jurisdiction. subsequently , on march 31 , 2016 , the bipartisan legal advisory group of the united states house of representatives filed an amicus brief in support of ms. feldman's litigation . the court has yet to rule on merits of ms. feldman's legal challenge to the district's budget autonomy act as of this writing .