are developed ad hoc . other arbitration rules include those of the international chamber of commerce , the stockholm chamber of commerce , and the permanent court of arbitration . the methods of selection and disqualification of arbitrators may differ depending on whether the arbitration is conducted under icsid or uncitral arbitration rules , nafta , or agreements based on the u.s. model bit . furthermore , the parties may also contract to have the dispute governed by rules other than the icsid and uncitral arbitration rules . with regard to selection of arbitrators , both nafta and u.s. ftas based on the recent model bit state that , unless the parties otherwise agree , the tribunal shall be comprised of three arbitrators . the claimant appoints one arbitrator ; the respondent state appoints one arbitrator ; and the parties then agree on a presiding arbitrator . if the disputing parties cannot agree on appointment of an arbitrator , then the secretary general of icsid becomes the appointing authority . under the icsid convention , arbitrators must be "persons of high moral character and recognized competence in the fields of law , commerce , industry or finance. however , under the uncitral arbitration rules , there does not appear to be a corresponding provision that explicitly requires arbitrators to be recognized as competent in any particular field . in the event that a party to the arbitration believes that an arbitrator should be disqualified , the procedures it must follow depend on the rules that govern the arbitration . under the icsid convention and arbitration rules , a party may propose disqualification of an arbitrator on account of any fact indicating that the arbitrator has a "manifest lack" of the ability to exercise independent judgment . similarly , under the uncitral rules , an arbitrator may be challenged if "circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator's impartiality or independence. arbitrators have an obligation to affirmatively disclose such circumstances both prior to , and during , the dispute proceedings . it appears that many challenges to an arbitrator's qualifications to sit on a tribunal arise from prior existing relationships between the arbitrators and the disputing parties . for example , one arbitrator , in 2013 , was disqualified from the tribunal in blue bank v. venezuela because the arbitrator in question was a partner at a law firm that was representing the claimant in a different isds proceeding against venezuela that dealt with issues similar to the case he was set to decide . however , tribunals have also held that "the mere existence of some professional relationship with a party is not an automatic basis for disqualification of an arbitrator. in one case , the arbitrator in question advised the disputing parties that one of the partners in his law firm had worked for the claimant - company's predecessor on an unrelated tax issue but the panel did not find this relationship warranted disqualification . prior relationships with disputing parties are not the only reason that an arbitrator can be disqualified . arbitrators can also be removed from a panel if they have biases against the law in dispute or the specific subject at issue .