this attention has been twofold . first , media reports have highlighted how much water is used overall by california's agricultural sectors . second , media reports have highlighted how much water is used to grow certain types of crops . most media attention has focused on certain orchard crops , such as tree nuts and vineyard crops , as well as some grain and pasture crops used to support california's meat and dairy industries . these reports frequently conflict with primary data sources , resulting in confusion over the state of agricultural production and irrigated water use in the california . regarding overall water use for california's agricultural production , media reports have widely cited estimates claiming that 80% of the state's available water supplies are used annually for agricultural use . federal and state sources indicate that the state's agricultural sector uses less available water than many media reports claim . the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) indicates that roughly 60% is used for the state's agricultural sectors ; the california department of water resources ( dwr ) indicates roughly 40% . the difference between these two estimates is largely based on different survey methods and assumptions , including the baseline amount of water estimated for use , including what constitutes "available" supplies . some reports , including information posted by the california department of food and agriculture ( cdfa ) , have tried to clarify and highlight differences between various water use estimates . regarding water used to produce specific crops , news outlets across the country have , on numerous occasions , reported estimates of the amount of water california farmers use to produce a single serving of certain foods . for example , according to these reports , it takes nearly one gallon of water to produce one almond and 450 gallons of water to produce a quarter - pound hamburger patty . such statistics can be misleading and further raise questions about the usefulness of quantifying the inputs and resources required to produce a single serving of a specific crop or a single serving of meat or dairy products . most fruit and nut trees require water year - round and often take several years before the plant reaches fruiting maturity . at maturity , a fruit orchard can produce food capable of feeding many people . other crops — such as feed grains and pasture crops — are grown , in some cases , mainly to feed livestock , poultry , and dairy cows . the cumulative amount of resources and inputs needed to raise a single farm animal to maturity adds up quickly . growing consumer and market demand for these food commodities is also a major factor in their production . moreover , some agricultural products are grown in areas where water is more accessible . also , not all of the water used by the agriculture sector is captured by the plant ; some is returned to the soil or atmosphere .