refugees are processed and admitted to the united states from abroad . they may legally live and work in the united states . after one year , they may apply to adjust to lawful permanent resident ( lpr ) status , subject to a set of requirements . typically , a refugee being considered for resettlement in the united states is outside his or her country of origin ( in a host county ) and is referred to the u.s. program by the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) . the first part of the ina definition of a refugee ( ina §101 ( a ) ( 42 ) ( a ) ) states that the term means: any person who is outside any country of such person's nationality or , in the case of a person having no nationality , is outside any country in which such person last habitually resided , and who is unable or unwilling to return to , and is unable or unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of , that country because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion . the ina also provides for the processing of refugees in their countries of origin for purposes of admission to the united states in some cases , as reflected in the second , alternate part of the definition of a refugee ( ina §101 ( a ) ( 42 ) ( b ) ) : in such circumstances as the president after appropriate consultation ( as defined in section 207 ( e ) of this act ) may specify , any person who is within the country of such person's nationality or , in the case of a person having no nationality , within the country in which such person is habitually residing , and who is persecuted or who has a well - founded fear of persecution on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion . over the years , the united states has utilized in - country refugee processing to address particular refugee populations and situations . decisions about establishing in - country processing programs involve a range of considerations ; these include key considerations of foreign policy , diplomacy , and security , which are beyond the scope of this report . over the years , administrations — either on their own or prompted by congress — have used this authority in limited cases . the 2002 remarks by the state department about haiti cited above suggest that some relevant considerations include likely effectiveness and the existence of sufficient alternatives . relatedly , in - country processing programs are typically aimed at particular groups within a country and may require applicants to have some type of connection to the united states . for example , the new in - country processing program for certain minors from el salvador , guatemala , and honduras requires the minors to have a lawfully present parent in the united states .