for more information. ) figure 1 shows that the two target trend lines follow different trajectories . the aca establishes two sets of parliamentary procedures . the first set of procedures governs congressional consideration of ipab implementing legislation . the act establishes a second set of fast - track procedures ( discussed in detail in " what are the fast - track procedures for legislation discontinuing ipab ? ( see " what triggers ipab action ? ," below ) governing the consideration in 2017 of a joint resolution discontinuing the automatic ipab implementation process . the aca requires the board ( and , in cases in which the board does not act , the secretary ) to submit its proposal to both congress and the president . the proposal is to be accompanied by , among other things , implementing legislation . the secretary is required to automatically implement the proposals contained in the ipab legislation on august 15 of the year such a proposal is submitted , unless prior to that date , legislation is enacted that includes the statement , "this act supersedes the recommendations of the board contained in the proposal submitted , in the year which includes the date of enactment of this act , to congress under section 1899a of the social security act," or in 2017 , a joint resolution discontinuing the automatic ipab implementation process has been enacted . the act establishes special fast - track parliamentary procedures governing house and senate committee consideration , and senate floor consideration , of legislation implementing the board's or secretary's proposal . these procedures differ from the parliamentary mechanisms the chambers usually use to consider most legislation , and they are designed to ensure that congress can act promptly on the implementing legislation should it choose to do so . the aca - established procedures accomplish this goal by mandating the immediate introduction of the legislation in congress and by establishing strict deadlines for committee and senate floor consideration , as well as by placing certain limits on the amending process . the procedures established by the act permit congress to amend the ipab - implementing legislation , but only in a manner that achieves at least the same level of targeted reductions in medicare spending growth as is contained in the ipab plan . the act bars congress from changing the ipab fiscal targets in any other legislation it considers as well , and it establishes procedures whereby a supermajority vote is required in the senate to waive this requirement . in addition , the act's procedures include expedited mechanisms that are intended to facilitate the exchange of implementing legislation between the house and senate . on june 11 , 2015 , cbo released a score for h.r . 1190 as reported on june 2 , 2015 , by the house ways and means committee . cbo indicates that repealing the ipab would increase direct spending in the future ; however , the estimate is subject to a high degree of uncertainty because of the unknown likelihood that the ipab authority would be triggered . specifically , the cost estimate includes the following summary: cbo estimates that enacting h.r .