these funds are not appropriated by congress . they are available for obligation and included in the president's budget to calculate the gross budget authority . 302 ( a ) and 302 ( b ) allocations in general practice , the maximum budget authority for annual appropriations ( including dhs ) is determined through a two - stage congressional budget process . in the first stage , congress sets overall spending totals in the annual concurrent resolution on the budget . subsequently , these totals are allocated among the appropriations committees , usually through the statement of managers for the conference report on the budget resolution . these amounts are known as the 302 ( a ) allocations . they include discretionary totals available to the house and senate committees on appropriations for enactment in annual appropriations bills through the subcommittees responsible for the development of the bills . in the second stage of the process , the appropriations committees allocate the 302 ( a ) discretionary funds among their subcommittees for each of the appropriations bills . these amounts are known as the 302 ( b ) allocations . these allocations must add up to no more than the 302 ( a ) discretionary allocation and form the basis for enforcing budget discipline , since any bill reported with a total above the ceiling is subject to a point of order . the 302 ( b ) allocations may be adjusted during the year by the respective appropriations committee issuing a report delineating the revised suballocations as the various appropriations bills progress toward final enactment . no subcommittee allocations are developed for conference reports or enacted appropriations bills . table a - 1 shows comparable figures for the 302 ( b ) allocation for fy2015 , based on p.l . 114-4 , the president's request for fy2016 , house and senate subcommittee allocations for the homeland security appropriations bills for fy2016 , and the allocation that would have been needed to accommodate the fy2016 enacted homeland security appropriations act , 2016 . the budget control act , discretionary spending caps , and adjustments the fy2012 appropriations bills were the first appropriations bills governed by the budget control act , which established discretionary security and nonsecurity spending caps for fy2012 and fy2013 . the bill also established overall caps that govern the actions of appropriations committees in both chambers . subsequent legislation , including the bipartisan budget act of 2013 , amended those caps . for fy2015 , the overall cap on discretionary spending is $1,014 billion . separate limitations are made for defense and nondefense spending — roughly $521 billion and $492 billion , respectively . most of the budget for dhs is considered nondefense spending . in addition , the budget control act allows for adjustments that would raise the statutory caps to cover funding for overseas contingency operations / global war on terror , emergency spending , and , to a limited extent , disaster relief and appropriations for continuing disability reviews and control of health care fraud and abuse . three of the four justifications outlined in the budget control act for adjusting the caps on discretionary budget authority have played a role in dhs's appropriations process .