contract awards refer to bids and agreements the federal government makes for specific goods and services . according to a note on the site , data quality and display improvements will be continually made on a rolling basis . users of usaspending.gov should be aware that although search results may be useful for informing consideration of certain questions , these results may also be incomplete or contain inaccuracies . data foundation and deloitte , "data act 2022: changing technology , changing culture," report , may 2017 , at http: / / www.datafoundation.org / data - act - 2022 / . u.s. senate , permanent subcommittee on investigations , committee on homeland security and governmental affairs , "federal agency compliance with the data act," report , july 2018 , at https: / / www.hsgac.senate.gov / subcommittees / investigations / media / new - psi - report - details - failure - of - federal - agencies - to - submit - accurate - data - on - how - they - spend - taxpayer - dollars . urban institute , "follow the money: how to track federal funding to local governments," research report , february 26 , 2018 , at https: / / www.urban.org / research / publication / follow - money - how - track - federal - funding - local - governments . usaspending.gov also provides tools for examining the broader picture of federal spending obligations by categories , such as budget function , agency , and object class . budget function refers to the major purpose that the spending serves , such as social security , medicare , and national defense . object class refers to the type of item or service purchased by the federal government , such as grants , contracts , and personnel compensation and benefits . for congress , the ability to more accurately track these federal awards is necessary to better inform oversight of federal spending . in recent years , congress has passed laws to create and improve systems used by government departments and agencies to report and input data on federal awards for contracts , grants , and other financial assistance: p.l . 109-282 , the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 ( ffata ) , called for the creation of a database that became usaspending.gov . the publicly available database replaced data collection and annual reports issued for more than 30 years in the census bureau's federal aid to states ( fas ) report and consolidated federal funds report ( cffr ) . 111-5 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) , required federal agencies awarding stimulus funding and state and local recipients of such funding to report spending back to the arra recovery board ; this reporting also became a part of usaspending.gov . 113-101 , the digital accountability and transparency act of 2014 ( data act ) , transferred responsibility for usaspending.gov from the office of management and budget ( omb ) to the department of the treasury and required that expenditures data be added to the federal agency obligations data already included in the usaspending.gov database .