coalition building . moreover , the administration has sought to build alliances to counter iran strategically . some initiatives , such as the formation of a "middle east strategic alliance," are discussed below . building a coalition to counter iran was a key component of secretary of state pompeo's trip to the gcc states , iraq , jordan , and egypt in january 2019 , as well as a ministerial meeting in poland during february 13-14 , 2019 . threatening military action . the administration also has threatened military retaliation for iranian direct action . on september 21 , 2018 , secretary of state pompeo threatened action against iran also for activities undertaken by iran's proxies . according to the secretary , "we have told the islamic republic of iran that using a proxy force to attack an american interest will not prevent us from responding against the prime actor. in early may 2019 , the united states sent accelerated the deployment of an aircraft carrier group and sent a bomber group to the persian gulf region in response to what the administration said were "troubling ; and escalatory indications and warnings" related to iran . the united states also works with local leaders and factions that seek to counter iranian influence . the applications of administration strategy are discussed in the sections below . iran's relations with countries in the caucasus , central asia , and south asia vary significantly , but most countries in these regions conduct relatively normal trade and diplomacy with iran . some of them face significant domestic threats from radical sunni islamist extremist movements similar to those that iran characterizes as a threat . most of the central asia states that were part of the soviet union are governed by authoritarian leaders . afghanistan remains politically weak , and iran is able to exert influence there . some countries in the region , particularly india , seek greater integration with the united states and other world powers and tend to downplay cooperation with iran . the following sections address countries that have significant economic and political relationships with iran . iran attaches significant weight to its relations with russia — a permanent member of the u.n. security council , a supplier of arms to iran , a party to the jcpoa , and a key supporter of the asad regime . russia appears to view iran as a de facto ally in combating sunni islamist extremist movements , which have conducted attacks in russia . russian president vladimir putin visited iran on november 23 , 2015 , to attend a conference of major international natural gas producers , and also held talks with supreme leader khamene'i and president rouhani , resulting in an announcement of a $5 billion line of credit to iran for possible joint projects , including additional natural gas pipelines , railroads , and power plants . rouhani visited moscow on march 28 , 2017 , to discuss with president putin the issues discussed below . during putin's visit to tehran on november 1 , 2017 , the two countries agreed to collaborate on "strategic energy deals" valued at about $30 billion .