appendix a . comparison of institutions of higher learning and institutions of higher education appendix b . acronyms acronyms related to the post - 9 / 11 gi bill information systems programs other acronyms acronyms related to the pell grant program: information systems other acronyms appendix c. post - 9 / 11 gi bill secondary processing and disbursement of funds for additional forms of education and training the administration of post - 9 / 11 gi bill vocational flight training , apprenticeships or on - the - job training ( ojt ) , tutorial assistance , correspondence training , licensing and certification tests , national tests , and relocation differs significantly from the administration of other degree and non - college degree ( ncd ) programs at educational institutions . the following explains the processes with respect to the secondary processing ( supplemental claims ) and disbursement of funds . certification of flight training as part of the initial enrollment certification , the flight school must complete va - once or the applicable sections of the certifications for va enrollment certification ( va form 22-1999 ) . this certification is used to indicate the student's eligibility for the flight training program and indicate the flight training plan . the form requires the individual's identifying information ; name of program ; certification that the student has a private pilot's license ; certification that the student has a class i and / or ii medical certificate on file at the school , as applicable ; credit allowed for previous education and training ; number of hours / units of instruction in current training plan ; training dates ; and charges . flight schools that are not institutions of higher learning ( ihls ) must certify the number of training hours completed by each student monthly using va - once or the monthly certification of flight training ( va form 22-6553c ) . the form requires the individual's identifying information , course , type of instruction , applicable horsepower , hours , charge rate , total instructional charges , a summary of cumulative instruction , medical certification , course completion or interruption , remarks , and the signatures of the student and sco . finally , the paper cert is signed by the student and sco and mailed to the appropriate rpo . certification of apprenticeships or on - the - job training certs for pursuit of approved programs of apprenticeships or ojt are generally completed on paper and mailed or emailed to the relevant rpo . the cert may be completed using va form 22-1999 , va enrollment certification , or on letterhead of the training establishment . apprenticeship and ojt certs certify training completed in the previous month . the earliest the cert can be submitted is the last calendar day of the month being certified . the cert must identify the eligible individual , program of education , training dates , hours during which the individual was employed and training , and number of hours in a standard work week . finally , the cert must be signed by both the eligible individual and certifying official . in addition , the cert must be accompanied by a signed copy of the training agreement outlining the training program and wage scale .