like h.r . 167 and s. 235 , the s. 508 formula also had potential implications for the amount available for the disaster cap in future fiscal years . because the amount appropriated using the wildfire adjustment would have been subtracted from the disaster calculation and not factored into the 10-year rolling average , the use of the wildfire adjustment would have had the potential to make the disaster cap lower than it otherwise might have been . 167 were unknown . it is not clear how these proposals would have interacted with the flame accounts . the bills specified that at least 70% of the budget request would have to have been appropriated for suppression operations but did not specify whether the appropriations had to be in the agencies' respective wfm or flame accounts . the flame accounts will expire if funds are not appropriated to ( or withdrawn from ) them for three consecutive years . 167 also were silent as to fire borrowing . if either of these proposals were enacted , it was unclear if fire borrowing authorities would have continued to be provided in appropriations laws . 167 would have required the usda and doi secretaries to continue to use the rolling 10-year average of suppression obligations to formulate their suppression budget requests . the usda and doi secretaries also would have been directed to "promptly" submit any request to congress for supplemental wildfire suppression operations funding , and to submit a plan to congress explaining how the supplemental appropriations would be obligated within 30 days of receiving them . this proposal would have largely codified recent agency practices , with some modifications . this could have given congress more advance notice about the need for supplemental wildfire suppression operations appropriations , as well as information on how the agencies proposed to use those additional appropriations . both this advance notice and additional information could have aided congress in appropriations decisionmaking and oversight . they also might have added to the workload of both the fs and doi during a critical time of providing wildfire assistance . this interaction between the proposed wildfire and existing disaster relief adjustments had a number of potential implications for the amount of the disaster cap in the future . however , because these potential implications were highly sensitive to future appropriations decisions made by congress and the president each fiscal year , the extent to which the calculation for the disaster cap would have been affected by the use of the wildfire adjustment cannot be determined definitively . assuming that the wildfire adjustment was first used in fy2016 , for the next several years , the disaster formula would have been based on 10 fiscal years of funding for disaster relief ( minus the highest and lowest fiscal year ) , but fewer than 10 fiscal years of the wildfire adjustment would have been available to be incorporated into the base calculation . this would have had the potential to make the amount available for the disaster cap lower than it otherwise might have been .