the house fy2016 agriculture appropriations bill ( h.r . 114-205 ) would have provided $245 million for the cftc . title vii contains general provisions applying government - wide . the house and senate fsgg bills fund the same agencies , with one exception . the commodities and futures trading commission ( cftc ) is funded through the agriculture appropriations bill in the house and the fsgg bill in the senate . this structure has existed in its current form since the 2007 reorganization of the house and senate committees on appropriations . although financial services are a major focus of the bills , fsgg appropriations bills do not include many financial regulatory agencies , which are instead funded outside of the appropriations process . on february 2 , 2015 , president obama submitted his fy2016 budget request , which sought a total of $46.8 billion for agencies funded through the fsgg appropriations bill , including $322 million for the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) . on july 9 , 2015 , the house committee on appropriations ( hereinafter "the house committee" ) reported the financial services and general government appropriations act , 2016 ( h.r . 2995 as reported would have provided $41.6 billion for agencies funded through the house fsgg appropriations subcommittee bill . total fy2016 funding in the two house bills would have been $41.8 billion , about $4.9 billion below the president's fy2016 request . in the house , the jurisdiction of the fsgg subcommittee comprised primarily agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the subcommittee on transportation , treasury , housing and urban development , the judiciary , the district of columbia , and independent agencies , commonly referred to as "tthud. in addition , the house fsgg subcommittee was assigned four independent agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the science , state , justice , commerce , and related agencies subcommittee: the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , and the small business administration ( sba ) . on july 30 , 2015 , the senate committee on appropriations reported the financial services and general government act , 2016 ( s. 1910 , s.rept . the district of columbia , which had its own subcommittee in the 109 th congress , was placed under the purview of the fsgg subcommittee , as were four independent agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies subcommittee: the fcc , ftc , sec , and sba . in addition , most of the agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the tthud subcommittee were assigned to the fsgg subcommittee . as a result of this reorganization , the house and senate fsgg subcommittees have nearly identical jurisdictions , except that the cftc is under the jurisdiction of the fsgg subcommittee in the senate and the agriculture subcommittee in the house . s. 1910 would have appropriated $42.1 billion for fy2016 , about $4.7 billion below the president's request . neither fsgg appropriations bill was considered on the floor prior to the end of fy2015 .