bomb data center . finally , report language directed atf to maintain its fy2015 level of operations at ncetr to train federal , state , local , and tribal technicians in advanced fire investigations and advanced explosives disposal techniques . how many were successfully traced ? and how many were found to have originated in the united states prior to being recovered in mexico ? the senate version of the bill also included a provision ( §216 ) that would continue to ban any doj agency from using appropriations to transfer an operable firearm to a known or suspected "drug cartel" agent without continuously monitoring and controlling such firearm . as described in the appendix of this report , this provision was first sponsored as an amendment offered by senator john cornyn for fy2012 . it has been included in every doj appropriation since then . it was also included in the house - passed bill for fy2016 ( h.r . this provision is a response to a flawed southwest border gun trafficking investigation known as "operation fast and furious. the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l . 114-113 ) includes this provision ( also number §216 ) . in addition , report language lauded atf for co - locating the u.s . bomb data center with the national center for explosives training and research ( ncetr ) , and noted that doj had directed all its component agencies to use the atf bomb arson tracking system to document explosives - related incidents . report language directed atf to make space available for federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) and department of homeland security's office bombing prevention analysts at the u.s . congress has placed nine provisos related to domestic gun control on bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) appropriations for salaries and expenses ( s&e ) and included another six provisos in either the department of justice ( doj ) general provisions or the general provisions for the entire commerce , justice , science ( cjs ) and related appropriations act . congress has included "futurity" language ( eg , "in each fiscal year thereafter" ) in several of these provisos that appears to be intended to make them permanent law . one proviso — the "tiahrt amendment" — has included futurity language since fy2005 , but was included in subsequent appropriations acts through fy2012 . this proviso restricts atf from using appropriations to release unfiltered firearms trace data , and prohibits the use of such data for the purposes of supporting civil lawsuits . gun control advocates have argued that the tiahrt amendment and other limitations on the atf appropriations have unduly hampered that agency from enforcing the law , and consequently have called for their repeal . supporters of gun rights , on the other hand , maintain that these limitations prevent atf from overreaching its statutory and regulatory authority . for fy2012 , congress included futurity language in four of those provisos that appears to be intended to make them permanent law .