evaluation . under usaid forward , the agency has given renewed attention to the number of independent evaluations it undertakes . a challenge for usaid is to improve the quality of evaluations — including conducting more long - term outcome analysis — and to ensure that evaluation results are used as "lessons learned" to make corrections for future programs . local solutions . as discussed earlier in this report , working with local governments and the private sector to implement development efforts requires a commitment of agency personnel and funds , the flexibility to use those funds in a way that reflects country priorities , and a long - term planning and implementation time frame aimed at developing local capacities , while at the same time ensuring that accountability standards are met . will agency efforts to "scale - up" lab innovations succeed ? some observers have suggested that one necessary element is creating a longer time horizon for usaid projects and making funding available for follow - up projects to see new ideas through to maturity . another factor for success is the extent to which knowledge of innovations in one place can be disseminated throughout the agency . sustainability . building "country ownership" is one usaid response to the challenge of sustaining development efforts beyond the life of usaid's interventions . another is more resource mobilization efforts to develop a government's capacity to collect revenue to support development . a clear path to sustainability , however , remains a work in progress . security . lack of security for agency personnel overseas poses significant obstacles to successful project implementation . how to get past the security - centered structure that many u.s. embassies have become to regularly meet with government and civil society representatives in order to formulate suitable projects , and how to gain safe access to project locales for appropriate monitoring , are major concerns . security concerns in so - called non - permissive environments , such as south sudan , afghanistan , pakistan , and yemen , pose considerably greater problems , including periodic evacuation of personnel , complications in finding contractors and grantees willing to undertake the risks of work in the field , and difficulty employing foreign national employees willing to undertake work under u.s. auspices . program flexibility . usaid staff face multiple imperatives , including objectives listed in the foreign assistance act , congressional mandates , presidential initiatives , direction from state department diplomats , priorities of partner governments , and the influence of the international community . usaid , as an agency , is challenged to reconcile these varied views , yet remain sufficiently flexible to fashion a coherent development program in priority countries . each of these issues is highlighted below . usaid , as with any public or private institution , faces multiple challenges in the process of fulfilling its mission . the peculiar environment in which it operates — with multiple lines of authority , shifting priorities , uncertain budgets , unpredictable partners , and unstable settings — has ensured a degree of difficulty in implementing its programs . even as the agency addressed old challenges with the usaid forward reforms , new ones have emerged .