consent to being available to testify by doj . listing of the legal claims being settled by both departments . it is unclear to what extent any of these requirements will continue to apply in the 116 th congress . long - standing disputes over water rights and use involving indian tribes continue to be negotiated and settled by the executive branch and are thus likely to be an ongoing issue for congress . this matter includes implementation of ongoing indian water rights settlements , negotiation of new settlements , and consideration of these settlements for potential enactment and subsequent funding . as of the end of the 115 th congress , 32 settlements had been enacted since 1978 , and 4 settlements had been approved administratively . additional funding for ongoing settlements and authorization of and appropriations for new settlements are likely to be requested in the future . in considering indian water rights settlements , primary issues for congress may include the cost , contents , and sufficiency of federally authorized efforts to settle tribal water rights claims , as well as the circumstances under which these settlements are considered and approved by authorizing committees and others ( i.e. , whether the settlements are accompanied by formal statements of administration support , cost estimates , etc. ) in addition , the preferred extent of federal involvement in implementing settlements , including the question of whether the federal government or tribes should take the lead in developing and constructing projects , may be of interest to congress . the siwro is led by a director who reports to the chair of the working group . doi also appoints teams to work on individual indian water rights settlements during the various stages of the settlement process ( see below section , " steps in settlement process " ) . each team includes a chairman who is designated by the chair of the working group ( i.e. , the counselor to the secretary ) and who represents the secretary in all settlement activities . federal teams typically are composed of representatives from the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) , bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) , u.s . fish and wildlife service , office of the solicitor , and doj . the teams explain general federal policies on settlement and , when possible , help to develop the parameters of a particular settlement . broadly speaking , there are four steps associated with indian water rights settlements: prenegotiation , negotiation , settlement , and implementation . the time between negotiation , settlement , and implementation can take several years . each step , including relevant federal involvement , is discussed below . the federal government has been involved with indian water rights settlements through assessment , negotiation , and implementations teams ( for enacted settlements ) since 1990 . as of 2018 , there were 21 ongoing negotiation teams working on settlements projected to cost more than $2 billion . additionally , there are 23 implementation teams active for carrying out approved settlements . overall , the federal government has entered into 36 settlements since 1978 , with congress enacting 32 of these settlements .