this section briefly explores these questions . obergefell raised questions about the decision's broader impact on the rights of gay individuals — that is , whether its rationale extends rights to gay individuals outside of the marriage context . however , the decision appears limited to the marriage context . although the majority opinion did make reference to same - sex marriage bans implicating equal protection guarantees , its holding rested entirely on such bans infringing upon the fundamental right to marry in violation of both equal protection and due process guarantees . the court did not mention whether classifications based on sexual orientation are suspect or quasi - suspect , and thus warrant any form of heightened scrutiny . if the court had rendered such a holding , its decision would have arguably had broader implications for the rights of gay individuals , as it would have potentially subjected all governmental action that classifies based on sexual orientation to a heightened form of judicial scrutiny . prior to obergefell , federal appeals courts were split regarding the proper level of judicial scrutiny applicable to governmental action that classifies based on sexual orientation . the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit ( ninth circuit ) has held that classifications based on sexual orientation warrant heightened scrutiny , though it did not clarify whether this heightened scrutiny was intermediate or strict scrutiny . the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit ( second circuit ) has similarly found that classifications based on sexual orientation are quasi - suspect , and thus any governmental action that classifies based on sexual orientation is subject to intermediate scrutiny . conversely , however , the u.s. court of appeals for the sixth circuit ( sixth circuit ) has held that governmental action that classifies based on sexual orientation is neither suspect nor quasi - suspect , and thus subject only to rational basis review . because the court's decision in obergefell rested on the fundamental right to marry — and therefore seems limited to the marriage context — nothing in the opinion appears to resolve the circuit split between the second , sixth , and ninth circuits regarding the correct level of scrutiny applicable to classifications based on sexual orientation . other lower courts will be left to grapple with this issue in the future . this ambiguity leaves open the possibility that , moving forward , circuit courts could either , like the second and ninth circuits , apply heightened scrutiny to laws that classify based on sexual orientation ( eg , laws that provide exemptions from anti - discrimination legislation for religious entities based on their objections to certain sexual orientations ) , or could apply rational basis review to such laws like the sixth circuit . the fact that some lower courts may apply heightened scrutiny to government action that classifies based on sexual orientation where other courts may not is significant because , as discussed earlier in this report , laws subject to higher levels of scrutiny are more likely to be found unconstitutional . as such , this could create a situation wherein similar laws that classify based on sexual orientation receive dissimilar outcomes when facing constitutional challenge , depending on the evaluating court .