no loans were outstanding after may 2009 . the pdcf experienced no losses and earned interest income of $0.5 billion over the life of the program . the bailout prevention act ( h.r . 2625 ) would amend section 13 ( 3 ) to limit the fed's discretion to make emergency loans . it eliminates the current language permitting the fed to establish the solvency of a borrower based on the borrower's certification and specifies that a borrower may not be eligible for assistance unless the fed and all federal banking regulators with jurisdiction over the borrower certify that the borrower is not insolvent and issue a detailed public explanation of the certification decision . the certification must be based on an assessment of "relevant financial data" for the most recent four months and determine that the fair value of the borrower's assets exceeds the fair value of liabilities — adjusting for temporary market illiquidity . on september 16 , 2008 , a mmmf called the reserve fund "broke the buck," meaning that the value of its shares had fallen below par value of $1 . it forbids the fed from lending to a bridge company set up under title ii of the dodd - frank act . it defines broad - based eligibility to comprise at least five companies . its sets the minimum interest rate on a loan to be at least five percentage points above the yield on a treasury security with a comparable duration . it provides the fed with authority to create a program that does not meet the bill's definition of broad - based eligibility or minimum lending rate , provided it notifies congress within three days . if a joint resolution authorizing the program to continue is not enacted within 30 days of receipt of that notice , the program terminates . it would reduce the delayed release of unredacted gao reports and lending records pertaining to section 13 ( 3 ) from one or two years to 60 days . the commercial paper issued directly by firms tends not to be backed by collateral , because these firms are viewed as large and creditworthy , and the paper matures quickly . individual investors are major purchasers of highly rated commercial paper through money market mutual funds ( mmmfs ) and money market accounts . this occurred because of losses it had taken on short - term debt issued by lehman brothers , which filed for bankruptcy on september 15 , 2008 . money market investors had perceived breaking the buck to be highly unlikely , and its occurrence set off a generalized run on mmmfs , as investors simultaneously attempted to withdraw an estimated $250 billion of their investments — even from funds without exposure to lehman . the decline in commercial paper outstanding after september 2008 is illustrated in figure a - 2 . fearing that disruption in the commercial paper markets could make overall problems in financial markets more severe , the fed announced on september 19 , 2008 , that it would create the asset - backed commercial paper money market mutual fund liquidity facility ( amlf ) . this facility made nonrecourse loans to banks to purchase asset - backed commercial paper .