each of these provisions is discussed below . section 2 of s. 659 would expand the existing statutory exclusion of shells and cartridges ( and preserve its exclusion of pistols , revolvers , other firearms ) from potential regulation as chemical substances under the toxic substances control act ( tsca ; p.l . the exclusion would be expanded to encompass specific components of these items including shot , bullets and other projectiles , propellants , and primers . additionally , the exclusion would be expanded to encompass "sport fishing equipment" ( primarily lead sinkers ) as referenced in the internal revenue code and sport fishing equipment components . over the past 20 years , several citizens' organizations have submitted multiple petitions to the environmental protection agency ( epa ) requesting that the agency evaluate the risks of lead in ammunition and in fishing sinkers for regulation under tsca . most recently , in 2011 and 2012 , petitions were submitted again to epa . one petition addressed lead ammunition . epa denied that petition because of the existing statutory exclusion under tsca . epa's denial of that petition was later upheld in litigation . the other petition addressed lead fishing tackle . epa denied that petition because the threshold of risk for warranting federal regulation was not demonstrated by the petitioners . adoption of section 2 would prevent federal regulation through tsca but not through other statutory authorities . lead shot has been banned in the united states for the hunting of migratory waterfowl since 1991 under authority of the migratory bird treaty act and the endangered species act ( esa ; p.l . although these two statutes address the use of lead shot in hunting migratory waterfowl , tsca more broadly applies to the lifecycle of a chemical substance , excluding lead in ammunition or fishing equipment from the definition of a chemical substance . consequently , the provision would protect continued use of lead shot in hunting of upland game birds ( such as turkeys or grouse ) or fishing practices that use lead sinkers , but it would not affect the use of lead shot in waterfowl hunting , where it is already banned . section 3 of s. 659 would allow territories and states to use more of the funds allocated to them under the pittman - robertson wildlife restoration act ( 16 u.s.c . ยง669 ) for projects involving land acquisition , construction , and expansion of public target ranges for firearms or archery . a state's allocation of federal funds currently may be used to support a maximum of 75% of any project , with the remainder coming from nonfederal sources . section 3 would amend 16 u.s.c . ยง669h - 1 ( a ) , with the effect of increasing the maximum federal share from the pittman - robertson ( p - r ) program from 75% to 90% for projects acquiring land for , expanding , or constructing target ranges . however , the bill also contains a provision stating that "a state may pay up to 90 percent of the cost of acquiring land for , expanding , or constructing a public target range.