appendix a . past legislative activity congress has played a role in guiding u.s. foreign and defense policies regarding the prc and the pla . this section discusses laws that have had significant , continuing impacts on u.s. policies as well as some recent bills that address the present situation . 113 note ) ? a second key issue for congress is whether the u.s. government has appropriately assessed prc leaders' intentions regarding the pla . dod's assessment of this issue is reflected in various documents , including its annual report to congress on military and security developments involving china . challenges in assessing the intentions of china's leaders include the following: statements from chinese ( or other national ) lea d ers about their intentions may not always be reliable . china's leaders make regular ( if often generalized ) statements about their intentions for their military through white papers and other public statements . these statements , however , might be attempts to influence foreign audiences or for domestic consumption , and might not be an accurate guide to understanding the actual intentions that china's leaders have for the pla . on the other hand , not all statements should be dismissed as posturing . what are the limits of what can be learned through these activities ? how does u.s. - china military - to - military engagement inform the u.s. government about chinese military capabilities ? does dod's annual report to congress on military and security developments involving china provide sufficient information to permit congress to make a well - considered ( if generalized ) independent assessment of china's military capabilities ? what changes , if any , might be needed in this report ( 10 u.s.c . for example , chinese leaders have made statements about china's "core interests" and their willingness to defend them by force if necessary ; such statements might reflect , to some degree at least , genuinely held views . the challenge is to discern posturing from genuine expressions . observing what kinds of military capabilities china is pursuing , and how these capabilities appear to align or not align with stated intentions , can help inform judgments on this question . limited chinese transparency . as with the matter of assessing china's military capabilities , assessing china's leaders' intentions regarding the military is made more complicated by china's limited transparency regarding intentions . dod states that "china's lack of transparency surrounding its growing military capabilities and strategic decision - making has also increased concerns in the region about china's intentions . absent greater transparency , these concerns will likely intensify as the pla modernization progresses. u.s. officials regularly urge china to be more transparent regarding their intentions . mirror imaging . assessing china's leaders' intentions regarding the military can benefit from having an accurate understanding of the values and belief sets of those leaders . those values and belief sets can differ , perhaps substantially , from the values and belief sets common to americans . mirror imaging — tacitly and perhaps unconsciously assuming that one's values and belief sets are shared by the other party — can lead to less accurate assessments of the other party's intentions . intentions can change .