race riots , since then , have been relatively rare . yet in december 2013 a traffic accident , which killed an indian national , sparked widespread rioting in singapore's little india district , involving over 400 people . lee hsien loong has served as prime minister since 2004 . lee is the son of former prime minister lee kuan yew , who stepped down in 1990 after 31 years at the helm . the senior lee , who died in may 2015 , still is widely acknowledged as the architect of singapore's success as a nation . he resigned his post as "minister mentor" following the 2011 elections , citing a need to pass leadership on to the next generation . in 2010 , changes to the constitution guaranteed that more non - pap members would be represented in the parliament . the electoral reforms were seen as an acknowledgement by the pap that it must adjust to a more open and diverse singapore . the country's leaders have acknowledged a "contract" with the singaporean people , under which individual rights are curtailed in the interest of maintaining a stable , prosperous society . supporters praise the pragmatism of singapore , noting its sustained economic growth and high standards of living . others criticize the approach as stunting creativity and entrepreneurship , and insist that singapore's leaders must respond to an increasingly sophisticated and well - educated public's demand for greater liberties for economic survival . singapore was a founding member of asean , the region's leading multilateral body , which allows southeast asia's mostly smaller countries to influence regional diplomacy , particularly vis - à - vis china . renewed u.s. engagement in the asia pacific under the obama administration has pleased singapore and may have allowed it more diplomatic space to stand up to beijing on key issues . singapore has praised the administration's "rebalancing" effort toward asia , yet has been careful to warn that anti - china rhetoric or efforts to "contain" china's rise will be counterproductive . at the same time , singapore leaders have publicly told chinese audiences that deeper tensions between china and the united states are detrimental to the broader asia region . maintaining strong relations with both china and the united states is a keystone of singapore's foreign policy . singapore often portrays itself as a useful balancer and intermediary between major powers in the region . in the south china sea dispute , for example , in 2011 , singapore — a non - claimant — called on china to clarify its island claims , characterizing its stance on the issue as neutral , yet concerned because of the threat to maritime stability . at the same time , singapore was hosting a port visit by a chinese surveillance vessel , part of an ongoing exchange on technical cooperation on maritime safety with beijing . china's economic power makes it a crucial component of trade policy for all countries in the region , but singapore's ties with beijing are multifaceted and extend to cultural , political , and educational exchanges as well . china is singapore's largest trading partner , and singapore signed on to the chinese - led asian infrastructure investment bank ( aiib ) .