veterans can also use the g.i . bill tuition benefits to cover tuition for the related instruction portion of an apprenticeship program . in some circumstances , funding from the departments of agriculture , transportation , and housing and urban development may also support apprenticeship . employers with registered apprenticeships may also receive distinct treatment in federal contracts . veterans education benefits ( g.i . fy2016 appropriations were about $34 million . historically , dedicated federal support for apprenticeship programs has been limited to appropriations for oa and an annual appropriation of approximately $1 million to support the women in apprenticeship and non - traditional occupations act ( wanto , p.l . in recent years , however , dedicated federal funds have been made available to support the development and expansion of apprenticeship programs: in december 2014 , dol solicited applications for competitive american apprenticeship grants . approximately $175 million in grants were awarded in september 2015 . the grants were funded by immigration visa fees , not congressional appropriations . the grants supported the development and expansion of apprenticeship programs , with emphasis on industries that utilize skilled foreign labor , such as information technology and healthcare . in fy2016 , the consolidated appropriations act of 2016 ( p.l . 114-113 ) appropriated $90 million to "expand opportunities relating to apprenticeship programs registered under the national apprenticeship act , to be available to the secretary to carry out activities through grants , cooperative agreements , contracts and other arrangements , with states and other appropriate entities[.] there are several federal programs in which supporting apprenticeship is an allowable use of funds . in many cases , these programs support the related instruction portion of the apprenticeship program . at present , funding related to registered apprenticeship is a relatively small portion of these programs' budgets . federal workforce development funds support a group of coordinated programs that support training and employment services . these funds are granted to states and subgranted to local workforce boards . training decisions are made at the local level . allowable uses of federal workforce funds include paying for an apprentice's related instruction , reimbursing an employer for a portion of the wages paid to a worker during on - the - job training , and providing placement assistance for an apprentice who completed a program . federal student aid provides financial assistance to individual students to assist in covering costs related to postsecondary education . apprentices who are eligible for need - based pell grants can use those funds for tuition , books , and other costs associated with the related instruction portion of a registered apprenticeship program if the apprentice is enrolled in an eligible certificate or degree program . apprentices may also qualify for federal work study funds in some circumstances . bill programs ) provide tuition assistance and a housing allowance for veterans who pursue postsecondary education . veterans enrolled in a registered apprenticeship may collect a portion of the g.i . oa receives an annual appropriation for operating costs . bill's housing allowance when enrolled . for example , workers enrolled in a registered apprenticeship program and employed on a federal construction project may not be subject to full prevailing wage requirements under the davis - bacon act and related acts .