neither measure received floor consideration . instead , after several continuing resolutions , congress chose to include foreign aid funding in the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l . 114-113 ) , which president obama signed into law on december 18 , 2015 . the legislation includes $32.9 billion for bilateral economic assistance and international security assistance worldwide . this global funding level is 2.8% higher than the administration's fy2016 request and about 1% lower than the fy2015 estimated level . it is unclear how much foreign assistance will be directed to latin america and the caribbean , since , for the most part , appropriations levels for individual countries and programs are not specified in the legislation or the accompanying explanatory statement . the appropriations levels that are specified in the legislation and explanatory statement differ from the administration's request in several respects . perhaps the most noteworthy difference involves funding for central america . the legislation provides up to $750 million to implement the new u.s. strategy for engagement in central america , which is $250 million less than requested . this includes about $68 million for el salvador ( $51 million less than requested ) , $128 million for guatemala ( $98 million less than requested ) , and $98 million for honduras ( $65 million less than requested ) . it also includes $349 million for carsi , which is $62 million more than was requested for the initiative . the legislation places a number of conditions on the funds , requiring the state department to withhold 75% of the assistance for the "central governments of el salvador , guatemala , and honduras" until the secretary of state certifies that those governments are "taking effective steps" to improve border security , combat corruption , increase revenues , and address human rights concerns , among other actions . there are several other instances where appropriations levels differ from those in the administration's request . the measure appears to provide $12 million more than was requested for colombia , $8 million more than was requested for mexico , and $4 million more than was requested for the cbsi . in all three cases , it shifts the emphasis of aid toward security concerns by providing less assistance than was requested through the esf account and providing more than was requested through the incle account . the act also stipulates that "not more than" $191 million may be provided to haiti , which is $50 million less than was requested . it requires the state department to withhold all assistance for the "central government of haiti" until the secretary of state certifies that the haitian government is "taking effective steps" to hold free and fair elections , strengthen the rule of law , combat corruption , and increase government revenues . while the request did not include any funding to support environmental programs in brazil , the omnibus provides $10.5 million for such programs . it also provides $6.5 million for democracy programs in venezuela , which is $1 million above the request . in the coming months , congress will continue to oversee the implementation of foreign aid programs in latin america and the caribbean and begin to consider the obama administration's fy2017 foreign assistance request for the region .