charter is not among the mvpds listed . federal regulators have approved the transaction . that transaction , if completed , could result in malone becoming a substantial shareholder in at&t . other owners of in demand include comcast and cox communications . through in demand , twc obtains rights to carry movies and events and to sell and / or rent video programming online . in demand also negotiates on behalf of comcast with studios for the right to sell electronic copies of movies directly to consumers , enabling comcast to compete directly with apple's itunes and amazon prime instant . in addition , in demand produces promotional programming on behalf of twc , bhn , and cox communications . in demand also owns and operates content delivery networks on behalf of its affiliates . by acquiring twc's and bhn's interests in in demand , charter could potentially facilitate coordination among cable operators with respect to the acquisition and marketing of programming for mvpds' on - demand services . twc , together with comcast and cox , owns national cable communications ( ncc ) , which sells advertising time to national and regional advertisers on behalf of "virtually every other tv service provider in the country. the transactions could potentially increase charter's ability to facilitate coordination among mvpds in the sale of advertising . in december 2011 , several cable operators entered into marketing agreements with verizon wireless . these agreements allow the companies to sell bundled offerings that include verizon wireless services and the cable operators' residential wireline voice , video , and internet access services in areas where verizon wireless's parent company , verizon communications inc. , sells dsl internet access service . with the proposed transaction , the incentive and ability of charter to coordinate its activities with verizon might increase , given the larger number of cable and internet access subscribers whom the agreements would affect . the agencies could investigate whether charter's proposed commitments would be sufficiently beneficial to mitigate potential harms of the transaction . among the benefits of the proposed transaction , charter claims that the transactions would increase twc's and bhn's incentives to invest in new services , infrastructure , and customer service . to verify this claim , the fcc would need to investigate whether twc and bhn were planning to make such investments independently , absent the proposed transaction . moreover , the fcc could investigate the extent to which charter's reliance on secured debt to fund the transactions could limit charter's ability to spend extensively on improving its products and services . if , after the transactions close , charter's costs are higher than , or revenues are lower than , what it anticipates today , charter may need to reduce spending on investments or sell off assets in order to repay debt holders . in july 2015 , charter pledged to the fcc that , as a condition of the agency's approval of the proposed transactions , it would maintain a settlement - free interconnection policy until december 31 , 2018 . according to its revised interconnection policy , charter will interconnect its network at no charge with ovds ( or other applicants delivering content to charter's subscribers ) under certain conditions .