figure 1 . percent of market value of crops sold from irrigated farms , 2012source: crs from usda , national agricultural statistics service ( nass ) , 2012 united states census of agriculture , ac 12-a - 51 , washington , dc , may 2014 , http: / / www.agcensus.usda.gov / publications / 2012 / full_report / volume_1,_chapter_1_us / usv1.pdf . figure 2 . percent change in irrigated acres in the united states , 1997-2013source: crs from usda , nass , quick stats , http: / / quickstats.nass.usda.gov / . the report is intended to provide an overview of on - farm irrigation and does not cover storage and conveyance prior to the farm or how irrigation adoption may alter other farm practices , such as the use of fertilizers and pesticides or impacts off - farm ( eg , groundwater and surface water quality concerns ) . while these issues are significant to understanding the full system that supports irrigated agriculture and the potential environmental impacts of irrigation , they are beyond the purpose and scope of this report . irrigation has played a significant role in the development and economy of the united states . it was critical in the settlement of the west and agricultural reinvention after the dust bowl . while irrigation has ancient roots , technological developments ( eg , pumps , plastics , computers , and sensors ) have transformed modern irrigated agriculture . the benefits of irrigation for the nation's agricultural industry have been expansive ; however , the application of irrigation technologies and the concomitant changes in the industry have not been without their costs . these costs include but are not limited to associated infrastructure ( eg , dams and conveyance facilities ) , programs supporting use ( eg , federal assistance for irrigation investments and efficiency improvements ) , and potential effects on other current and future water users and the environment . while there are many definitions that can be used for this term , irrigation efficiency in this report refers to the percentage of applied irrigation water that is beneficially used and not lost to evaporation or seepage during on - farm conveyance , percolation , or runoff . this is determined by several factors , including irrigation system performance , uniformity of water application , and crop response to irrigation . one factor to consider in determining irrigation efficiency is the rate of evapotranspiration . climate conditions , like length of sunlight hours , intensity of sunlight , temperature , humidity , wind speed , and canopy development , influence evapotranspiration rates , which determine the crop water requirement . another determinant of irrigation efficiency is the water conveyance system . irrigation canals that are not well constructed or maintained can lead to conveyance losses of up to 50% . efficient irrigation systems are often thought of as allowing the same level of crop production as less efficient systems while leaving additional water in the hydrological system for further use downstream . studies have shown , however , that in some cases efficient irrigation systems may lead to greater water consumption .