in addition , p.l . 115-174 , section 302 , amends the fcra to provide credit reporting protections for veterans as follows: cras must exclude certain medical debt incurred by a veteran from his or her credit report if the hospital care or medical services relating to the debt predates the credit report by less than one year . cras must remove from the credit report a veteran's fully paid or settled medical debt previously characterized as delinquent , charged off , or in collection . insured depository institutions ( i.e. , banks and credit unions ) rely on consumer data service providers to determine whether to make checking accounts or loans available to individuals . insurance companies use consumer data to determine what insurance products to make available and to set policy premiums . some payday lenders use data regarding the management of checking accounts and payment of telecommunications bills to determine the likelihood that a consumer will fail to repay small - dollar cash advances . merchants rely on the consumer data industry to determine whether to approve payment by check or electronic payment card . employers may use consumer data information to screen prospective employees to determine , for example , the likelihood of fraudulent behavior . in short , numerous firms rely upon consumer data to identify and evaluate the risks associated with entering into financial relationships or transactions with consumers . greater reliance by firms on consumer data significantly affects consumer access to financial products or opportunities . for example , negative or derogatory information , such as multiple overdrafts , involuntary account closures , loan defaults , and fraud incidents , may influence a lender to deny a consumer access to credit . further , such information may stay on a consumer's reports for several years . the inclusion of negative information may be particularly limiting to consumers under circumstances in which such information is inaccurate or needs to be updated to reflect more current and possibly more favorable financial situations . 1282 would direct the ftc to ensure sufficient standards for safeguarding consumer information , including for the credit bureaus and data furnishers . in addition , in march 2019 , a government accountability office report became public that recommended actions for the ftc , the cfpb , and congress to strengthen oversight of credit bureaus' data security . meanwhile , p.l . 115-174 , section 301 , requires credit bureaus to provide fraud alerts for consumer files for at least a year under certain circumstances . in addition , credit bureaus must provide consumers with one free freeze alert and one free unfreeze alert per year . the law also established further requirements to protect minors . currently , many credit bureaus provide consumers services such as credit monitoring for identity theft victims . in general , credit bureaus charge fees for these services , paid for by either a consumer or private company after a data breach incident . in short , tax - exempt hospitals must allow patients 120 days from the date of the first billing statement to pay the obligation before initiating collection procedures .