this report provides an overview of the excise tax . 114-113 ) delays implementation until 2020 . the excise tax is included in the aca to raise revenue to offset the cost of other aca provisions ( eg , the financial subsidies available through the health insurance exchanges ) . the most current publicly available cost estimate from the congressional budget office ( cbo ) indicates that the excise tax was expected to increase federal revenues by $87 billion between 2016 and 2025 , based on 2018 implementation . the excise tax also is expected to limit the tax advantages for employer - sponsored health coverage . many economists contend that the tax advantages lead to an overconsumption of coverage and health care services . the report includes cost estimates for the excise tax and explores the excise tax's relationship with the tax advantages for employer - sponsored health coverage . the information in this report is based on statute and two notices issued by the department of the treasury ( treasury ) and the internal revenue service ( irs ) . notice 2015-16 was issued february 17 , 2015 , and the comment period for the notice closed may 15 , 2015 . notice 2015-52 was issued july 30 , 2015 . the comment period for the notice closed october 1 , 2015 . as of the date of this report , regulations related to the excise tax have not been promulgated . many employers offer health insurance plans and other health - related benefits ( eg , health care flexible spending accounts , or fsas ) . these benefits are one part of an employee's total compensation . often employers pay for part or all of these benefits . to illustrate , 57% of employers offered health insurance plans to their employees in 2015 , and on average employers covered 82% of the premiums for single coverage and 71% of the premiums for family coverage . beginning in 2020 , a 40% excise tax is to be assessed on the aggregate cost of an employee's applicable coverage that exceeds a dollar limit during a taxable period . ending or modifying the tax exclusion could raise a significant amount of revenue , depending on how it would be modified or repealed and how employers and workers would adjust . the excise tax does not directly modify or end the tax exclusion ; however , the excise tax is seen as an indirect method for limiting the tax exclusion . as discussed above , official scores indicate that the revenue raised by the excise tax will come both from collection of the excise tax and from increases in taxable income . the increases in taxable income are a result of the expectation that employers will reduce the amount of health coverage they offer to employees to avoid paying the excise tax . unlike some other aca provisions , assessment of the excise tax is not dependent on an employer's characteristics ( eg , number of workers ) ; assessment is dependent on whether the aggregate cost of an employee's applicable coverage exceeds a dollar limit . the entity responsible for paying the excise tax to the irs is the coverage provider .