section 634 of p.l . 113-291 required a review of management , food , and pricing options for deca including using variable pricing in commissary stores to reduce the expenditure of appropriated funds ; implementing a program to make available more private label products in commissary stores ; converting the defense commissary system to a non - appropriated fund instrumentality ; and eliminating or at least reducing second - destination funding . section 652 of the enacted bill ( p.l . 114-92 , s. 1356 ) requires the comptroller general of the united states to submit a report on the commissary surcharge , non - appropriated fund , and privately - financed major construction program . the report will be submitted to the committees on armed services of both chambers no later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this act . codified at 10 u.s.c . 12304a and 12304b , these new activation authorities allow 120-day activations of certain reservists for disaster response and 365 day activations for preplanned missions in support of the combatant commands ( 12304a ) . crs point of contact : [author name scrubbed] , x[phone number scrubbed] . background: the purple heart is awarded to any member of the armed forces who has been ( 1 )  killed or wounded in action by weapon fire while directly engaged in armed conflict against an enemy of the united states ; ( 2 ) killed or wounded by friendly fire under certain circumstances ; or ( 3 ) killed or wounded as a result of an intentional terrorist attack against the united states . discussion: section 565 of the initial house - passed bill ( h.r . 1735 ) would exempt military duty under the new reserve activation authorities from counting towards the cumulative five year limit on military service for reemployment protection under userra . section 562 of the enacted bill ( p.l . 114-92 , s. 1356 ) incorporated the house provision . reference ( s ) : for more information on userra and the mobilization authorities , please see crs report rl30802 , reserve component personnel issues: questions and answers , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . crs point of contact: [author name scrubbed] , x[phone number scrubbed] . background: by statute ( 38 u.s.c . 101 ( 2 ) ) , a veteran is defined as a "person who served in the active military , naval , or air service , and who was discharged or released therefrom under conditions other than dishonorable. thus , an individual must have "active military , naval , or air service" to be considered a veteran for most va benefits . however , not all types of service are considered active military service for this purpose . in general , active service means full - time service , other than active duty for training , as a member of the army , navy , air force , marine corps , or coast guard ; as a commissioned officer of the public health service ; or as a commissioned officer of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration or its predecessors .