the restriction in h.r . 2822 , had it been enacted , would not have prohibited osm from utilizing unexpired unobligated balances in the osm regulation and technology account that could still be available for the rulemaking . osm released the final stream protection rule on december 19 , 2016 , to be effective on january 19 , 2017 . the rule was published in the federal register on december 20 . the final rule closely resembles the 2015 proposed rule but also reflects a number of revisions . requirements for baseline water quality monitoring data are revised to reduce required frequency and minimum parameters ( see " baseline data collection " ) . stream definitions and classifications ( eg , ephemeral , intermittent , and perennial ) in the rule are revised for consistency with u.s. army corps of engineers definitions by limiting the scope to conveyances with channels that have a bed - and - bank configuration and an ordinary high water mark . the definition of "material damage to the hydrologic balance outside the permit area" is revised by removing all proposed criteria and instead providing a list of factors that the regulatory authority , in consultation with the clean water act authority , must identify in identifying material damage thresholds ( see " definition of 'material damage to the hydrologic balance outside the permit area' " ) . post - mining requirements for mountaintop removal mining operations are revised . for example , permit applicants will be required to have substantially , but not fully , implemented approved post - mining land use prior to final bond release , and applicants will not be required to post additional bond sufficient to ensure that lands approved for an aoc variance can be returned to aoc if the proposed post - mining land use is not implemented ( see " approximate original contour ( aoc ) and aoc variances " ) . osm provided clarification in response to industry criticism that the rule would effectively prohibit underground mining using longwall technology . the final rule states that it does not prohibit temporary impacts to streams and other water resources as a result of longwall mining as long as those impacts do not rise to the level of material damage to the hydrologic balance outside the permit area . the final stream protection rule clarifies that streamside vegetative corridors , or riparian corridors , which are required to be adjacent to streams that are mined through , are to be at least 100-feet wide on each side of a restored stream , not 50 feet on either side of a stream . osm prepared a final regulatory impact analysis ( ria ) for the final rule that forecasts lower baseline coal production and increased industry compliance costs , compared with the draft ria . a number of aspects of osm's analysis changed as a result of regulatory changes reflected in the final rule , revised estimates based on public comments , and other factors . for example , osm revised its baseline coal demand estimates because of continuing decline of the coal industry , largely due to substitution of natural gas for coal among u.s. power plants .