there are several issues for congress . moreover , any attack against the icbm force represents a direct attack against the united states . therefore , icbms deny prospective enemies "any hope of half - way measures against us: if they mean nuclear war , then they must decide upon nuclear war. as analysts within and outside dod continue to debate the value of the nuclear deterrent to the defense of the united states , congress may wish to reevaluate whether to continue to support the nation's icbm force . first , congress may consider whether the current plans for the nuclear enterprise ( consisting of leadership , people and things that work on the nuclear mission ) are sufficient to address the problems within the icbm force or whether there may be other ways to sustain the current force . second , congress may consider whether the united states should continue to deploy icbms in the future nuclear force structure , particularly in light of expected financial constraints . it may consider whether nuclear weapons modernization programs will compete with each other , or with conventional weapons programs , for scarce resources . finally , congress may question whether the united states can afford to forgo icbm sustainment and modernization programs in an era of changing national security challenges . the u.s. nuclear force is a "triad" consisting of strategic ballistic missile submarines ( ssbns ) that carry submarine - launched ballistic missiles ( slbms ) , the land - based icbm force , and long - range bomber aircraft . each leg of the triad has both strengths and weaknesses , leading some analysts to recognize the complementary capabilities of the three legs . according to the nuclear posture review , "strategic nuclear submarines and the slbms they carry represent the most survivable leg of the u.s. nuclear triad. some argue single - warhead icbms contribute to stability , and like slbms are not vulnerable to air defenses . unlike slbms and icbms , bombers can be visibly forward deployed , as a signal in crisis to strengthen deterrence of potential adversaries and assurance to allies and partners . others contend that , because each leg of the triad contributes unique attributes that enhance deterrence and reduce risk , together they comprise a robust deterrent that complicates a potential adversary's offensive and defensive planning . in this view , they provide a "synergistic force" that provides protection against the failure of any single one of its legs . as a result , many analysts believe that these complementary capabilities justify retaining all three legs for the foreseeable future . in october 2010 , the air force produced an icbm master plan that outlined its approach to sustaining and modernizing the minuteman ( mm ) force . this report indicated that the air force would sustain the minuteman iii missiles through 2030 and deploy a follow - on system after 2030 . the plan states that "beginning in 2020 , large - scale investment will be required to sustain mm iii through 2030 . these modernization efforts must support both sustainment through 2030 and recapitalization for a minuteman follow - on after 2030. .