each of these categories is discussed below . s. 1894 contains several titles and individual provisions that are not in h.r . among these are modification of and / or explicit authority for existing programs and authorities and creation of new programs that were not previously authorized . selected examples of these changes are highlighted below . among the key issues for congress is how to address water supply shortages in general and management of federal water supply projects in particular during times of drought and increasing demand . myriad laws , regulations , contracts , and other obligations affect federal water project management . balancing these obligations while meeting growing demands for water for multiple purposes poses challenges for western water managers at all levels: federal , state , tribal , and local . 2898 and s. 1894 propose to address some of these challenges by providing guidance for reclamation's management of the cvp , which would result in changes to cvp operations under certain circumstances . both bills call for maximizing water supplies to users , with certain limitations . 2898 also contains specific guidance on the implementation of biops . these conditions under both bills raise questions of how much discretion federal agencies would have in implementing the cvp's operations and how the management provisions in each bill would be implemented . some may also question whether aspects of one or both bills contain conflicting operational directives within the bill or among other regulations . for example , how would cvp directives in either bill be implemented in relation to state water quality regulations ? both bills call for measuring the effects of water operations on listed species under esa . s. 1894 states that operations are to be consistent with applicable laws and regulations ( including esa ) ; h.r . 2898 conditions several actions on the "negative effect on the long term survival of the species. some might question if h.r . , rifia ) that differs from traditional reclamation project financing . some of the questions related to both bills may include what quantity of water supplies would be generated by new authorities and programs and at what federal and nonfederal cost . in addition , some may ask how new authorities and processes that would be established in the bills would be prioritized relative to ongoing agency activities and how ( or whether ) spending provisions might be offset . 2898 would set a new standard for measuring effects on species under esa or if maximizing water supplies in the short term could have long - term effects on the viability of species populations . each bill contains certain provisions that would direct greater data collection and monitoring . 2898 includes provisions that would specify how certain aspects of the delta smelt and salmon biops would be implemented . these provisions may raise questions about how better data collection and more accurate accounting of species populations could result in higher pumping rates and water exports . further , these proposed changes might raise the question of whether the effects of operational changes could be better detected and acted upon in a manner that will protect the species .