jtf – guantanamo was established in late 2002 . , also shall continue in effect in the same form and on the same conditions with respect to the naval station at guantanamo . office of military commissions – south detachment: military commissions were created by the president under the authority of the military commissions act of 2006 , since amended . the director of the office of military commissions is directly subordinate to the secretary of defense and the deputy secretary of defense . the territorial limits of the naval station remain as they were in 1934 , unless the united states abandons guantanamo bay ( effectively ending the lease ) or the two governments reach an agreement to modify its boundaries . the office of military commissions is located in washington , dc . the office's guantanamo bay detachment ( omc - south ) works in a temporary facility , camp justice , that sits on the closed mccalla airfield on the east side of the mouth of guantanamo bay . the origins of the u.s. military installation at guantanamo bay , cuba , lie in the execution of military operations during the spanish - american war of april - august 1898 . so long as the united states of america shall not abandon the said naval station of guantanamo or the two governments shall not agree to a modification of its present limits , the station shall continue to have the territorial area that it now has , with the limits that it has on the date of the signature of the present treaty . thus , the two earlier executive agreements pertaining to the guantanamo lease ( one entered into force on february 23 , 1903 , and the second entered into force on october 6 , 1903 ) can only be modified or abrogated pursuant to an agreement between the united states and cuba . the pertinent question is whether , under u.s. law , a modification or termination of the lease agreements can be accomplished with an executive agreement or whether it must take the form of a treaty , ratified pursuant to the advice and consent of the senate . a second question is whether the president has the authority to "abandon" the naval station without action by congress . jonathan m. hansen , guantanamo : an american history ( new york: hill and wang , 2011 ) . theodore k. mason , across the cactus curtain: the story of guanta n amo bay ( new york: dodd , mead , 1984 ) . marion emerson murphy , the history of guantánamo bay ( san juan: district publications and printing office , tenth naval district , 1953 ) . michael j. strauss , the leasing of guantanamo bay ( westport , connecticut: praeger security international , 2009 ) . the military campaign in cuba began with the landing of u.s. marines at guantanamo bay on the island's southeastern coast in early june 1898 and the eventual capture of the various spanish fortifications in the vicinity by a combined u.s. - cuban force .