title i of p.l . 114-113 provided $137 million for osem , $3.2 million ( 2.4% ) more than requested . as in the senate - reported bill , $13 million of osem funding was withheld from obligation until both the comprehensive plan to implement the biometric entry and exit data system and the report on visa overstay data by country are submitted , as required , within 30 days after the act's enactment , to the house committees on appropriations , the judiciary , and homeland security and the senate committees on appropriations , the judiciary , and homeland security and governmental affairs . the explanatory statement specified that the visa overstay report must include ( 1 ) overstays from all nonimmigrant visa categories under the immigration laws , by each class and sub - class ; and ( 2 ) numbers and rates of overstays for each class and sub - class of nonimmigrant categories per country . the house committee recommended the requested $5 million for the joint requirements council ( jrc ) . the committee report directed the department to keep the committee informed on the council's efforts to examine and reform joint operations within dhs and to clearly display in its budget execution and justification materials efficiencies and savings achieved from jrc operations . the explanatory statement directed the jrc to provide quarterly briefings beginning no later than january 30 , 2016 , on its results with regard to improving and leveraging joint requirements across components . the house report stated the committee's expectation that dhs would track the number of times that unmanned aircraft systems are used along the border , in a maritime environment , or in support of state , local , and tribal law enforcement entities , to monitor compliance with laws and standards on privacy and civil liberties . the report also stated that committee's expectations that the department would submit , by the required deadlines , reports that ( 1 ) assess the feasibility , cost , and benefits of implementing a universal complaint system across the department , to ensure that complaints are promptly addressed , and ( 2 ) provide an update on the corrective action plan to address low employee morale and the poor climate for workplace innovation . the explanatory statement directed the department to expeditiously brief the house and senate appropriations committees on the report ( which is overdue ) on a universal complaint system . the house committee report directed the office of policy to provide a detailed description of all dhs countering violent extremism ( cve ) programs and initiatives , including associated personnel and funding levels , within 60 days after the act's enactment as a means to ensure that the united states "is positioned to counter homegrown violent extremism and prevent domestic radicalization. a new general provision at section 543 in p.l . 114-113 provided $50 million "for emergent threats from violent extremism and from complex coordinated terrorist attacks. the funds may be transferred by the secretary between appropriations upon 15 days advance notice to the house and senate appropriations committees .