the amount for such grants was not specified . the act specified that the grants should be used to provide services only to individuals who have been lawfully admitted into the u.s. for permanent residence . the act also continued a provision described above in the senate - and house - reported bills that requires the completion of background checks and their receipt by dhs prior to the granting of any immigration benefits . the explanatory statement accompanying division f directed uscis to brief the committees on actions to implement the government accountability office's recommendations from its review of fraud in the asylum process , and to provide progress updates every 60 days thereafter until all recommendations have been implemented for all types of benefits . gao was directed to perform a similarly scoped review of fraud for the refugee screening process . the statement directed uscis to include e - verify usage statistics on its website and to report on the use of advance parole within 90 days following passage of the act . it directed uscis to report on the results of its fee study within 30 days of passage of the act . it also directed the agency to report on noncitizen compliance with address change notification requirements under 8 u.s.c . 1305 within 120 days of passage of the act . a potential issue for congress involved ongoing concerns about e - verify operability . e - verify helps employers ascertain whether their employees have the requisite legal status and work authorization to work lawfully in the united states . the senate committee report acknowledged improvements in the accuracy of e - verify and directed uscis to include national - level e - verify utilization statistics on its website . the senate committee directed uscis to increase incentives for smaller businesses to use e - verify and directed uscis to report to congress on estimated costs and time required for making e - verify mandatory for employers . 114-113 was silent on further directions from congress to uscis regarding e - verify . the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) provides basic and advanced law enforcement instruction to 91 federal entities with law enforcement responsibilities . fletc also provides specialized training to state and local law enforcement entities , campus police forces , law enforcement organizations of native american tribes , and international law enforcement agencies . by training officers in a multi - agency environment , fletc intends to promote consistency and collaboration across its partner organizations . fletc administers four training sites throughout the united states , but also uses online training and provides training at other locations when its specialized facilities are not needed . fletc employs approximately 1,100 personnel . the administration requested $267 million in net discretionary budget authority for fletc for fy2016 , $8 million ( 3.2% ) above the enacted level for fy2015 . the request envisions an additional $117 million in reimbursements from other government agencies for law enforcement training . the senate - reported bill included $246 million for fletc , $21 million ( 7.8% ) less than requested , and more than $12 million ( 4.8% ) less than fy2015 .