the full senate has not acted on any of these bills . legislation similar to s. 373 has been introduced in the house in the 114 th congress ( h.r . on may 18 , 2016 , the house passed h.r . 4909 , the national defense authorization act for fy2017 . title xxxvi of this bill , as passed , is identical to the text of h.r . section 10 addresses the effect of the bill on state authority . section 10 would generally prohibit a state or political subdivision from adopting or enforcing any law or rule concerning vessel discharges after enactment of the bill . however , it modifies this general prohibition by authorizing a state or political subdivision to adopt or enforce a ballast water law or rule that is more stringent than the standards under the vessel incidental discharge act if the coast guard makes a determination that compliance with the standard can be achieved and detected ; that technology is commercially available ; and determines that the law or rule is consistent with international treaties or agreements to which the united states is a party . a state or political subdivision seeking to adopt or enforce its own more stringent law or rule is authorized in section 10 to petition the coast guard , and the coast guard is required to make a determination on a petition within 90 days of receipt . finally , section 11 states that upon enactment , the legislation shall be the exclusive statutory authority for federal regulation of vessel discharges . further , any existing regulation relating to a permitting requirement or prohibition on vessel discharges shall be deemed to be a regulation under this act that remains in effect unless or until superseded by new rules under the vessel incidental discharge act . legislation intended to strengthen regulation and management of ballast water discharges that can be a source of non - native aquatic invasive species in u.s. waters has been introduced in congress for more than a decade , including proposals to require vessels to achieve specific ballast water treatment performance standards . in recent years — especially since epa's issuance of the first vessel general permit in 2008 — some of the proposals have evolved and been expanded to address administrative aspects of ballast water regulation , that is , clarifying what some term a "jumble" of federal and state requirements . while many in the maritime industry strongly support the legislation discussed in this report , others , including some states and environmental advocacy groups , continue to oppose aspects of the proposals . the administration's position on the current legislation is unknown . the coast guard could establish lower or higher revised performance standards with respect to classes of vessels , if appropriate . upon enactment of the bill , manufacturers of ballast water treatment technology could only sell , deliver , or import technology that has been certified by the coast guard as meeting criteria in the legislation . finally , a state could adopt or enforce a more stringent ballast water performance standard if the coast guard determines that compliance with the state standard is achievable and is consistent with obligations under relevant international treaties or agreements .