11423 , as amended by e.o . 10485 , as amended by e.o . broadly speaking , each executive order requires the respective agency to do the following: gather necessary project - specific information from the applicant ; seek input from specific outside federal agencies ; and decide whether to seek input from additional local , state , tribal , or federal agencies or from members of the public . under the applicable executive order , each agency is required to issue a presidential permit if , after evaluating all relevant project information , the agency determines that the project would "serve the national interest" ( pursuant to e.o . depending on the type of project - and site - specific impacts of the project , additional federal requirements may apply to the proposal . for example , natural gas pipelines are subject to requirements established by or pursuant to the natural gas act . each agency authorized to issue presidential permits informs its decisionmaking regarding such permits using information gathered in accordance with its procedures implementing the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa ) . in part , nepa requires federal agencies to ensure that the environmental impacts of an action are identified and taken into consideration before making a final agency decision about the action . permit conditions , such as mitigation measures and additional compliance requirements , are also generally identified during the nepa review . for example , during the nepa review , an agency may identify construction procedures or mitigation measures that the applicant must implement to ensure compliance with other applicable federal law , such as the endangered species act or clean water act . 1487 ) and the north american energy infrastructure act ( s. 1228 ) . given the issues that arose in the wake of transcanada's application for the keystone xl pipeline , congress may again propose legislation intended to expedite approval of future applications for presidential permits . this report focusses on the presidential permit review processes for cross - border energy infrastructure as implemented by these agencies: the department of state for pipelines and similar facilities that transport liquids such as petroleum , petroleum products , and other hazardous liquids ; the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) for natural gas pipelines and associated facilities ; and the department of energy ( doe ) for electricity transmission lines and associated facilities . however , such a decision was a rare exception , not the rule . each agency's permitting process involves the identification and analysis of project - specific impacts of a proposal . that information is gathered in accordance with executive order directives , the agency's nepa implementation process , and any other applicable federal requirements . once a presidential permit is issued , the applicant ( then permittee ) must site , construct , operate , and maintain the border - crossing facilities in accordance with conditions specified in the permit . as a result , subsequent modifications to the facility related to its siting , construction , operation , or maintenance may require additional authorization from the permitting agency .