, such notifications are generally not made ) . the clinton administration's amendments were revoked by the george w. bush administration shortly after their effective date , making it difficult to assess what their effects on the procurement process would have been . the questions and answers are organized into three sections . as previously noted , contractors are generally not entitled to notice and an opportunity for a hearing prior to being found nonresponsible for the award of a federal contract ( see " what is de facto debarment , and will implementation of the order result in de facto debarment of contractors ? the cases of any "otherwise qualified" small business contractors who might be found nonresponsible must be referred to the sba , which may certify as to the firm's responsibility ( see " will there be changes in the certificate of competency process used in determining the responsibility of small businesses ? outside of the sba certificate of competency process , however , the far does not make any provisions for review or appeal of contracting officers' determinations as to responsibility within ( or outside ) the procuring agency . these determinations could , however , potentially be challenged in the course of a bid protest before the procuring agency , the government accountability office , or the u.s. court of federal claims , the three forums with jurisdiction over bid protests . in such a protest , a vendor that was denied an award because it was found to be nonresponsible could contest that determination on the grounds that the determination is arbitrary , capricious , an abuse of discretion , or otherwise not in accordance with law . alternatively , a vendor that lost an award to a competitor which was found to be affirmatively responsible could seek to challenge that determination , although gao regulations , in particular , permit challenges to affirmative determinations of responsibility only in narrow circumstances . prevailing in such bid protests could be difficult , though , because the reviewing tribunals afford substantial deference to the contracting officers' determinations as to responsibility on the grounds these determinations are committed to agency discretion by law , and the procuring agencies "must bear the brunt of any difficulties experienced during performance. this generally means that the protester must show that the contracting officer's determination lacked "any reasonable basis," or was arbitrary or made in bad faith . moreover , in cases of nonresponsibility determinations , review is generally limited to the information available to the contracting officer at the time of the determination . the review could potentially encompass information not considered by the contracting officer in cases where the contracting officer has made an affirmative determination of responsibility . however , affirmative determinations of responsibility are not necessarily seen as invalid just because information exists that is adverse to the contractor , so long as this information was known to and not ignored by the contracting officer when making the determination . limitations on jurisdiction and standing could also effectively limit vendors' ability to challenge responsibility determinations in certain cases , since the protest forums will generally only hear protests that are seen to be timely .