appear under each section heading . along with each faq is the page ( s ) in the proposed rule where the relevant provision is located . in the proposed rule , cms proposes to better align the medicaid managed care regulations with regulations governing other health coverage markets , such as medicare advantage and the health insurance exchanges established under the aca . the mco assumes the financial risk for spending . federal regulations provide guidance to states on delivering care through mcos , including requirements and standards for contracts and for setting capitation rates . cms considered the standards and market reforms established under the aca in developing the proposed rule . this standard would apply to both voluntary ( where enrollment in managed care is voluntary for the beneficiary ) and mandatory ( where enrollment in managed care is required ) managed care programs . the aca established health insurance exchanges and qualified health plans ( qhps ) to provide health care coverage to millions of americans . qhps are the only health plans that can be offered on the exchanges , and they are the only plans for which the premium tax credits and reduced cost sharing established under the aca are available to enrollees . cms would apply these standards during the review and approval process of the state's capitation rates . under a more limited risk - based arrangement , states contract with limited - benefit health plans called prepaid inpatient health plans ( pihps ) and prepaid ambulatory health plans ( pahps ) . these plans typically deliver a limited benefit package , sometimes limited to a single benefit such as dental coverage , in return for a capitated payment from the state medicaid program . in the past , managed care generally has been used to provide coverage to healthier populations , but more and more states are using it for people who need ltss . managed ltss ( mltss ) refers to the delivery of ltss benefits through managed care . mltss can be provided through mcos , pihps , or pahps that receive a capitated payment from the state medicaid program . the number of states with mltss programs has grown significantly over the past decade . only 8 states had mltss programs in 2004 , compared with 16 states in 2012 . in response to this growth , cms released guidance in may 2013 for states to use in setting up an mltss program through a 1915 ( b ) waiver or a section 1115 demonstration . the proposed rule would codify that guidance . the may 2013 guidance outlined 10 key elements for high - quality mltss programs , which can be found in the proposed rule . yes , the proposed rule would make changes that are specific to mltss .