106-569 ) was removed . the law limited the amount of origination fees that can be charged . hecms were allowed to be used to purchase a one - to four - family home . the reverse mortgage stabilization act of 2013 ( p.l . for more information about limits on initial disbursements , see " how are disbursements made ? while reverse mortgages were made privately on a small scale starting in the 1970s , the initial federal government involvement occurred as a one - time grant through the administration on aging ( aoa ) , within the department of health and human services , called the home equity conversion project . aoa awarded a grant to researchers in the state of wisconsin to conduct a feasibility study for reverse mortgages . the wisconsin department of aging had already begun a "reverse mortgage study project" in 1978 . it used the aoa funding to conduct consumer research and provide technical assistance on six pilot projects across the country that experimented with lending against home equity for seniors . about the same time that the home equity conversion project was underway , as part of the 1980 white house conference on aging , the conference's mini - conference on housing for the elderly released a report with recommendations for providing housing assistance as individuals age . one of the recommendations was to develop a way in which seniors could use home equity to supplement their income ; the reverse mortgage was one of the options proposed . in 1982 , partially in response to the mini - conference recommendations , the senate special committee on aging held a hearing on the issue of home equity conversion , and later released an informational report about options for converting home equity into income . legislation to enact a home equity conversion mortgage program was introduced in the 98 th and 99 th congresses , but no laws were enacted . in the subsequent congress , in 1988 , the hecm program was enacted as a demonstration , the home equity conversion mortgage insurance demonstration ( p.l . the program was based on a combination of provisions from both a senate - passed bill ( s. 825 ) and a house - passed bill ( h.r . 4 ) that were brought together in conference . based on hearings and congressional committee reports leading up to the program's enactment , the rationale for creating a reverse mortgage insurance program was to help seniors with lower incomes , and who had available home equity , remain in their homes and pay for expenses that they might not otherwise be able to afford . in addition , both of the relevant house and senate committees discussed in their respective reports regarding hecms the need for government insurance as a means to encourage private lenders to enter into reverse mortgages . for example , the house committee on banking , finance , and urban affairs , in its report accompanying h.r . ) ; current issues facing the hecm program ( " what are current issues surrounding hecms ? the committee report went on to cite with approval the fact that the bill contained protections for borrowers such as required counseling and the prohibition on involuntary displacement .