in united states v . lopez , the court invalidated the gun - free school zones act of 1990 , which criminalized the knowing possession of a firearm in a school zone as beyond congress's authority under the commerce clause . the government argued that violent crime affected the national economy by deterring travelers and also imposed a threat to school environments , which , in turn , could result in a less educated population , which would negatively affect the economy . the court , however , observed that the statute had nothing to do with economic activity and noted the lack of any "jurisdictional element which would ensure … that the firearm in question affects interstate commerce. the court ultimately rejected the government's arguments , observing that under its theories "it is difficult to perceive any limitation on federal power. accepting the government's argument , the court reasoned , would require it to "pile inference upon inference" to find a substantial effect on interstate commerce and would result in congressional usurpation of the states' police power . similarly , in united states v. morrison , the court invalidated a provision of the violence against women act of 1994 , which authorized the victims of gender - motivated violence to sue the perpetrator for damages , as exceeding congress's authority under the commerce clause . the court noted that congress did support the legislation with congressional findings indicating the effect of gender - motivated violence on interstate commerce but concluded that congress was relying on a "but - for causal chain from the initial occurrence of violent crime to … every attenuated effect upon interstate commerce. this reasoning "would allow congress to regulate any crime so long as the nationwide" impact affected interstate commerce . the court thus ruled that congress may not regulate "noneconomic , violent criminal conduct based solely on that conduct's aggregate effect on interstate commerce. the court has also narrowly construed statutes to avoid confronting whether congress exceeded its commerce clause authority . for example , in jones v. u nited states , the federal government prosecuted an individual for arson of a private residence not used for commercial purposes . the underlying statute criminalized the destruction by fire of a building "used" in interstate commerce . noting the "constitutional questions" that would arise if the court interpreted the statute to criminalize "traditionally local … conduct," the court read the "used" language to require "active employment for commercial purposes , and not merely a passive , passing , or past connection to commerce. because the home burned by the defendant was not used in this way , the court read the statute not to apply and vacated the conviction . proposals to federalize crimes of violence by local and state police officers without a jurisdictional hook to interstate economic activity might not be upheld as valid legislation under the commerce clause . the court has noted that drawing a clear line between economic and non - economic activity can sometimes be difficult but has explained that "'[e]conomics' refers to 'the production , distribution , and consumption of commodities.'