dark web . deep web . the deep web , as noted , cannot be accessed by traditional search engines because the content in this layer of the web is not indexed . information here is not "static and linked to other pages" as is information on the surface web . as researchers have noted , "[i]t's almost impossible to measure the size of the deep web . while some early estimates put the size of the deep web at 4,000 – 5,000 times larger than the surface web , the changing dynamic of how information is accessed and presented means that the deep web is growing exponentially and at a rate that defies quantification. within the deep web , the dark web is also growing as new tools make it easier to navigate . the final relay is called the "exit relay," and the ip address of this relay is viewed as the source of the tor traffic . this number surpassed 2 billion in 2010 and crested over 3 billion in 2014 . as such , it appears that the connection to any given website "is coming from the ip address of a tor exit relay , which can be anywhere in the world. as of july 2016 , more than 46% of the world population was connected to the internet . while data exist on the number of internet users , data on the number of users accessing the various layers of the web and on the breadth of these layers are less clear . surface web . the magnitude of the web is growing . according to one estimate , there were 334.6 million internet top - level domain names registered globally during the second quarter of 2016 . this is a 12.9% increase from the number of domain names registered during the same period in 2015 . as such , the bulk of this section focuses on the illegal activities . because of the anonymity provided by tor and other software such as i2p , the dark web can be a playground for nefarious actors online . as noted , however , there are a number of areas in which the study and use of the dark web may provide benefits . this is true not only for citizens and businesses seeking online privacy , but also for certain government sectors — namely the law enforcement , military , and intelligence communities . the deep web and dark web have been of increasing interest to researchers , law enforcement , and policy makers . however , clear data on the scope and nature of these layers of the internet are unavailable ; anonymity often afforded by services such as tor for users accessing the deepest corners of the web contributes to this lack of clarity , as does the sometimes temporary nature of the websites hosted there . individuals , businesses , and governments may all rely upon the digital underground . it may be used for legal and illegal activities ranging from keeping sensitive communications private to selling illegal contraband . despite some reaching for increased privacy and security online , researchers have questioned whether there will be a corresponding uptick in individuals turning to anonymizing services such as tor .