the house passed h.r . 2578 contained no language supporting such restrictions . on october 20 , 2015 , the senate failed to pass a cloture motion to consider s. 2146 , which would have made sanctuary jurisdictions ineligible for certain federal grants . this bill also sought to ensure that states and localities had the "authority to carry out detainers" and to limit their liability for actions taken pursuant to immigration detainers . the senate also considered two measures , s. 3100 and s. 2193 , that would have restricted federal funding to cities that decline to honor detainers ; and increase penalties ( i.e. , prison sentence ) for migrants who illegally renter the country . s. 3100 would have withheld a range of federal grants for public works , economic development , planning , administrative expenses , training , research , and technical assistance from such sanctuary jurisdictions . s. 2193 would have increased maximum prison terms for unauthorized aliens by setting a five - year maximum sentence for unauthorized aliens with felony convictions caught two or more times , and a 10-year maximum sentence on unauthorized aliens caught reentering three times . the senate failed to pass a cloture motion to consider either bill . state and local facilities report their data to doj . a brief discussion of resources dedicated to these efforts follows . the report concludes with a discussion of select issues and an analysis of possible policy approaches for congress . the enforcement of immigration laws in the interior of the united states has long been a controversial topic . traditionally , the debate emphasized economic and labor market issues , with those concerned about whether unauthorized aliens were depressing wages and taking jobs from native workers pitted against those who argued that foreign labor was critical for certain industries and benefitted the broader economy . after the attacks of september 11 , 2001 ( 9 / 11 ) , attention refocused on the adequacy of interior immigration enforcement , especially the perceived lack of federal resources . although ice has seen an increase in resources to carry out its immigration enforcement responsibilities , the number of ice agents pales in comparison to the resources available to local law enforcement agencies ( leas ) throughout the country . while immigration enforcement is a federal responsibility , interior enforcement programs that involve cooperation between ice and state and local law enforcement agencies can allow a relatively small number of ice agents to leverage much larger numbers of state and local law enforcement agents . ice operates four major programs that target criminal aliens . the criminal alien program ( cap ) serves as an umbrella program for marshaling the agency's resources to identify and remove criminal and other removable aliens . cap is guided by the priority enforcement program ( pep ) , which represents a set of enforcement priorities that describe which foreign nationals should be removed and in what priority order . pep also comprises a data sharing infrastructure or "interoperability" between dhs and the department of justice ( doj ) that screens for immigration violations when individuals are booked into jails .