appendix a . additional wic data appendix b . revisions of wic food packages , 2003-present 2009 changes to the wic food packages effective october 1 , 2009 , usda significantly revised the wic food packages . these changes were made to reflect updates and revisions in nutrition science , public health concerns , and cultural eating patterns . the revised packages provide participants with a wider variety of foods , including whole grains , fruits , and vegetables ; increase incentives for breastfeeding ; and allow states greater flexibility in accommodating cultural preferences of participants . before usda embarked on this process to update the food packages , there had not been a major revision since the 1970s . in 2003 , usda - fns contracted with the institute of medicine ( iom ) to independently review the wic food packages , in order to align them more closely with updated nutrition science . iom released its final report in 2005 , recommending significant , though cost - neutral , changes to the food packages . iom's major recommendations included the addition of whole - wheat bread and infant foods including fruits , vegetables , and meats ; revised food quantities and food package categories ; additional foods for breastfeeding women and breastfed infants ; providing new optional food - substitutions ( such as soy milk and tofu ) ; and the introduction of a cash - value voucher ( cvv ) redeemable for a specified dollar amount of fruits and vegetables . in december 2007 , usda - fns published an interim final rule to update the wic food packages . this interim rule largely included the iom's recommendations , and state agencies were required to implement the changes in their state lists by october 1 , 2009 . while the interim final rule was in effect , usda - fns collected comments on its implementation , receiving over 7,500 letters . the agency published a final rule in march 2014 . about the white potato policy changes the description of the wic food packages in the " supplemental food package " section of this report largely reflects the march 2014 final rule . both the interim and final rules restricted the purchase of white potatoes , but a 2015 legislative change now allows their purchase . one of the changes in the updated food packages was the inclusion of the cvv . based on the 2005 iom recommendations , these interim and final regulations did not allow participants to purchase white potatoes with the cvv . iom cited the 2005 dietary guidelines for americans for starchy vegetable consumption as well as food intake data showing that white potatoes , unlike many other vegetables , were already widely consumed . this policy proved to be controversial in congress and related proposals were included in the 112 th and 113 th congress . in december 2014 , congress enacted a fy2015 appropriations law that included a policy rider ( section 753 of p.l . 113-235 ) to change wic's exclusion of white potatoes . the law barred usda from excluding any vegetable ( without added sugar , salt , or fat ) from the wic food packages , therefore allowing white potatoes .