735 ( serrano ) . 635 ( rangel ) , among its various provisions , has the goal of facilitating the export of u.s. agricultural and medical exports to cuba by permanently redefining the term "payment of cash in advance" to mean that payment is received before the transfer of title and release and control of the commodity to the purchaser ; authorizing direct transfers between cuban and u.s. financial institutions for products exported under the terms of tsra ; establishing an export promotion program for u.s. agricultural exports to cuba ; and prohibiting restrictions on travel to cuba . s. 491 ( klobuchar ) would remove various provisions of law restricting trade and other relations with cuba , including certain restrictions in the cda , the libertad act , and tsra that currently prohibit financing of agricultural sales to cuba , u.s. export assistance for sales to cuba including credit and guarantees , and the entry of cuban goods into the united states . s. 1049 ( heitkamp ) would amend tsra to allow for the private financing of agricultural commodity sales to cuba . s. 1543 ( moran ) / h.r . 3238 ( emmer ) would repeal or amend various provisions of law restricting trade and other relations with cuba , including certain restrictions in the cda , the libertad act , and tsra . it would repeal restrictions on private financing for cuba in tsra but continue to prohibit u.s. government foreign assistance or financial assistance , loans , loan guarantee , extension of credit , or other financing for export to cuba , albeit with presidential waiver authority for national security or humanitarian reasons . under the initiative , the federal government would be prohibited from expending any funds to promote trade with cuba or develop markets in cuba , although certain federal commodity research and promotion programs that are funded through mandatory assessments would be allowed . 3687 ( crawford ) would amend tsra to remove the prohibition on u.s. entities from making loans or extending credit to cuba to facilitate sales of agricultural commodities . the bill would also permit u.s. government assistance in support of u.s. agricultural exports to cuba — including the market access program , the export credit guarantee program and the foreign market development cooperator program and federal commodity promotion programs — provided the recipient of the assistance is not controlled by the cuban government . it would also authorize investment for development of an agricultural business in cuba so long as it is not controlled by the cuban government or does not traffic in property of u.s. nationals confiscated by the cuban government . three bills would lift the overall embargo: h.r . 274 ( rush ) , h.r . 403 ( rangel ) , and h.r . a brief review of several of the legislative initiatives that address agricultural aspects of the trade embargo against cuba follows . the text box below identifies existing statutes that contain restrictions that are of particular importance for trade in food and agricultural products with cuba .