yes . there is no general exemption for nonprofits in the flsa or the overtime rule . coverage for workers in nonprofits , like other entities , is determined by the enterprise and individual coverage tests ( see " who is covered by the flsa ? it is important to note , however , that charitable activities often associated with nonprofits do not count as ordinary commercial activities and thus do not count toward the $500,000 threshold for enterprise coverage under the flsa . only the commercial activities of nonprofits ( eg , gift shops , fee for service activities ) count toward the threshold . on the other hand , even if a nonprofit does not meet the enterprise test for coverage , individual employees in an otherwise exempt nonprofit may be covered by the flsa and the overtime rules if they engage in interstate commerce ( eg , regularly making out of state phone calls , processing credit card transactions .

 ) yes . both the flsa and the 2016 final rule apply to institutes of higher education ( ihes ) . due to other provisions of the flsa , however , many personnel at ihes are not eligible for overtime and thus are unaffected by the 2016 final rule . for example , in general , bona fide teachers , coaches ( if their primary duty is teaching ) , and graduate and undergraduate students are exempt and thus are not eligible for overtime . similarly , academic administrative personnel are exempt from overtime pay if they are paid at least the eap salary level threshold or are paid at least equal to the entrance salary for teachers at the same institution . on the other hand , some ihe workers are subject to the overtime rules of the flsa and will be affected by the 2016 final rule . affected workers include postdoctoral researchers who are employees , nonacademic administrative employees , and other salaried workers who are not covered by another exemption . finally , like some public sector employees , but unlike private sectors employers , public ihes may have the option of using compensatory time ( i.e. , a rate of 1.5 hours for each hour of overtime ) , rather than cash payment , to meet the obligation of providing overtime compensation . yes . there is no blanket exemption from flsa and overtime rule coverage for state and local governments . in general , employees of state and local governments are covered by the overtime provisions of the flsa and thus are affected by the 2016 final rule updating the salary level threshold for the eap exemptions . that said , other flsa provisions apply to state and local governments that affect the applicability of overtime rules on these public sector employees . one way in which flsa overtime rules apply differently in the public sector relates to the mode of compensation . state and local governments may have the option of using compensatory time , at a rate of 1.5 hours for each hour of overtime , rather than cash payment to meet the obligation of providing overtime compensation . this option provides an alternative not available to private sector employers to meet the overtime pay requirements .