the ehb differs from minimum essential coverage . the aca does not specifically define this core package . the ehb are one of the three components of the ehb package . the ehb package requires plans to ( 1 ) cover certain benefits ( i.e. , the essential health benefits ) ; ( 2 ) comply with specific cost - sharing limitations ; and ( 3 ) meet a certain generosity level . the ehb are to be balanced among the 10 categories , without a weighted preference toward any category . the hhs secretary cannot make any coverage decisions , determine reimbursement rates , establish incentive programs , or design benefits in ways that discriminate against individuals because of their age , disability , or expected length of life . furthermore , the hhs secretary must take into account the diverse health care needs of the population , which includes women , children , persons with disabilities , and other groups . the hhs secretary is tasked with reviewing the ehb , and part of the ehb review process includes providing a report to congress and the public . the report is supposed to assess whether enrollees are facing any difficulty accessing services , either due to coverage or cost , and to consider whether the ehb need to be modified or updated due to changes in medical evidence or scientific advancement . if any modifications are to be made , the hhs secretary is to include in the report how the ehb would be modified . consequently , the secretary periodically may update the ehb based on issues identified during the review process . the aca imposes an annual cap on consumer cost sharing for the ehb . the aca specifies that the limits work in two ways: they prohibit ( 1 ) applying deductibles to preventive health services and ( 2 ) annual out - of - pocket limits that exceed existing limits in the tax code . for example , the scope of the ehb is to be equivalent to the scope of benefits typically provided under an employer - sponsored insurance plan . to accomplish this task , the aca requires the secretary of the department of labor ( dol ) to conduct surveys of employer - sponsored insurance plans to determine typical benefits and provide a summary of the findings to the hhs secretary . the cost - sharing limits apply only to in - network benefits and must include all co - payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . in 2016 , the cost - sharing limits are $6,850 for an individual plan and $13,700 for a family plan . for 2017 , the cost - sharing limits are $7,150 for an individual plan and $14,300 for a family plan . prior to the aca , plans generally were able to set lifetime and annual limits — dollar limits on how much the plan would spend for covered health benefits either during the entire period an individual was enrolled in the plan ( lifetime limits ) or during a plan year ( annual limits ) . the aca prohibited both lifetime and annual limits on the ehb .