the uclass draft rfp is classified . however , "according to ( chief of naval research radm mathias ) winter , the broad overarching goals of the uclass program are to provide two intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance orbits at 'tactically significant ranges' 24 hours a day , seven days a week over uncontested airspace. the uclass would also have a light strike capability to eliminate targets of opportunity . a press report stated: "the plan here is to provide an early operational capability that will be verified and validated for a light strike permissive environment," ( radm mathias ) winter said . "what we will ensure is that the design of the system does not preclude what we call capability growth to be able to operate in contested environments. uclass is still expected to grow into the missions required before the 2012 jroc memo . first flight took place in february 2003 . on december 31 , 2002 , the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) issued a program decision memorandum adjusting future funding for both navy and air force ucav development and mandating the services merge their efforts into a joint program . the defense department recognized the potential for significant synergy by combining the programs , and in 2003 "directed that the programs be consolidated into a joint demonstration program supporting both navy and air force needs. the resulting joint unmanned combat air systems ( j - ucas ) program was a darpa - air force - navy effort to demonstrate the technical feasibility , military utility , and operational value of a networked system of high - performance , weaponized unmanned air vehicles . missions included sead , electronic attack , precision strike , penetrating surveillance / reconnaissance , and persistent global attack . "the operational focus of this system is on those combat situations and environments that involve deep , denied enemy territory and the requirement for a survivable , persisting combat presence ... operating and surviving in denied airspace. three years later , the 2006 quadrennial defense review called for the j - ucas to be terminated . instead , the air force was to begin developing a new bomber , while the navy was mandated to develop an unmanned longer - range carrier - based aircraft capable of being air - refueled to provide greater standoff capability , to expand payload and launch options , and to increase naval reach and persistence . that follow - on effort became the navy unmanned combat air system ( n - ucas ) . given the baseline of being able to operate from aircraft carriers , n - ucas's other requirements looked much like j - ucas , with the desired ability to provide "persistent , penetrating surveillance , and penetrating strike capability in high threat areas" "or suppress enemy air defenses. n - ucas had been a development program to determine how to make an unmanned vehicle take on many of the aspects of a manned fighter .