( a ) limitation . none of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this act or otherwise made available for fiscal year 2015 for the department of defense may be obligated or expended to make significant changes to manning levels with respect to any e – 3 airborne warning and control systems aircraft , or to retire , prepare to retire , or place in storage any such aircraft . ( b ) rule of construction. it does not address options for recapitalization currently being offered by industry to other countries . congress has the authority to approve , reject , or modify air force and navy funding requests for c2isr aircraft sustainment , modernization , and recapitalization , as well as maintain oversight of the nation's c2isr requirements and capabilities . congress's decisions on appropriations for the c2isr force could impact the nation's c2isr capabilities and have additional consequences for the u.s. aerospace industry . a key issue for congress is whether to continue providing sustainment , modernization , and / or recapitalization funding for dod's boeing 707-based legacy c2isr aircraft fleet , and if so , at what levels . pertinent to the discussion is the potential for a shortfall in the nation's c2isr capabilities if congress or dod chooses to minimize funding for sustainment and upgrades that would keep the weapon systems viable until they are recapitalized . another issue for congress is dod , air force , and navy priorities for sustainment , modernization , and recapitalization efforts . an important question is whether development of a c2isr replacement aircraft can or should be further delayed by increasing funding for legacy c2isr aircraft sustainment and modernization . additionally , potentially shifting some of the legacy c2isr missions to remotely piloted aircraft may affect recapitalization efforts . congress's decisions on these issues could also have implications for any potential future base realignment and closure ( brac ) decisions as well as impact the u.s. aircraft manufacturing industrial base . ultimately , the priority the dod places on legacy c2isr sustainment , modernization , and recapitalization , and any decisions considered by congress , could have potential consequences for future national defense strategies and on u.s. c2isr capabilities , given the pivotal role c2isr plays in implementing those strategies . a note on sources: as small fleets of specialized aircraft , relatively little has been written on the programs discussed in this paper . description of each therefore relies on air force fact sheets , which are used to introduce each aircraft before discussing the supporting budget items . the manned aircraft that accomplish the dod's c2isr missions are primarily based on boeing 707 aircraft procured from the 1960s to the early 1990s . as these legacy c2isr platforms continue to remain in the inventory and their age increases , understanding the air force and navy sustainment , modernization , and recapitalization plans is likely important for congress . the central issue is how much congress should consider appropriating for the continued sustainment and modernization of these aircraft compared to funding for recapitalization of these missions to new aircraft .