thus x is 0.199 . substituting the values for x and ( 2p+t ) , each dollar of revenue is 0.199*0.4* ( 1-0.038 ) +.0801 . the last term , reflecting plans that eliminated the tax , account for 80% of revenues . if the tax subsidy is 0.38 , then each dollar represents 1 / 0.38 of or $2.63 of income . the change in the subsidy is 4.63*0.86*$20 billion or $45 billion . the projected health expenditures covered by private insurance is $1,752.6 billion in 2025 . if the out - of - pocket share is 19% , total expenditure is $1,752.6 / 0.81 billion or $2,167 , and the out of pocket amount is $411.1 billion . therefore the percentage reduction in the subsidy ( ds / ( 1-s ) be applied to the price and quantity formulations in equations ( 5 ) and ( 6 ) is $45 / $411 or 10.9% . this report examines several issues . it evaluates the potential of the cadillac tax to affect health insurance coverage and , therefore , the health market . it also examines the expected incidence ( burden ) of the tax — that is , which group will pay the price of the tax . in addition , the report discusses the efficiency of the tax in the context of administrative cost . the health care sector contains many sources of market failure , which create economic inefficiencies . the inefficiency that is most directly related to the cadillac tax is the moral - hazard issue that results from having health insurance . in general , insured individuals spend more on medical care than they would without insurance . more demand for medical care raises the price of medical care , and it could reduce incentives for individuals to take responsibility for their health status ( to the extent that they can ) . incentives that encourage insurance consumption , such as the unlimited esi tax exclusion , can increase these inefficiencies in the market for medical care . the cadillac tax is intended in part to reduce this source of inefficiency . although some employers and employees may choose to retain high - cost plans , others may scale back to avoid the tax . for employees in the latter group , the cost of health care increases , for example , through higher co - payments and larger deductibles . the cadillac tax is expected to decrease after - tax compensation . these effects are expected to occur regardless of whether revenue is collected from the cadillac tax or firms change health insurance offerings in response to the tax . some employers might choose to maintain health plans that are subject to the cadillac tax . in this case , third - party insurers could pass along the direct cost of the tax to employers who would then pass it on to wages . similarly , self - insured employers , who are directly responsible for paying the cadillac tax , would likely pass along any added costs to workers in the form of lower wages . as shown in the appendix , the cadillac tax should be considered an add - on to the base ( or tax exclusive ) .