appendix a . review of research on the prevalence of multiple homicides , mass murder , and patterns of mass murder a handful of criminologists , statisticians , sociologists , and journalists have evaluated the single , most comprehensive source of homicide data in the united states as a means to gauge the frequency and deadliness of multiple victim homicides and "mass murder" committed with firearms and other weapons . bureau of justice statistics estimates of multiple victim homicides based on its analysis of the fbi - shr data , the doj bureau of justice statistics ( bjs ) has provided crs with data on the prevalence of multiple victim homicide incidents ( by firearms and all other means ) and associated murder victim counts for the years 1980 through 2011 . how many and what types of guns were carried and used ? did the gun types lead to higher victim counts in terms of both killed and wounded ? did the offenders hold valid , state - issued concealed carry permits and , if so , was concealed carry a factor in shootings ? did the shootings occur in designated "gun free zones" ? questions such as these , if answered comprehensively and in a longitudinal fashion , could arguably inform the policymaking process , as well as provide first responders with valuable criminal intelligence . toward those ends , several gun control issues related to mass shootings are discussed below . following the newtown , ct , mass shooting , congress passed legislation that statutorily defines the term "mass killings" as "3 or more killings in a single incident. this act essentially authorizes the attorney general and fbi director , at the request of a state or local law enforcement official , to assist in the investigation of violent acts , including mass killings and attempted mass killings in schools , malls , or other public places and non - federal office buildings . the term "mass killings" as defined in this act with its three - victim threshold differs with previous fbi guidance on homicide types , and with the prior general practice of enumerating what constitutes "mass murder. as discussed previously , a mass murder has been defined generally as a multiple homicide incident in which four or more victims are murdered — not including the offender ( s ) — within one event , and in one or more geographical locations relatively near one another . given its definition of "mass killings" in p.l . 112-265 , and as one step towards establishing a comprehensive statistical baseline in the future , congress might want to consider whether it would be beneficial for the fbi or other governmental agency to provide a consistent , complementary set of definitions for terms like "mass murder," "mass shooting," and "mass public shooting," so that such terminology is not conflated with terms like "active shooter," "mass killing," or "mass casualty event. several researchers have called for the development of a consensus definition for mass shootings , as one step towards stimulating and funding "epidemiologic research on this phenomenon. so far , with the exception of bjs , no federal agency has systematically analyzed multiple victim homicide incidents involving firearms in a comprehensive , authoritative manner .