appendix b . criminal investigations field office . this office also includes the uniformed division . office of strategic intelligence and information works with the office of protective operations and provides counter surveillance , and threat intelligence and assessment activities . office of technical development and mission support , which is responsible for providing it support to the usss's protective mission . it was further alleged that these two agents were under the influence of alcohol . the usss is not the only federal law enforcement entity that has been identified with having personnel violating ethics or participating in professional and personal misconduct . for example , in april 2015 , the house judiciary committee conducted a hearing on "analyzing misconduct in federal law enforcement," and focused on misconduct by federal drug enforcement agency personnel . it should be noted , however , that usss security breaches and ethical violations may have greater consequences , particularly concerning presidential protection . this report provides a brief overview of the usss's missions and structure , as currently constituted , and explores enacted and proposed changes and reforms stemming from the recent series of incidents embarrassing to the usss and affecting its mission . to put the issues surrounding the usss in context , one needs to first understand the two concurrent usss missions . there are numerous ways in which congress , dhs , and the usss might address recent security breaches and ethical violations within usss . for example , congress could continue to engage in deliberate oversight of the usss , with an emphasis on identifying potential reforms to usss's management practices , operations , and training programs that go beyond simply reacting to recent security breaches and ethical violations and , instead , focusing on the underlying causes of these program failures . agreement concerning the nature of these fundamental issues and how to address them has not yet been achieved , but focusing solely on individual incidents may potentially obscure or confuse the underlying issues that have adversely affected the usss as a whole and its ability to fully meet its missions . appendix a. u.s. secret service components the office of the director is the lead office within the usss and the director is assisted by the office of the chief counsel and the office of equal employment opportunity and diversity . a chief operating officer manages the following offices: office of the chief financial officer , which is responsible for administrative operations , budget , financial systems , and procurement . office of human resources ( hr ) , which is responsible for benefits and payroll ; hr information technology ; hr research and assessment ; employee performance and relations ; safety , health , and environmental programs ; security clearances ; talent and employee acquisition management ; and workforce planning . office of strategic planning and policy , which is responsible for conducting usss policy planning and long - term strategy development . a deputy director manages the following offices: office of government and public affairs , which is responsible for conducting liaison with the public , other federal entities ( including congress ) , and state and local governments .