negotiations started in 2013 and are uncertain . some members of congress have been concerned about whether imf programs in greece have been an appropriate use of imf resources and adequately protected u.s. taxpayer contributions to the imf . the united states generally has a leading voice at the imf , as the institution's largest shareholder . concerns have generally focused on the unusual nature of the programs , particularly that the imf has not generally lent to developed countries in recent decades , and that the programs provide a large amount of financing relative to the size of greece's economy . additionally , there has been scrutiny of a specific decision by the imf executive board in 2010 . generally , imf staff had to certify that debt in a country was sustainable over the medium - term before approving a program that exceeded normal limits on the size of imf financing ( referred to as "exceptional access" to imf financing ) . in may 2010 , the board changed its lending policies to allow the first greek program to go forward , even though imf staff could not certify that greece's debt was sustainable in the medium term , due to concerns about potential spillover effects . critics argue that the policy change inappropriately relaxed imf lending standards and put the financial commitments of taxpayers in the united states and other countries to the imf at risk . they point to greece's missed payments to the imf in june and july 2015 as evidence that imf loans to greece have been risky , even though they were later repaid . proponents of the imf programs in the eurozone point out that the programs are consistent with the imf's mandate of maintaining international monetary stability ; the imf has lent to developed countries in the past , if not recently ; and that as a member of the imf , greece is entitled to draw on imf resources . they also argue that the imf has several safeguards in place to protect imf resources , including making the disbursement of funds conditional upon economic reforms , and that the imf has a strong historical record of countries meeting their repayment obligations . proponents argue that imf safeguards had to be changed in 2010 to allow the greece program to go forward in order to protect international monetary stability and limit possible contagion of the crisis in greece to the rest of europe and the broader economy . they also argue that other large programs for eurozone countries , including portugal , ireland , and cyprus , have been successful . concerns about imf resources being used to "bail out" greece and other eurozone governments has led to legislation . in 2010 , a provision in the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( section 1501 of p.l . 111-203 ) requires u.s. representatives at the imf to oppose loans to high - and middle - income countries with large public debt levels ( greater than 100% of gdp ) if it is "not likely" that they will repay the imf . prospective imf loans to low - income countries are exempted from this requirement .