s aturation attacks . since a laser can attack only one target at a time , requires several seconds to disable it , and several more seconds to be redirected to the next target , a laser can disable only so many targets within a given period of time . this places an upper limit on the ability of an individual laser to deal with saturation attacks — attacks by multiple weapons that approach the ship simultaneously or within a few seconds of one another . this limitation can be mitigated by installing more than one laser on the ship , similar to how the navy installs multiple ciws systems on certain ships . h ardened targets and countermeasures . less - powerful lasers — that is , lasers with beam powers measured in kilowatts ( kw ) rather than megawatts ( mw ) — can have less effectiveness against targets that incorporate shielding , ablative material , or highly reflective surfaces , or that rotate rapidly ( so that the laser spot does not remain continuously on a single location on the target's surface ) or tumble . small boats ( or other units ) could employ smoke or other obscurants to reduce their susceptibility to laser attack . measures such as these , however , can increase the cost and / or weight of a weapon , and obscurants could make it more difficult for small boat operators to see what is around them , reducing their ability to use their boats effectively . t hermal blooming . a laser that continues firing in the same exact direction for a certain amount of time can heat up the air it is passing through , which in turn can defocus the laser beam , reducing its ability to disable the intended target . this effect , called thermal blooming , can make lasers less effective for countering targets that are coming straight at the ship , on a constant bearing ( i.e. , "down - the - throat" shots ) . other ship self - defense systems , such as interceptor missiles or a ciws , might be more suitable for countering such targets . most tests of laser systems have been against crossing targets rather than "down - the - throat" shots . in general , thermal blooming becomes more of a concern as the power of the laser beam increases . r isk of collateral damage to aircraft , satellites , and human eyesight . since light from an upward - pointing laser that does not hit the target would continue flying upward in a straight line , it could pose a risk of causing unwanted collateral damage to aircraft and satellites . the light emitted by ssls being developed by the navy is of a frequency that can cause permanent damage to human eyesight , including blinding . blinding can occur at ranges much greater than ranges for damaging targeted objects . p recision engagements . lasers are precision - engagement weapons — the light spot from a laser , which might be several inches in diameter , affects what it hits , while generally not affecting ( at least not directly ) separate nearby objects . g raduated responses .