these options are briefly summarized below . the appropriators have denied cms and the irs new funding to cover the administrative costs of aca implementation . cms has requested substantial increases in funding for its program management account in each of the past five budgets ( i.e. those new funds were to help support operation of the federally facilitated exchange and other aca - related activities . each of these categories is briefly discussed below . the house appropriations committee has added numerous aca - related provisions to annual appropriations acts since the republicans regained control of the house at the beginning of the 112 th congress . most of these provisions were included in the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( lhhs ) appropriations act , which funds cms . a few were incorporated in the financial services and general government ( financial services ) appropriations act , which funds the irs . appropriations bills drafted by the senate appropriations committee remained largely free of aca - related provisions during the 112 th and 113 th congresses , while the senate remained under democratic control , with one key exception . each year , the senate lhhs appropriations bill included instructions on the allocation of pphf funding . disagreement between the republican - controlled house and the democrat - led senate during the 113 th congress on whether to include aca provisions in the fy2014 continuing resolution ( cr ) shut down programs and activities across the federal government in october 2013 ; see text box . with republicans in control of both chambers in the 114 th congress , house and senate appropriators were able to coordinate their efforts to include aca - related provisions in appropriations bills . the house and senate fy2016 and fy2017 lhhs appropriations bills included several overlapping aca provisions and reporting requirements . the appropriations committees have used a number of legislative options available to them through the appropriations process in an effort to defund , delay , or otherwise address implementation of the aca . congress , however , did not provide any additional discretionary funds for cms in the enacted lhhs appropriations acts for fy2013-fy2017 . similarly , the irs requested additional discretionary funds in each of the last five budgets to support administration and enforcement of the aca's tax provisions , including the premium tax credits and the individual mandate penalties . again , congress has not given the irs the extra funds it requested . house appropriators repeatedly have added limitations ( often referred to as riders ) to the lhhs and financial services appropriations bills . limitation provisions within appropriations measures are provisions that restrict the use of funds provided by the bill . they do this either by capping the amount of funding that may be used for a particular purpose or by prohibiting the use of any funds for a specific purpose . for example , house appropriators on multiple occasions have added language prohibiting an agency from using any of the funds for aca implementation activities . limitation provisions also may be used to restrict the availability of funds for transfer .