in addition , h.r . 3895 would have mandated the nrc to take certain measures to accelerate nuclear energy development . nwpa's current repository volume limitations would also be revoked . the bill also contains various provisions on nuclear waste transportation , technical assistance , and funding and cost recovery . s. 854 expressly provides that ongoing litigation against doe regarding nuclear waste disposal contracts shall "not abate by reason of the enactment of this act," and would continue with the administrator of the nwa substituted for the secretary of energy . however , the bill directs the administrator , together with the attorney general , to settle the claims "as a condition precedent of an agreement of the administrator to take title to and store the nuclear waste of the contract holder at a storage facility," and to modify contracts in accordance with such settlements . another pair of bills introduced in the 114th congress in both houses , the nuclear waste informed consent act , h.r . 1364 and s. 691 , would relate more narrowly to the blue ribbon commission's recommendation for a new "consent - based approach" to nuclear waste facility siting . these bills would prohibit the nrc from granting a nuclear waste repository construction license unless doe has entered into a written agreement to host the repository with the governor of the state in which the repository is proposed to be located ; each affected unit of local government as well as any unit of general local government contiguous to the affected unit of local government through which snf or hlw would be transported ; and each affected indian tribe . the bills also clarify that the consent requirements apply to doe's pending 2008 application for a construction license yucca mountain , as well as to any application submitted thereafter . notably , comparable provisions of s. 854 would extend to nuclear waste storage facilities as well as permanent repositories , but s. 854 does not include contiguous local governments through which waste would be transported . the interim consolidated storage act , h.r . 4745 , would amend the nwpa to expressly authorize doe to enter or modify contracts for the storage of hlw or snf with any licensed interim consolidated storage facility , and to specify that doe's transfer of hlw or snf to such a facility would satisfy standard contract obligations . 3643 also would enable doe to use "necessary amounts" from the nuclear waste fund for certain costs in connection with an interim consolidated storage facility , without further appropriation ; this provision is removed in h.r . waste control specialists llc ( wcs ) , a private company , in collaboration with andrews county , texas , has proposed to develop an interim consolidated storage facility in texas , and has filed a license application with the nrc ; an application for a second centralized interim storage facility in new mexico is expected to be filed by another company , holtec international , later in 2016 . taking a contrasting approach to the bills above , in the 113th congress , h.r .