co 2 ) . second , epa determined the amount of renewable energy generation ( pursuant to building block 3 ) that would not be needed to achieve the emission rate targets . this "excess" renewable energy generation is available because epa chose the least stringent of the three regional co 2 performance rates as the national co2 performance rate . epa calculated the co 2 emissions associated with this "excess" generation and allocated the co 2 emissions to all of the states based on their 2012 generation , increasing their annual mass - based targets . as a result , some of the states' 2030 mass - based targets are higher than their 2012 emission baselines . table a - 2 lists the state - specific , mass - based targets from epa's final rule . the table compares the 2030 targets with the 2012 baselines as calculated for the final rule and provides a percentage change between the two values . after epa's proposed rule in june 2014 , multiple states and stakeholders raised a variety of concerns with epa's use of 2012 as the baseline year to calculate the emission rate targets . in both its proposed and final rules , epa uses 2012 as the baseline year in its emission rate and mass - based target calculations . however , epa made several state - specific adjustments in the final rule to address some of the concerns . perhaps the most substantial adjustments are in states that generate a significant percentage of electricity from hydropower . according to epa , 2012 was an "outlier" year for snowpack , resulting in relatively high use of hydropower and a corresponding decrease in fossil fuel generation in particular states . as table a - 1 indicates , this adjustment seemed to have a considerable impact in states that use a high percentage of hydropower: washington , oregon , idaho , and maine . in addition , epa made other state - specific adjustments for egus that came online during 2012 . renewable energy played a significant role in the proposed rule , and its role appears to be even greater in the final rule . although an in - depth analysis of renewable energy in the final rule is beyond the scope of this report , a comparison of estimated results from the regulatory impact analyses ( ria ) accompanying the proposed and final rules indicates a substantial increase in epa's analysis of renewable energy's contribution to the nation's electricity portfolio by 2030 . for example , in the proposed rule ria , non - hydro renewable energy generation was projected to increase by 2% in 2030 , compared to a business - as - usual scenario . in the final rule ria , non - hydro renewable energy generation was projected to increase by 9% in 2030 ( under a rate - based scenario ) , compared to a business - as - usual scenario . the methodology ( i.e. , underlying calculations and assumptions ) in the final rule that epa used to create ( 1 ) the national co 2 emission performance rates and ( 2 ) the state - specific emission rate and mass - based targets is considerably different from epa's methodology in its proposed rule .