section 713 . section 713 authorizes the secretary to remove career appointees in the senior executive service ( ses ) and some individuals who occupy administrative or executive positions or demote them to general schedule positions . 110-81 , section 401 ) , and as amended by the stop trading on congressional knowledge act ( stock act ; p.l . 112-105 , section 15 ) in 2012 , members of congress lose service credit for any service performed as a member of congress if convicted of any one of a number of federal laws concerning corruption , election crimes , or misconduct while the individual was a member of congress or while the individual was the president , vice president , or an elected official of a state or local government . section 7 ( a ) ( 1 ) of h.r . 1994 would amend chapter 7 of title 38 of the u.s.c . by adding a new section 723 on "limitation on administrative leave. 1994 would extend this removal and demotion authority to many employees in the va. a senior executive who was removed from federal service pursuant to 38 u.s.c . a removal or demotion under h.r . 1994 could be appealed to the merit systems protection board ( mspb or board ) if filed not later than 7 days after the removal or demotion . the board would be required to refer an appeal to an administrative judge who would have to expedite it and issue a decision not later than 45 days after the appeal date . the decision of an administrative judge would be final and not subject to any further appeal . if an administrative judge could not issue a decision within 45 days , the removal or demotion would be final . in such a case , the board , within 14 days after a removal or demotion is final , would have to submit to congress and the house and senate committees on veterans affairs a report that explains why a decision on an appeal was not issued . during an appeal period , an individual who was removed could not receive any pay , awards , bonuses , incentives , allowances , differentials , student loan repayments , special payments , or benefits . to the maximum extent practicable , the secretary would be required to provide the board and any administrative judge to whom an appeal is referred , such information and assistance as may be necessary to ensure expediting an appeal . the secretary could not remove or demote an individual who is seeking corrective action for whistleblowing ( or on whose behalf corrective action is being sought ) from the office of special counsel based on an alleged prohibited personnel practice described in 5 u.s.c . section 2302 ( b ) without the approval of the special counsel under 5 u.s.c . section 1214 ( f ) . the secretary could not remove or demote an individual who has filed a whistleblower complaint until the central whistleblower office has made a final decision with respect to that complaint .