both survived . on what criteria ? such a decision varies , depending on many factors: an individual's prognosis , threat to the community , alternative available treatments , and informed consent , among others . although sometimes it makes sense to use an unapproved product , doing so presents possible risks to patients , research goals , and manufacturers . investigators first seek to establish safety and effectiveness thresholds for patients . no drug — even if fda - approved — is completely safe . fda approval involves weighing the potential risks ( including known side effects ) against the potential benefits . the threshold for acceptable risk rises with the risk of not acting at all . someone with a disease that was 100% certain to be fatal in the next hour might well take a drug with an 80% risk of immediate death and a 2% chance of helping . when it comes to access questions , fda decisions generally fall into four categories . approved use for a new drug . fda approves or licenses a product only when its scientists think the manufacturer has submitted evidence of the drug's safety and effectiveness for a specific use ( among other requirements of approval ) . unapproved use of a drug that fda has approved for another use . a product's labeling includes information , including dosage , for the fda - approved use . with a few exceptions , however , a physician may prescribe that drug for what is called "off - label" use . the physician may have seen anecdotal evidence or a relationship to fda - reviewed data about another disease . for example , a product on the market labeled to treat depression might be used by a clinician to treat a patient with obsessive compulsive disorder . in such a case , a clinician could be aware of the likely safety and side effect profile of the drug but would have limited data , if any , with which to predict the drug's effectiveness in its off - label use . fda does not require an ind application in this situation . unapproved use of an investigational new drug . because all drugs involve risks , regulators require that researchers design clinical trials to protect research participants ( patients ) from unnecessary risks . that is why the law forbids a sponsor that is testing an as yet unapproved drug from providing it outside that trial without fda permission . fda may allow individual access to an investigational drug , but it cannot compel the sponsor to provide the drug . ( see discussion of " how does fda regulate individual ind applications ? " unapproved use of a product that has not yet begun clinical testing . before clinical tests have started , researchers have conducted no human safety ( or effectiveness ) studies . in considering whether to allow the use of such an experimental product , fda might analyze animal studies and any information about similar drugs or diseases to see whether the animal data might be applicable to humans . if no other treatment option exists and the patient is likely to die soon , assessing drug risk becomes less relevant to an individual patient .