appendix a . subsidized eas outside of alaska appendix b . subsidized eas in alask . the faa reauthorization act of 2018 ( p.l . the airline deregulation act of 1978 ( p.l . 95-504 ) granted u.s. passenger airlines almost total freedom to determine which domestic markets to serve and what airfares to charge . with the advent of deregulation , there were concerns that small communities would lose air service because airlines would shift their operations to serve larger and often more profitable markets . to address these concerns , congress established the essential air service ( eas ) program in the airline deregulation act to ensure continuous air service to small communities . initially , approximately 746 communities were eligible . however , not all eligible communities required eas subsidies . some communities have been receiving unsubsidized service because air carriers have been willing to offer service without subsidy ; some have been receiving subsidized service under eas from the very beginning ; others initially supported unsubsidized service , but later sought subsidies , or vice versa ; some were subsidized but later lost their eligible status and are no longer in the program . over time , congress has tightened the conditions under which communities can receive subsidized air service . nonetheless , program expenditures have increased , more than doubling in inflation - adjusted terms between 2008 and 2018 . certain features of the program may have contributed to the challenge of controlling costs: few carriers may bid for any particular eas contract . although in some instances two or three carriers may offer proposals in response to an rfp , in some cases there is only one proposal with no competing bid , providing little incentive for the carrier to minimize its subsidy request . subsidy cost is not among the four major factors dot is required by statute to consider when evaluating bids . dot is required by statute to consider the views of the community when selecting a carrier to provide subsidized service . if more than one carrier is proposing to offer service , local officials are under no obligation to favor the proposal that entails the lowest cost to the federal government . the law does not limit a community's subsidized flights to a single route . more than 30 of the 174 eas communities had subsidized flights to more than one hub airport in fy2018 . although eligibility for eas service , except in alaska and hawaii , depends in part on an airport's distance from the nearest large or medium hub airport , the law does not specify that the eas - subsidized flights must serve that hub . in an unknown number of cases , subsidized flights link eas communities with more distant airports rather than with the nearest hub , perhaps at greater cost to the government . for technical reasons or because of its own operational needs , a carrier may utilize a plane for an eas flight that is larger than necessary for the traffic on the route , in curring high per - passenger costs . dot estimates that 20% to 25% of eas communities are served by aircraft that are larger than passenger numbers might require .