in addition , p.l . 114-113 included a provision rescinding $10 million in eaa unobligated balances from prior year appropriations . the report ( h.rept . 114-130 ) accompanying the bill directed eda to allocate at least $15 million to assist communities affected by job losses in the coal mining industry as part of the administration's power+ initiative . the report included language directing eda to give priority to coal mining communities that had not yet developed a ceds when awarding power+ funding . 2578 by a vote of 242-183 . the bill , as passed by the house , would have frozen eda appropriations at their fy2015 levels , rejecting the administration's request for an increase in overall funding and a shift in funding priorities . the bill would have appropriated $250 million for eda , including $213 million for eda activities and programs , and $37 million for salaries and expenses . the bill reflected slightly different funding priorities from those of the previous year . the bill proposed increasing funding for assistance to coal communities by $5 million and would have established assistance to these communities as a stand - alone program rather than a set - aside under the economic adjustment assistance program while eliminating $4 million in funding for innovative manufacturing grants . ( see table 1 for a complete breakdown by program. ) the funds would have been used to begin the ceds planning process . the report directed eda , within 90 days of enactment of h.r . 2578 , to submit to the house committee on appropriations a report on the government - wide effort to assist coal mining communities as part of the power+ initiative , including descriptions of eda's and other federal agencies' past efforts and future plans to assist coal communities . in addition , the house appropriations committee report accompanying the bill included language admonishing eda on its slow implementation of the innovative manufacturing loan guarantee program . the report noted that although the program had received funding as far back as fy2012 , eda had not yet issued loan guarantees , but noted that the agency expected to issue its first loan guarantee during the second quarter of fy2016 . the report directed eda to provide the committee with periodic updates on the status of the program , including a written report within 60 days following enactment of the act . the report also included language directing eda to use its regional innovation program ( rip ) funds to support university - and state - sponsored incubator programs . on june 16 , 2015 , the senate appropriations committee reported its version of h.r . 2578 , the departments of commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations bill for fy2016 . the senate appropriations committee rejected the administration's proposed increase in funding for eda programs and recommended freezing total funding at the fy2015 total of $250 million , including $213 million for eda programs and $37 million for salaries and expenses . the senate bill did not include funding for coal mining communities and innovative manufacturing . instead , the bill recommended a $3 million increase in funding for economic adjustment assistance grants . the report ( s.rept .