it was a good one . i offered another alternative , dismantle part of iran's nuclear facilities , and don't remove those restrictions until iran changes its aggressive behavior.... that — none of that has been acquired . a possibly greater iranian capacity to affect the regional balance of power in the wake of the deal , along with newly considered u.s. arms sales to arab gulf states — apparently calculated to mitigate the gulf states' own concerns regarding the deal — could potentially affect israel's "qualitative military edge" over regional threats . such considerations are presumably driving israel to seek tangible measures of reassurance from the united states . the reported u.s. - israel preliminary consultations on aid and arms sales may to some extent reflect possible preparation by israeli officials ( since the april announcement of the deal's basic framework ) to shift their focus toward insisting on iranian compliance with and p5+1 enforcement of the deal , in the event it goes into effect at the end of the congressional review process . additionally , although some israeli defense officials hint that a unilateral military strike against iranian nuclear facilities remains an option to prevent iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon , most analysts assert that such an option is less viable and likely than in the past . one former israeli official who discerned flaws in both the negotiating process and the july agreement nevertheless wrote , "an [israeli] attack probably could not have achieved more than a few years' postponement of iran's program , whereas the agreement will do so for at least 10 to 15 years. israeli and some other critics of the deal disagree with obama administration officials and some of the deal's other proponents about the lessons that the 1994 u.s. agreement with north korea holds for the agreement with iran . in netanyahu's official reaction to the jcpoa on july 14 , he said that "this deal repeats the mistakes made with north korea. secretary of state john kerry , in july 28 testimony before the house foreign affairs committee , repeated that comparison , saying that "this is a very different agreement from anything that ever existed with north korea. after the comprehensive agreement was announced , the wall street journal wrote that "israeli officials are refusing to discuss with the white house additional american military assistance at least until after congress completes its review of the iran deal in september . instead , israeli leaders are training their focus on pressing lawmakers to reject the deal and view entertaining any new offers of military assistance as condoning the agreement. however , opposition leader herzog has disclosed plans to visit the united states ( though no specific date has been announced ) "to ask that israel gets a security umbrella and a series of steps to allow israel to maintain its advantage in the region due to the new reality coming out of the deal.