during the 2015 supreme court term , the court is continuing to focus on redistricting . in order to comport with the constitutional standard of equality of population among districts , discussed below , at least once every 10 years , in response to changes in the number of representatives apportioned to it or to shifts in its population , most states are required to draw new boundaries for its congressional districts . the supreme court has interpreted the constitution to require that each congressional district within a state contain approximately the same population . this requirement is known as the "equality standard" or the principle of "one person , one vote. in 1964 , in wesberry v. sanders , the supreme court interpreted article i , section 2 , clause 1 of the constitution , which states that representatives be chosen "by the people of the several states" and "apportioned among the several states ... according to their respective numbers," to require that "as nearly as is practicable , one man's vote in a congressional election is to be worth as much as another's. with regard to state legislative redistricting , later that year , the court issued its ruling in reynolds v. sims . in reynolds , the supreme court held that the one person , one vote standard also applied in the context of state legislative redistricting , holding that the equal protection clause requires all who participate in an election "to have an equal vote. congressional districts must be drawn consistent with the voting rights act ( vra ) . the vra was enacted under congress's authority to enforce the fifteenth amendment , providing that the right of citizens to vote shall not be denied or abridged on account of race , color , or previous servitude . the report then addresses the court's 2015 ruling in arizona state legislature v. arizona independent redistricting commission , upholding an arizona constitutional provision — enacted through initiative — that established an independent commission for drawing congressional districts . finally , the report provides an overview of selected legislation in the 114 th congress that would establish additional statutory requirements and standards for congressional redistricting . the legal framework for congressional redistricting involves , in addition to various state processes , both constitutional and federal statutory requirements , and case law interpretations of each . the elections clause of the constitution , article i , section 4 , clause 1 , provides that the times , places , and manner of holding congressional elections be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof , but that congress may at any time make or alter such laws . article i , section 2 , clause 3 requires a count of the u.s. population every 10 years , and based on the census , requires apportionment of seats in the house of representatives among the states , with each state entitled to at least one representative . a federal statute requires that apportionment occur every 10 years . in a series of cases and evolving jurisprudence , the u.s. supreme court has interpreted how the vra applies in the context of congressional redistricting . congressional district boundaries in every state are required to comply with section 2 of the vra .