what might be the congressional role ? policymakers may weigh whether aiding federal law enforcement will involve incentives or requirements for communications and technology companies to provide specified information to law enforcement , enhanced investigative tools , bolstered financial and manpower resources to help law enforcement better leverage existing authorities , or combinations of these and other options . in debating law enforcement's need to access certain real - time communications and stored data , congress could move to update calea and related laws to cover a broader range of communications and data . currently , requirements under calea apply to telecommunications carriers as well as facilities - based broadband internet access and interconnected voice over internet protocol ( voip ) providers . proposals have reportedly been floated that would extend calea requirements to apply to a wider range of technology services and products such as instant messaging , video game chats , and real - time video communications like skype . proponents of expanding calea mandates may believe that it would enhance law enforcement's abilities to carry out existing authorities to intercept real - time communications . opponents to calea expansion proposals , however , may contend that mandating other communications services and technology manufacturers to build in intercept capabilities could be costly , both financially and in terms of security . financially , companies may need to dedicate resources to reengineer their products ; they may need to add or allocate personnel to liaise with law enforcement to facilitate wiretap requests . on the security front , companies would necessarily need to build in a "back door" to allow for authorized access , and any means of access necessarily opens the doors to exploitation . if policymakers are interested in requiring technology companies to assist law enforcement carry out authorized surveillance and searches , legislators may consider options other than amending calea . one such option may be to directly mandate that technology companies build in "back door" access for law enforcement into specified communications products sold in the united states . one unintended consequence of this could be that u.s. consumers , in search of privacy , might buy more products from overseas , and consumers outside the united states might decline to buy certain u.s. products that conform with these requirements . while placing requirements on technology companies may be one route to assisting law enforcement , policymakers may also debate options that could enhance the tools available to law enforcement . these could include making it a crime for an individual ( when presented with a court authorized warrant ) to fail to turn over his passcode or other information that would allow law enforcement to decrypt a given device . however , those in support of encryption note that a search warrant is "an instrument of permission , not compulsion. in other words , individuals need not proactively reveal or open hiding places for investigators presenting a search warrant . additionally , judges may in some cases be able to hold individuals in contempt for failure to turn over information that would help law enforcement unlock certain electronic devices .