these three combat vehicles have a long history of service in the army . what modifications to the basic stryker vehicle would be required to accommodate proposed lethality upgrades and how will these changes affect vehicle operational capabilities ? how would the stryker lethality modifications affect the deployability of stryker brigade combat teams ( sbcts ) ? would additional maintenance and support units / troops be needed in stryker units to accommodate proposed lethality upgrades ? is the decision to upgrade stryker lethality — as opposed to upgrading for protection and maneuverability — consistent with current and future threats ? the successful development and deployment of "soft - kill" and "hard - kill" aps technologies has the potential to significantly change current and future designs of armored fighting vehicles . by integrating aps into abrams , bradleys , and strykers , as well as future fighting vehicles , the potential exists to not only increase survivability but also to reduce armor protection and vehicle weight . this indiscriminate use of terminology and lack of specific definitions can cause confusion , particularly when conducting oversight of funding . traditionally , modernization and recapitalization efforts are funded by operations and maintenance ( o&m ) funds , while reset has been funded as part of overseas contingency operations account . the army reportedly intends to begin testing active protective systems ( aps ) on a number of its combat vehicles , including the abrams , bradleys , and strykers , before fy2019 . the army's program , designated the modular active protection systems ( maps ) , will initially focus on "soft - kill" technologies such as vehicle obscurants and electronic defeat systems and then progress to "hard - kill" technologies like the ability to shoot down missiles fired at vehicles . as part of developing maps , the army is looking at existing , non - developmental aps technologies both domestically and foreign - produced , such as israel's trophy aps currently in use with israeli forces . as part of the army's fy2017 budget proposal , the army reportedly will experiment with commercially available aps systems as part of abrams , bradley , and stryker survivability enhancements . in order to keep the abrams , bradley , and stryker operational and effective over a prolonged period , a variety of activities have been undertaken over the lives of these vehicles . the most common terms used to describe these activities are modernization , recapitalization , and reset . although there is a lack of formal dod and army definition for these terms , the following descriptions can be considered representative of how the army uses these terms: upon comparison , it might appear these terms describe somewhat similar activities . it has been a common criticism by some that the army frequently uses these terms interchangeably when describing its efforts and activities related to these and other weapon systems . the army's equipment program in support of the president's budget 2015 describes the abrams , bradley , and stryker as part of the operational force until at least fy2029 and perhaps beyond . regarding the abrams and stryker , army plans call for an upgraded m - 1a3 abrams and an upgraded stryker vehicle .