correa responded by seeking to split the ap . in mid - january , correa induced 28 of the 74 ap legislators to leave the ap party and join a new , correa - based variant , called citizens revolution , thus causing the ap party to lose its legislative majority . president moreno now will have to negotiate with numerous parties to form a coalition to pass certain types of legislation , such as constitutional reforms , even though the february referendum results ( such as canceling the option for indefinite reelection , reimposing term limits , and not allowing public office holders to return to office after a corruption conviction ) was approved by voters in early february 2018 ( see results in table 1 ) . historically , ecuador's dependence on a few export commodities — primarily bananas , cacao , coffee , and sugar — that are subject to highly volatile price swings left it vulnerable to economic instability . the discovery of oil in the amazon region in 1967 transformed the economy . in 2000 , ecuador adopted the u.s. dollar as its national currency following a major recession in 1999 . dollarization helped curb inflation and restored some macroeconomic stability . in 2009 , however , economic growth declined to 0.6% during the global recession , accompanied by falling oil prices and a decline in remittances provided by ecuadorians living and working abroad ( a major source of external revenues ) . however , in the middle of 2014 after the price of oil declined significantly , ecuador's oil earnings fell . as a consequence , the economist intelligence unit ( eiu ) forecast that ecuador's economy would contract slightly in 2015 , although the economy ultimately grew by less than half a percent . president correa's plans to begin extracting crude oil from the ishpingo , tambochoa , and tiputini field in yasuní national park in the amazon to provide an economic boost did not salvage the economy from going into recession . in 2016 , ecuador's gross domestic product contracted by 1.6% . ecuador's economic slowdown in 2016 and the country's need for external finance were exacerbated by a deadly april 2016 earthquake . ecuador's estimated $3 billion costs for reconstruction and humanitarian assistance for 720,000 people in the affected region remain a burden that the government and private sector have sought to address . in response , the u.s. office of foreign disaster assistance provided more than $3 million in assistance , including provisions airlifted in for 50,000 people in the earthquake - prone region and assistance with water and sanitation systems in affected areas . a u.n. appeal by the office of coordination of humanitarian assistance sought to raise $73 million . however , as of july 2016 , only one - fifth of this amount had been received from donor countries , including the united states . the correa government increased a value - added tax and implemented a plan to further cut government expenditures after cutting capital expenditures by 30% . despite president correa's reluctance to ask for assistance from the international monetary fund ( imf ) , the imf approved a request for $364 million in financial support under its rapid financing instrument in early july 2016 for ecuador .