cool program complied with wto obligations . the wto established the dispute settlement panel in may 2010 . canada and mexico alleged , inter alia , that the u.s . cool program violated article 2.1 of the tbt agreement . similarly , in 2008 , mexico requested consultations with the united states regarding the dolphin - safe labeling program . after consultations did not result in a mutually agreed - upon solution , mexico requested the establishment of a dispute panel , which was established on april 20 , 2009 . mexico also claimed , inter alia , that the u.s. labeling program for tuna violated article 2.1 of the tbt agreement . the wto's appellate body decisions from these disputes provide insight into the application of article 2.1 , and on how to determine if a measure qualifies as a technical regulation under the tbt agreement . in each dispute , after the appellate body found that the united states' technical regulations violated obligations contained in wto agreements , the united states had a "reasonable period of time" to comply with the wto's findings . the tbt agreement does not contain a corresponding set of explicit exceptions . this characteristic has led some commentators to ask whether the tbt agreement obligations are intended to be more stringently applied than other wto agreements . however , as illustrated below , the appellate body appears to have read at least some of these exceptions into the text of the tbt agreement . members must also ensure that their measures are not "more trade restrictive than necessary" to fulfill a legitimate government objective . furthermore , article 2 of the tbt agreement contains numerous provisions that call for increased transparency among members with regard to technical regulations . arguably the most significant obligations , at least with regard to recent litigation that has occurred , are found in article 2.1 of the tbt agreement . article 2.1 requires that countries comply with "national treatment" obligations and "most - favored nation" ( mfn ) obligations . national treatment obligations provide that a country's technical regulations may not treat foreign products less favorably than like products of domestic origin . mfn obligations require that technical regulations treat products from one foreign country no less favorably than products from other foreign countries . the appellate body found , in u.s. – cool and u.s. – tuna ii , that the u.s. labeling programs violated these prohibitions on discrimination . before analyzing how the wto appellate body has evaluated certain labeling requirements under articles 2.1 of the tbt agreement , it is worth pointing out that the tbt agreement , unlike other wto agreements , does not provide any explicit exceptions to these obligations . for example , article xx of the gatt provides that members may implement measures that would otherwise violate gatt obligations if the measures are enacted to protect human health or the environment , conserve natural resources , or "protect public morals. the measure is gatt - compliant if it falls under one of these exceptions , provided it is not a disguised restriction on trade or implemented in an arbitrary manner . whether a member has properly invoked one of the exceptions is subject to review by a wto dispute panel .