other provisions of p.l . 111-87 are discussed below in the sections of this report on the various parts of the ryan white hiv / aids program . the patient protection and affordable care act of 2010 ( aca , p.l . 111-148 , as amended ) contains general provisions to increase access to health insurance and is expected to increase coverage for people living with hiv / aids . these provisions include prohibitions on the cancellation of coverage by an insurer due to a preexisting condition , elimination of lifetime caps on insurance benefits and annual limits on coverage , and eligibility for tax subsidies to help low - and middle - income individuals purchase coverage from health insurance exchanges . in addition , states have the option to broaden medicaid eligibility to include single adults . aca phases out the medicare part d so - called "doughnut hole" — a gap in prescription drug coverage — for individuals who are medicare - eligible , including individuals with hiv / aids . figure 1 . ryan white hiv / aids program funding , fy2016total = $2.3 billionsource: hrsa fy2016 funding provided in the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l . 114-113 ) .notes: adap = aids drugs assistance program ; adr = aids dental reimbursement program ; aetc = aids education and training centers ; and spns = special projects of national significance . 111-87 provided specific authorization levels for parts a , b , c , d , and f for each fiscal year through fy2013 , resulting in a four - year reauthorization for the ryan white hiv / aids program . the program's authority is currently expired , but congress continues to appropriate funds for the program . 111-87 required that the secretary establish a national hiv / aids testing goal of 5 million tests annually through programs administered by hrsa and the cdc . the secretary is required to submit an annual report to congress on the progress made in achieving the testing goal , including any barriers to meeting the goal , the amount of funding necessary to meet the goal , and the most cost - effective strategies for identifying individuals who are unaware of their hiv status . the secretary is also required to review each of the programs and activities conducted by cdc as part of the domestic hiv / aids prevention activities . the long - range impact of the health care law on hrsa's ryan white hiv / aids program ( in which the health and treatment services provided under ryan white are likely to be replaced to some extent by access to such services through health coverage via aca ) remains to be determined and may be of interest to policymakers given that authorization for the ryan white hiv / aids program has lapsed . the national hiv / aids strategy ( nhas ) is a five - year plan detailing the "principles , priorities , and actions" to guide the "collective national response to the hiv epidemic. the nhas was first released in july 2010 and updated in july 2015 . the current nhas goals are as follows: 1 . reduce new infections . increase access to care and improve health outcomes for people living with hiv .