what , then , is the iot ? there is no universally agreed - upon definition , but generally , the term is used to describe networks of objects that are not themselves computers but that have embedded components that connect to the internet . what impacts will the iot have ? what issues might affect the development and implementation of the iot ? what actions has congress taken ? where can i find additional resources on this topic ? when people talk about the internet , they are usually referring to the electronic network that permits computers around the world to communicate with each other . "things" may include , for example , smart meters , fitness trackers , personal vehicles , home appliances , medical devices , and even clothing used by individual consumers . they may also include embedded devices in roadways and in other components of infrastructure such as electric grids , manufacturing plants and other buildings , farms , and virtually any other object , element , or system for which remote communications , control , or data collection and processing might be useful . in other words , the iot potentially includes huge numbers and kinds of interconnected objects . in practice , iot refers not to a simple or uniform network of objects but rather to a complex collection of objects and networks . specific dimensions of the iot may be referred to by terms such as smart grid , connected cities , and industrial internet . other terms may also be used in the context of iot to denote related concepts such as cyber - physical systems and the internet of everything . the iot is often considered the next major stage in the evolution of cyberspace . the first electronic computers were developed in the 1940s , but 40 years passed before connecting computers through wired devices began to spread in the 1980s . the first decade of the 21 st century saw the next stage , marked by the rapid spread of smartphones and other mobile devices that use wireless communications , as well as social media , big - data analytics , and cloud computing . building on those advances , connections between two or more machines ( m2m ) and between machines and people are expected by many observers to lead to huge growth in the iot by 2020 . the iot is not separate from the internet , but rather , a potentially huge extension and expansion of it . the "things" that form the basis of the iot are objects . they could be virtually anything — streetlights , thermostats , electric meters , fitness trackers , factory equipment , automobiles , unmanned aircraft systems ( uass or drones ) , or even cows or sheep in a field . what makes an object part of the iot is embedded or attached computer chips or similar components that give the object both a unique identifier and internet connectivity . objects with such components are often called "smart" — such as smart meters and smart cars . internet connectivity allows a smart object to communicate with computers and with other smart objects .