historically , poland has had a difficult relationship with russia . many u.s. officials and members of congress have regarded european energy security as a u.s. interest . in particular , there has been concern in the united states over the influence that russian energy dominance could have on the ability to present a united transatlantic position when it comes to other issues related to russia . successive u.s. administrations have encouraged eu member states to reduce energy dependence on russia through diversification of supply and supported european steps to develop alternative sources and increase energy efficiency . as a result of warsaw's lead role in pushing for eu measures against russia , moscow targeted poland even before the eu's tougher sanctions were adopted in july 2014 by banning the import of certain polish fruits and vegetables , citing alleged health and sanitary reasons . in august , russia retaliated against western sanctions by banning the import of produce , meat , and dairy products from the eu and united states ( as well as canada , australia , and norway ) . in recent years , polish exports of fruit and vegetables to russia have been valued at $1 billion to $2 billion annually . one area of particular relevance to poland's security is kaliningrad , a 5,800-square - mile russian exclave wedged between poland and lithuania ( see table 1 ) . kaliningrad has a heavy russian military presence , including the baltic sea fleet and two airbases . in addition , russia has reportedly stationed , or at least threatened to station , iskander short - range nuclear missiles there . over half of the natural gas and most of the oil consumed in poland comes from russia . because poland continues to rely on coal for approximately 90% of its electricity generation , however , russian gas accounts for less than 10% of poland's primary energy supply . overall , as the largest coal producer in the eu , poland relies on energy imports for 31% of its needs , well below the eu average of 53% . successive governments have made a priority of efforts to diversify its energy sources to both reduce gas dependence on russia and increase the use of cleaner fuels that produce fewer co2 emissions . poland has also been taking steps such as expanding pipeline interconnectivity with its neighbors and developing the ability to reverse the flow of gas in the polish section of the yamal pipeline , which runs from russia to germany via belarus and poland , in order to import natural gas from the west in the case of a crisis such as a cut - off of russian gas . the construction of a liquefied natural gas terminal on the baltic sea coast near the german border ( swinoujscie ) has suffered a series of delays , but the facility was declared operational in october 2015 and received its first shipment from qatar in december 2015 . the facility is expected to begin receiving commercial deliveries in may 2016 and reach full capacity by 2018 . some polish elites have voiced criticisms over the returns from their alliance with the united states .