these are not predictions . while many stakeholders are optimistic that an agreement will be reached , the nature of the expected agreement and the provisions within it are far from certain . several delegations hold strenuously to opposing positions that may not be bridged through negotiations . particularly contentious are issues regarding whether pledges to reduce greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions should be quantified and legally binding , whether financial assistance should be quantified and legally binding , and whether any obligations regarding loss and damage should be included in the accord . the absence of an agreement may not have an effect on other parties' pledges , as observers have noted that some pledges do not go beyond business - as - usual trajectories . russia's indc is consistent with its economy - oriented efforts to improve energy and industrial efficiency and with its growing forests . some analysts conclude that china may peak its emissions earlier than its target of 2030 because of its efforts to reform the economy ; ensure energy security ; and reduce pollution , traffic , and water demand . others suggest a similar situation for india . on the other hand , some parties , including the united states , have yet to put policies in place that will fully achieve their indcs . further , some parties have indicated that they would condition achieving their indcs on adequate international financing ; the financing they anticipate may not be forthcoming without an agreement , though an agreement may not include all the financing they anticipate , either . finances reportedly available to assist low - income parties were $62 billion in 2014 under the non - binding 2010 cancun pledge , though not ( yet ) the $100 billion pledged by 2020 . most of those funds are coming from philanthropic and other private sources , not dependent on public funds . the funds are well below what some say are needed and some parties are proposing in the paris negotiations . it is unclear whether reaching a binding agreement — or not — in paris would substantially affect financial flows over time . market - based and cooperative mechanisms may emerge in the context of quantified pledges made that further increase available financing . one impact , if no binding agreement were reached in paris , might be on advocates of international accords as a vehicle to promote cooperative climate change policies and of treaties under the united nations more generally . disillusionment with the unfccc process may increase . this could shift efforts to other venues , including sub - national governments , bilateral agreements , and pressure on private companies . such shifts may yield faster results , and likely more diverse and fragmented ones . any assessment that paris may "fail" is significantly premised on the idea that outcomes are driven by the international process , rather than by nations themselves determining their own policies and actions ; or that the united nations negotiations can drive governments to go beyond what domestic impetus and support provide . numerous analyses , however , have argued that this is not the case .