administration. many u.s. officials and analysts also contend that eu fears of a demise in relations are largely overblown , especially in light of recent statements of support for the eu from president trump and other administration officials . following his july 2018 meeting with european commission president juncker , president trump tweeted that the united states and the eu "love each other," and he appeared to give a more upbeat assessment of u.s. - eu economic relations . in september 2018 , new u.s . ambassador to the eu gordon sondland observed that there have always been disagreements between the united states and the eu and that "one of the key strengths of the u.s. - eu relationship is our ability to talk candidly and freely about our differences . that is not an advantage we enjoy with all our partners , and we should not lose sight of its importance. sondland further noted that on a multitude of strategic and economic concerns , the united states and the eu "work best when we work in tandem," and he pledged continued support for close u.s. - eu cooperation . successive u.s . administrations and many members of congress have strongly supported the european integration project as a key pillar of the transatlantic relationship . in the aftermath of world war ii , the united states viewed european integration as a way to entrench democratic systems and free markets , and the creation of nato was meant to provide collective defense and security . with the end of the cold war , the united states was a key advocate for eu enlargement to the countries of central and eastern europe , believing it would help to promote stability and prosperity in the region . today , the united states and the eu share a dynamic political partnership and a huge trade and investment relationship . although u.s. - eu relations have experienced numerous ups and downs in the past and political and economic tensions have arisen periodically , u.s. and eu policymakers have tended to view the overall partnership as mutually beneficial . during the obama administration , the numerous challenges facing the eu worried many u.s. officials who feared that a politically divided , economically weak , and internally preoccupied eu would threaten european stability , jeopardize u.s. - eu economic relations , and make the eu a less robust and effective global partner . in the 114 th congress , several hearings addressed some of the specific issues facing the eu , including the greek debt crisis , the conflict in ukraine , europe's migration and refugee crisis , and potential threats to europe posed by the islamic state terrorist organization . some hearings also considered the eu's future development more broadly and its possible strategic and economic implications for the united states . many in the eu are concerned about the future trajectory of u.s. - eu relations under the trump administration and about whether the united states will continue to be a reliable partner in the years ahead . president trump's reported questioning of the eu's value and utility is largely unprecedented and in contrast to long - standing u.s. support for the european integration project .