spain has been a member of nato since 1982 . the rajoy government ( 2011-2018 ) maintained a relatively low profile in international affairs , while continuing the main tenets of past spanish foreign policy: support for european integration , friendly and cooperative relations with the united states , and strong ties with central and south america . the pp has traditionally promoted a strongly "atlanticist" foreign policy that emphasizes close security ties with the united states . the members of the barcelona terrorist cell were all born in morocco . ( about 70% of the approximately 1.18 million muslims living in spain have their origins in morocco. ) spain and morocco cooperate closely with regard to counterterrorism , including regular intelligence exchanges and joint operations against terrorist organizations and recruiting networks . moroccan authorities coordinated with their spanish counterparts in support of the investigations following the barcelona terrorist attack . compared to many other western european countries , a relatively low number of people have traveled from spain as "foreign fighters" seeking to join the islamic state or other jihadist groups fighting in syria and iraq . spanish authorities estimate that approximately 150 spanish nationals or permanent residents ( mostly moroccan nationals ) have traveled to the conflict zones in those two countries . in recent years , spanish police have conducted raids to dismantle jihadist recruiting networks active in ceuta and melilla , spanish enclaves located on the north coast of africa , as well as in madrid . from 2015 to 2017 , spanish security forces reportedly conducted 128 police operations against domestic terrorist networks , resulting in the arrest of 242 individuals . in 2015 , the spanish parliament adopted legislation backed by the pp and psoe to strengthen counterterrorism laws and police powers in response to the foreign fighter threat . the new legislation made it a criminal offense to receive terrorist training or to participate in an armed conflict abroad ; allows for passport seizures , accelerated expulsion orders , and reentry bans of identified extremists ; and introduces streamlined search and capture warrants for police to arrest fighters attempting to travel to conflict zones . the government also initiated reforms to the regulation of evidence collection and standards for witness protection , in order to improve the success rate of terrorism - related prosecutions . the united states and spain have close links in many areas , including extensive cultural ties . the u.s. - spain political relationship rests on a foundation of cooperation on a number of important diplomatic and security issues . the pp - led government of prime minister josé maría aznar ( 1996-2004 ) supported the u.s. - led invasion of iraq in 2003 and contributed forces to the coalition . during the socialist - led government of prime minister josé luis rodríguez zapatero ( 2004-2011 ) , u.s. - spain tensions arose over differences in approach to issues including iraq , the middle east peace process , and spain's engagement with cuba and venezuela . prime minister sánchez is not expected to make any dramatic changes to spain's foreign policy .