judges of the supreme court. while the process of appointing justices has undergone some changes over two centuries , its most essential feature — the sharing of power between the president and the senate — has remained unchanged: to receive appointment to the court , one must first be formally selected ( "nominated" ) by the president and then approved ( "confirmed" ) by the senate . for help in evaluating the backgrounds of court candidates , presidents sometimes also have enlisted the assistance of private lawyers , legal scholars , or , on rare occasions , the american bar association ( aba ) . near the culmination of this investigative effort , the president might want to personally meet with one or more of the candidates before finally deciding whom to nominate . during the pre - nomination phase , presidents vary in the degree to which they publicly reveal the names of individuals under consideration for the court . sometimes , presidents seek to keep confidential the identity of their court candidates . such secrecy may allow a president to reflect on the qualifications of prospective nominees , and the background investigations to proceed , away from the glare of publicity , news media coverage , and outside political pressures . other times , the white house may , at least in the early pre - nomination stage , reveal the names of supreme court candidates being considered . such openness may be intended to serve various purposes — among them , to test public or congressional reaction to potential nominees , please political constituencies who would identify with identified candidates , or demonstrate the president's determination to conduct a comprehensive search for the most qualified person available . an administration , of course , need not wait until a vacancy occurs on the court to begin investigating the backgrounds of potential nominees . immediately after president george w. bush was sworn into office in 2001 , according to a recent book on supreme court nominations , "his staff began putting together a list of potential nominees and conducting extensive background research on them. the book continued: officials believed [chief justice william h.] rehnquist was likely to retire in the summer of 2001 , and they were determined to be ready . each young lawyer in the white house counsel's office , most of whom had clerked on the supreme court , was assigned a candidate and made responsible for writing a lengthy report about him or her . in the late spring , then - white house counsel alberto gonzalez and his deputy tim flanigan began secretly interviewing some of those possible replacements . the advance work was designed to ensure that george w. bush would be prepared when a justice stepped down . the early in - depth research and interviews with prospective nominees were important in ensuring bush would have coolheaded advice , removed from any external political pressure to select a particular nominee in the hours after a retirement . figure 2 shows the number of days that elapsed between the date on which it was publicly known that a justice was leaving the court and the date on which the president publicly identified a nominee to replace the departing justice .