with the enactment of p.l . 114-113 ( div . f , ยง572 ) , it is now authorized through september 30 , 2016 . several bills on electronic employment eligibility verification have been introduced in the 114 th congress . one measure , the legal workforce act ( h.r . 1147 ) , has seen legislative action . 1147 , as ordered to be reported by the house judiciary committee , would amend ina section 274a to permanently authorize a new electronic verification system modeled on e - verify . under the bill , an employer , after reviewing employee documents evidencing identity and employment authorization and completing a verification form with the employee , would seek confirmation of the employee - provided information through the electronic verification system . the new electronic verification system proposed in h.r . 1147 would be mandatory for all employers in cases of hiring , recruitment , and referral . the verification requirements with respect to hiring would be phased in by employer size , with the largest employers ( those with 10,000 or more employees ) required to participate six months after the date of enactment and the smallest employers ( those with less than 20 employees ) required to participate two years after the date of enactment . the requirements with respect to recruitment and referral would apply one year after the date of enactment . the bill also would provide for mandatory reverification of workers with temporary work authorization , which would be phased in on the same schedule as the verification requirements for hiring . special provisions would apply to agriculture ; the hiring , recruitment and referral , and reverification provisions would not apply to agricultural workers until two years after the date of enactment . prior to these phase - in dates , existing requirements to use e - verify would remain in effect . 1147 would require or permit electronic verification in ways not currently allowed under e - verify . employers could conduct electronic verification after making an offer of employment but before hiring , and could condition a job offer on final verification under the system . verification of previously hired individuals would be mandatory in some cases ( such as federal , state , and local government employees ) . dhs could authorize or direct a critical infrastructure employer to use the system to the extent dhs determines is necessary for critical infrastructure protection . in addition , employers could verify current employees on a voluntary basis . 1147 would significantly increase existing civil and criminal penalties for violations of the revised ina section 274a prohibitions on unauthorized employment and for violations of requirements to conduct verification . it would make it a violation of the prohibition on unauthorized employment to fail to seek electronic verification as required or to knowingly provide false information to the electronic system . the bill also would differentiate between uac who do not meet the screening criteria ( i.e. , who are determined to be trafficking victims or to have possible asylum claims ) and those who do , requiring the former to be transferred to the department of health and human services ( hhs ) no later than 30 days after the screening determination is made .