administrations . since the 2015 elections , however , u.s. concerns about tanzania's governance have raised some tensions . such concerns have centered on the nullification of the 2015 election results ( and the subsequent rerun in 2016 ) in the semiautonomous coastal region of zanzibar , restrictions on civil liberties , and similar issues . citing such concerns , in march 2016 , the u.s. millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) board announced it would suspend its partnership with tanzania , deferring a vote on the country's continued eligibility for a potential second large development compact ; this effectively ended , for the time being , the development of a second mcc compact with tanzania , following its completion of an initial compact between 2008 and 2013 . the mcc had previously authorized and helped fund initial research and concept design activities focused on the development of a second compact , which had been expected to center on the electrical power sector — and in mid - 2015 had informed congress of its intent to negotiate such a compact tanzania . these developments ran counter to a prior narrative of improving governance and economic development in tanzania and closer u.s. ties , underscored by former president obama's july 2013 visit to the country , during which he highlighted such progress , as well as growing u.s. trade and investment ties . despite the later tensions , the obama administration described bilateral ties as being characterized by a "strong" partnership focused on a "shared vision of improving the quality of life for all tanzanians" in its fy2017 state department / u.s . agency for international development ( usaid ) foreign aid budget submission to congress . how bilateral ties may proceed under the trump administration and during the 115 th congress has yet to be determined , but they appear likely to remain on a positive track . an april 26 , 2017 , press release issued under the name of secretary of state rex tillerson characterized the u.s. - tanzanian relationship as "strong," and "marked by a collaborative effort toward shared goals and close cooperation on a variety of programs and initiatives , from health and education , promoting economic growth and democratic governance , and advancing regional security," and projected similar trends in the future . tanzania may also benefit from the fact that mark green , the new usaid administrator , is a former u.s. ambassador to the country ( 2007 to 2009 ) . in recent years , tanzania has been the second - or third - largest annual recipient of such aid in sub - saharan africa , with funding reaching a high of $634.1 million in fy2015 and a low of $546.6 million in fy2017 ( provisional current estimate ; see table 1 ) . the trump administration has requested $535 million for tanzania in fy2018 , the second - highest level requested for a country in the region and a minimal 2% drop relative to the current fy2017 estimate for tanzania . this decrease would be modest compared to the roughly one - third decrease in overall global aid levels proposed by the trump administration .