ethics pledge . every appointee in every executive agency appointed on or after january 20 , 2009 , shall sign , and upon signing shall be contractually committed to , the following pledge upon becoming an appointee: "as a condition , and in consideration , of my employment in the united states government in a position invested with the public trust , i commit myself to the following obligations , which i understand are binding on me and are enforceable under law: 1 . lobbyist gift ban . i will not accept gifts from registered lobbyists or lobbying organizations for the duration of my service as an appointee . revolving door ban — all appointees entering government . i will not for a period of 2 years from the date of my appointment participate in any particular matter involving specific parties that is directly and substantially related to my former employer or former clients , including regulations and contracts . revolving door ban — lobbyists entering government . if i was a registered lobbyist within the 2 years before the date of my appointment , in addition to abiding by the limitations of paragraph 2 , i will not for a period of 2 years after the date of my appointment: ( a ) participate in any particular matter on which i lobbied within the 2 years before the date of my appointment ; ( b ) participate in the specific issue area in which that particular matter falls ; or ( c ) seek or accept employment with any executive agency that i lobbied within the 2 years before the date of my appointment . revolving door ban — appointees leaving government . if , upon my departure from the government , i am covered by the post - employment restrictions on communicating with employees of my former executive agency set forth in section 207 ( c ) of title 18 , united states code , i agree that i will abide by those restrictions for a period of 2 years following the end of my appointment . revolving door ban — appointees leaving government to lobby . in addition to abiding by the limitations of paragraph 4 , i also agree , upon leaving government service , not to lobby any covered executive branch official or non - career senior executive service appointee for the remainder of the administration . employment qualification commitment . i agree that any hiring or other employment decisions i make will be based on the candidate's qualifications , competence , and experience. lobbying has its rightful place in our system . i believe every member here and every member who voted for this bill understands that and understands what a valuable role lobbying can play in the american system . at one time or another , just about every american citizen has wanted to be a lobbyist before the congress on one issue or another . but ordinary americans also understand that organized interests too often can hold too much sway in the halls of power . they know that in washington an influence industry too often operates in secret and gets special privileges not available to most americans .