cities. the times reported that at least 35 cities had seen increases in violent crime compared to 2014 , but the story specifically highlighted increases in reported homicides in 10 cities . according to the times , homicides have increased 76% in milwaukee , wi ; 60% in st. louis , mo ; 56% in baltimore , md ; 44% in washington , dc ; 22% in new orleans , la ; 20% in both chicago , il , and kansas city , mo ; 17% in dallas , tx ; 9% in new york city ; and 4% in philadelphia , pa . the times story followed reports from other media outlets about a growing number of violent crimes in some cities . the recent increases in violent crime have grabbed the attention of law enforcement officials . the major cities chiefs association held a summit in washington , dc , in august to discuss why it was increasing in some cities and what could be done to reduce it . the department of justice ( doj ) held a meeting on october 7 with officials from 15 cities to discuss how doj's resources could be utilized to help combat increases in violent crime . after years of declining crime rates , policymakers might consider legislation to reduce or eliminate some mandatory minimum sentences and reduce the number of people held in prison . the changes policymakers might consider could roll back some of the changes congress made to criminal justice policy during the 1980s and early 1990s in response to long - term rising crime rates . in general , these changes increased sentences , especially for violent and drug offenses , and ensured that inmates served a greater proportion of their sentences in prisons . however , some observers are now concerned that recent reports of an increasing number of violent crimes , especially homicides , in some cities might stymie criminal justice reform in congress . there has also been a spate of high - profile police - involved deaths over the past year . this has led to calls for legislation to reform police policies and tactics . some observers are concerned that reports of rising numbers of violent crimes might thwart efforts to increase police accountability if those efforts are viewed as hampering law enforcement's ability to control crime . has the united states reached the end of , as one criminologist characterized it , the "great american crime decline ? the general consensus is that it is too early to draw any conclusions about the reversal of long - term trends . for example , even though violent crime and homicide rates have been on a downward trend since the early 1990s , there were years where one or both increased , but those year - to - year increases did not portend a break in the overall trend . for example , a short - term but intense dispute between rival gangs might lead to an increase in reported violent crimes . crime is subject to seasonal effects . it tends to increase in the summer and decrease as the year goes on .