in contrast , h.r . ยง1251 et seq. ) under this bill , the permit provision would be part of the cwa's overall regulatory , permitting and enforcement mechanism . the cwa prohibits the discharge of pollutants into the nation's waters without authority under a cwa permit , and h.r . 963 would amend the act's principal permit provision , called the national pollutant discharge elimination system permit ( npdes , section 402 , 33 u.s.c . ยง1342 ) , by adding a new subsection with requirements specific to good samaritan permits . this bill includes a dedicated cleanup fund for abandoned hardrock mines from a royalty fee on minerals taken from public lands . 3843 and the discussion draft are stand - alone bills . these bills propose good samaritan relief from requirements of the cwa and the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla , or superfund , 42 u.s.c . ยง9601 et seq. ) neither includes dedicated funds for iam cleanups . proponents of good samaritan legislation have discussed issues related to proposals since bills were first introduced in the 106 th congress . in the 109 th congress , a number of bills were introduced ( including one supported by the administration ) , and a senate committee reported legislation , but no further activity occurred . bills were introduced in each subsequent congress , as well . with apparent renewed interest in the 114 th congress , the current legislation reflects concepts from a number of earlier proposals , with some refinements and modifications . senate and house committees have held oversight hearings on the gold king mine spill and hearings to review legislative responses to it , including bills that seek to overcome obstacles to potential good samaritans . this report discusses several issues that have drawn attention: eligibility for a good samaritan permit , minerals covered by a permit , standards applicable to a good samaritan cleanup , scope of liability protection , funding , treatment of revenues from cleanup , enforcement , the appropriate implementation role for states and indian tribes , terminating a permit , and sunsetting the permit program . this discussion does not address every issue in the current bills ( for example , it does not analyze procedures for issuing good samaritan permits ) , nor does it discuss general background on the problem of inactive and abandoned mine sites . policymakers and stakeholders have been discussing good samaritan legislative and administrative proposals for more than 15 years in hopes of finding mechanisms to encourage cleanup and remediation of inactive and abandoned mine sites that harm or could harm the environment . stakeholders who have been working for some time to achieve consensus on good samaritan issues believe that they have reached agreement on many but not all points . the august 2015 release of several million gallons of acid mine drainage from the gold king mine in colorado has brought renewed attention to the issue , including among members of congress . testimony at congressional hearings held following the colorado incident indicates some agreement on the basic point of liability relief to remove some of the obstacles to voluntary remediation of abandoned mine sites , but disagreement over a number of elements and important details .