proponents of h.r . 2357 argue that the bill would bolster smaller companies' opportunities to secure securities - based funding . relatedly , a report from the sec's government - business forum on small business capital formation also recommended giving smaller reporting companies more generous access to form s - 3 registration , arguing that traditional investor protection concerns over doing so have been "substantially eliminated with [the advent of] advanced information technology , including edgar. by contrast , critics of similar legislation to h.r . 2357 have warned that expanding smaller reporting company eligibility to form s - 3 registration would constitute a major shift in "long - standing" policies at the sec . title lxxi of p.l . 114-94 , title vi of h.r . 2064 would reduce the minimum amount of time between an egc's initial confidential draft registration statements and roadshows from the current 21 days to 15 days . they would also exempt egcs from having to submit certain historical financial disclosures to the sec before to launching an ipo . title lxxi of p.l . 114-94 , title vi of h.r . 2064 , section 604 of s. 1484 , and section 974 of s. 1910 would enable a company that was an egc when it filed a confidential registration statement for sec review , but is no longer an egc , to still be treated as an egc for regulatory purposes through the earliest of these two events: ( 1 ) when the company completes its ipo ; or ( 2 ) one year after the company ceases to be an egc . currently , a company that qualified as an egc when it filed its confidential registration statement with the sec , but later lost that qualification , would have no recourse for regaining egc status for regulatory purposes . proponents have argued that reducing the time between registration and the roadshow would reduce the likelihood that external events could have a negative impact on an ipo . the provisions have , however , been criticized by those who argue that while a number of egcs are relatively large in size and are likely to garner "fairly immediate" attention from securities analysts , some will likely be rather small and will not attract such immediate analytical attention . as such , the concern is that compressing the time for public reaction to such smaller and unanalyzed egcs in particular could be "a poor and untested idea. a 2014 study of egcs concluded that a sample of egcs began their roadshows an average of 43 days after they had publicly filed their registration statements with the sec . that 43-day average , more than twice the current 21-day minimum window , suggests that a reduction to 15 days is not likely to have a significant overall impact on the egc ipo process . advocates have also argued that not having to provide historical information to the sec would translate into meaningful cost savings . critics , however , have countered that , due to the central role that financial statements play in the overall scheme of mandatory corporate disclosures to the sec and investors , the ability to compare multiple years of such statements is critical .