107-110 ) , which reauthorized the esea . the act made certain technical amendments to the impact aid program , including extending its authorization of appropriations through fy2007 . as congress has not acted to reauthorize the impact aid program , appropriations for it are currently not explicitly authorized . appropriations to provide additional funding to leas serving significant numbers of military dependent students and federally connected children with severe disabilities have also been made available through the department of defense appropriations acts ( see subsequent section for more information ) . this section provides detailed information about impact aid funding provided through l - hhs - ed appropriations from fy2008 through fy2015 . the dod impact aid program was established in the early 1990s to supplement the impact aid programs administered by ed . the most recent dod authorization bill , the carl levin and howard p. "buck" mckeon national defense authorization act for fy2015 ( p.l . 113-291 ) , specifically authorized funding for two dod impact aid programs that provide additional funding for leas serving significant numbers of military dependent children and leas serving military dependent children with severe disabilities . in the past , dod authorization bills have also authorized a dod impact aid program for leas affected by base closures , force structure changes , or force relocation . the authorizations of appropriations for these programs have been lower than those provided for the impact aid programs administered by ed . funds for these programs are appropriated in the dod annual appropriations acts under operation and maintenance for defense - wide activities , but line item appropriation levels are not provided for these programs in the appropriations bills . the annual national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) provides the authorization of appropriations for these programs . this section provides an overview of the three impact aid programs administered by dod and their appropriations . the supplemental assistance program ( also referred to as "dod supplemental impact aid" and "assistance to schools with significant numbers of military dependent students" ) provides funds to leas with significant numbers of military students . funds are provided to eligible leas if , without the additional funding , an lea would be unable to provide students with a level of education equivalent to the minimum level of education available in the schools of other leas in the state . leas are eligible for assistance if at least 20% of their students in average daily attendance during the preceding school year were military dependent students counted under section 8003 ( a ) ( 1 ) of esea , title viii . about 120 districts receive funds through supplemental assistance . dod appropriations for military students with severe disabilities are provided to reimburse leas for money previously spent on providing such children with a free appropriate public education . section 363 of the floyd d. spence national defense authorization act for fy2001 ( p.l . 106-398 ) authorized payments for this purpose beginning in fy2002 .