coal was the fuel most used . coal is also the fossil fuel which emits the most carbon dioxide per unit of electric power produced , averaging 216 pounds of carbon dioxide per million british thermal units ( mmbtus ) of energy produced . by comparison , natural gas combustion releases about half the carbon emissions at 117 pounds of carbon dioxide per mmbtu of energy produced . in a 2007 decision , the supreme court found in massachusetts vs. epa that ghg emissions were air pollutants which could be regulated under the clean air act ( caa ) . epa then moved in 2009 to declare that ghgs were a threat to public health and welfare in an "endangerment" finding , which served as a basis for subsequent actions from the agency . with regard to stationary sources of ghgs , epa proposed new source performance standards ( nsps ) in september 2013 for the control of co 2 emissions from new electric power plants burning fossil fuels under caa section 111 ( b ) regulations . a state must implement an epa - approved plan to ensure that power plants individually , in aggregate , or in combination with other measures undertaken by the state , achieve the equivalent of the interim co 2 emissions performance rates ( over the "glide path" period of 2022 to 2029 ) , and the final co 2 performance rates , rate - based goals or mass - based goals by 2030 . epa outlines goals in the cpp for co 2 reduction by establishing its best system of emissions reduction . the bser is based upon three "building blocks" which epa says are available to all affected egus , either through direct investment or operational shifts or through emissions trading . building block 1 : improving the heat rate at affected coal - fired steam egus . building block 2 : substituting increased generation from lower - emitting existing natural gas combined cycle ( ngcc ) units for reduced generation from higher - emitting ( primarily coal - fired ) affected steam generating units . building block 3 : substituting increased generation from new zero - emitting renewable energy generating capacity for reduced generation from affected fossil fuel - fired generating units . all three building blocks are based on "inside the fence line" ( i.e. , egu - focused ) actions to reduce co 2 emissions or emissions rates . epa used the building blocks to create national performance rates for two subcategories of affected egus: fossil fuel - fired electric utility steam generating units and stationary combustion turbines . for fossil fuel - fired ( i.e. , mostly coal - and oil - fueled ) steam generating units , an emission performance rate of 1,305 pounds of co 2 per megawatt - hour ( lbs co 2 / mwh ) is established . for stationary combustion turbines ( identified by epa as ngcc units ) , the performance rate is 771 lbs co 2 / mwh . epa believes that a transition period from 2022 to 2029 will allow for states to achieve these final performance rates by 2030 .