common foreign assistance acronyms and abbreviation . both bills' accompanying committee reports ( h.rept . 114-79 ) include a number of middle east - related provisions . see table 6 below for a side - by - side comparison of select provisions . this report is an overview of u.s. foreign assistance to the middle east . it includes a brief historical review of foreign aid levels , a description of specific country programs , and analysis of current foreign aid issues . congress authorizes and appropriates foreign assistance and conducts oversight of exe cutive agencies' management of aid programs . as the largest regional recipient of u.s. economic and security assistance , the middle east is perennially a major focus of interest as congress exercises these powers . the foreign aid data in this report is based on a combination of resources , including the united states agency for international development's u.s. overseas loans and grants database ( also known as the "greenbook" ) , appropriations data collected by the congressional research service from the department of state and usaid , data extrapolated from executive branch agencies' notifications to congress , and information published annually in the state department and usaid congressional budget justifications . for fy2016 , the administration has requested overall non - humanitarian bilateral aid for near east and north africa countries totaling $7.14 billion , or about 13% of the state department's international affairs request . this would represent an increase of $365.1 million ( +5.4% ) over fy2014 actual funding levels , and an increase of $570.62 million ( +8.7% ) above the fy2015 requested funding . on july 9 , the senate committee on appropriations reported its version of a fy2016 foreign operations appropriations bill ( s. 1725 ) . similar to fy2013 and fy2014 assistance levels to the region , more than 80% of this fy2016 total would support assistance for israel , egypt , jordan , and the west bank and gaza . on june 15 , 2015 , the house appropriations committee reported a fy2016 department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations bill ( h.r .