it also authorizes certain activities and functions . the most recent comprehensive reauthorization of the hea was in 2008 under the higher education opportunity act ( heoa ; p.l . as amended by the heoa , appropriations were authorized for most hea discretionary spending programs through fy2014 . the comptroller general has explained that there is no constitutional or general statutory requirement that an appropriation must be preceded by a specific act that authorized it . however , under generally applicable provisions in the general education provisions act ( gepa ) , the authorization periods for most hea programs were effectively extended through the end of fy2015 . from september 30 , 2015 , through december 18 , 2015 , congress provided additional appropriations for many of these programs with three consecutive continuing resolutions . on december 18 , 2015 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 was enacted ( p.l . 114-113 ) , under which congress provided additional appropriations for many of the hea programs through fy2016 , such that they will continue operation until through september 30 , 2016 . additional legislative action must occur for the provisions extended by the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 to continue beyond september 30 , 2016 . not all authorizations of appropriations in the hea were set to expire at the end of fy2014 . for some hea programs , authorization of appropriations or mandatory budget authority is permanent , while for others authorization is provided through a date beyond the end of fy2014 . for a number of programs , the period during which appropriations are authorized to be provided has ended . for instance , the authorizations of appropriations for teacher quality partnership grants expired at the end of fy2011 . in a few other instances that are discussed below , program authority had a sunset date ( eg , the end of fy2014 , the end of fy2015 ) . most hea provisions that were set to expire at the end of fy2014 had been provided an additional one - year extension under gepa . this additional one - year extension terminated at the end of fy2015 . the implications of this expiration in the context of a particular program or activity depend on the nature of the provision that expired . in general , there is a distinction between an authorization provision that establishes the authority for a program , policy , project , or activity and a provision that explicitly authorizes subsequent congressional action to provide appropriations . "congress may ... appropriate funds for a program or object that has not been previously authorized or which exceeds the scope of a prior authorization , in which event the enacted appropriation , in effect , carries its own authorization and is available to the agency for obligation and expenditure. that is , in the event that an authorization of appropriations has lapsed , an appropriation would generally provide the necessary legal authorization for the agency to spend money for the particular purpose specified in the appropriations act .