the balance of this report consists of three sections . the first section analyzes potential weaknesses in the data available to congress on unutilized and underutilized buildings . the second section examines the nature of the government's reliance on costly leases and discusses which data elements might enhance oversight of leased building space . the final section of the report discusses options for policymakers to consider should they seek to address these data issues . as discussed earlier in this report , one of the primary reasons gao has listed federal real property management as a high - risk area since 2003 is that the government increasingly acquires space through leases rather than by constructing or purchasing buildings . the prospectus approval process provides congress with an opportunity to exercise oversight of gsa's lease decisions . given the size of its portfolio , and its role as the procurer of space for numerous other agencies , congressional oversight of gsa's prospectus - level lease proposals has broad implications . the usefulness of the prospectus approval process as an oversight tool , however , may be limited by the fact that gsa is not required to present data that directly compare the cost of leasing versus owning space . this means that congress is unable to determine whether it is being asked to approve the most cost - effective option for meeting an agency's real property needs . one option for improving oversight of gsa leases would be to mandate that gsa include comparative cost data in its prospectuses . this would not be a completely new step for gsa to take: in the 1980s and throughout the early part of the 1990s , gsa's lease prospectuses included a comparison of the costs of leasing space to constructing or buying it . gsa discontinued reporting comparative cost data in the mid - 1990s , it said , because funding for construction and purchase alternatives was so limited that they were not considered realistic alternatives . legislation requiring gsa to resume reporting comparative cost data would not , therefore , necessarily result in a significant administrative burden for the agency . as noted , the federal executive branch agencies hold more than 250,000 buildings with a range of purposes , suited to the unique mission of each agency . as agencies' missions change over time , so do their real property needs , thereby rendering some assets less useful or unneeded altogether . healthcare provided by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , for example , has shifted in recent decades from predominately hospital - based inpatient care to a greater reliance on clinics and outpatient care , with a resulting change in space needs . similarly , the department of defense ( dod ) decreased its force by 36% after the cold war ended , and has engaged in several rounds of base realignments and installation closures . in response to these changes , agencies have housed fewer employees in certain facilities , and have shifted other personnel into new space , leaving behind thousands of buildings that are vacant ( unutilized ) or only partially occupied ( underutilized ) . an issue that has gained increased attention from lawmakers in recent years is the government's growing reliance on leased space .