1 and the administration's proposal . these changes could be considered in a stand - alone proposal and , since their effects are largely confined to the corporate sector , pass - through businesses would be largely unaffected . how , or whether , to offset the potential increase in tax burden on pass - through businesses arising from base broadening is an issue in a business - only tax reform . the administration reform proposal included special provisions benefitting small business which was reported to lead to a net tax cut for small businesses ( although not for all pass - through businesses ) . this report discusses issues and options that might be considered in a business - only tax reform , including the approach of the administration's reform as well as other potential options to consider . it first outlines how firms operate as incorporated or unincorporated businesses for tax purposes and discusses the share of assets and income in the unincorporated sector . the next section examines corporate tax expenditures and the extent to which those tax expenditures affect pass - through firms . the final section discusses a number of options and issues that might be considered for business - only tax reform . businesses operate in several different forms: c corporations , proprietorships , partnerships , and s corporations ( sometimes referred to as subchapter s corporations following the section of the internal revenue code that defines them ) . s corporations elect to be taxed as proprietorships or partnerships . although a larger share of the production activities deduction than implied by these rate changes accrues to unincorporated businesses in the tax expenditures , some of that benefit presumably falls on labor rather than capital income . other provisions that are largely corporate include provisions associated with international taxes , research , advertising , and lifo ( last in , first out inventories ) . however , one of the problems with focusing on base broadening provisions that are primarily corporate is such an approach may interfere with other objectives of tax reform . for example , implementing the depreciation choices discussed above may minimize the effects on unincorporated businesses , but will leave rental housing favored relative to other business assets ( although not as favored as owner - occupied housing ) . international provisions may be subsumed into an overall international tax reform . moreover , tax benefits for r&d may be desirable due to the positive externalities research creates for the economy . this approach would limit base broadening to the corporate sector by restricting provisions only for corporations . as noted above , excluding deferral leaves only a few relatively small provisions that are predominantly or completely corporate . predominantly or completely corporate provisions include , for example , include research subsidies , insurance provisions , energy provisions and lower tax rates for small corporations . some of the provisions , such as expensing research and development expenditures , may be desirable provisions . a reform , however , could also implement corporate - only changes for provisions that affect pass - through businesses . for example , the existing depreciation system could be preserved for unincorporated businesses .