this section includes an overview of the employment service . following that , the report covers the services provided by the state formula grant programs and the national programs authorized under title i of wioa . the section on title i concludes with a discussion of funding and performance accountability . appendix a provides a glossary of selected key terms in wioa . the tables in appendix b provide future authorization levels for programs authorized under titles i , ii , iii , and iv of wioa . title i of wioa authorizes programs and activities that support job training and related services to unemployed and underemployed individuals . title i programs are administered by the u.s. department of labor ( dol ) , primarily through its employment and training administration ( eta ) . wioa authorizes appropriations for wioa programs from fy2015 through fy2020 . in fy2015 , programs and activities authorized under title i of wioa were funded at $4.8 billion , comprising 53% of all wioa appropriations . title i funding includes $2.6 billion for state formula grants for youth , adult , and dislocated worker training and employment activities ; $1.7 billion for the job corps program ; and $500 million for national programs . title i of wioa — workforce development activities — authorizes job training and related employment services to unemployed or underemployed individuals and provides the governing structure for all titles of wioa . in addition to state formula grant programs and job corps , wioa authorizes a number of competitive grant - based programs to provide employment and training services to special populations . section 116 of wioa sets forth state and local "performance accountability measures" that apply "across the core programs to assess the effectiveness of states and local areas in achieving positive outcomes for individuals served by those programs. the wioa performance accountability system is designed around the "primary indicators" of performance for the "core programs" and takes effect starting in py2016 ( july 1 , 2016 – june 30 , 2017 ) . the performance accountability system in wioa consists of two main components — indicators of performance and levels of performance . performance indicators are the objective variables on which states and localities must report and are specified in statute , while performance levels are the numerical score for indicators and are negotiated between states , localities , and the departments of labor and education . under wioa , "primary indicators of performance" consist of the required measures described in section 116 ( b ) ( 2 ) ( a ) and any additional indicators identified by individual states .