finally , h.r . 3762 would appropriate an additional $235 million for each of fy2016 and fy2017 to the federal health centers program . section 2001 ( a ) of s.con.res . 11 instructed two committees of the senate — the committee on finance and the committee on health , education , labor , and pensions — to submit changes in laws within each committee's jurisdiction to reduce the deficit by not less than $1 billion for the period fy2016-fy2025 . in other cases , the medicaid beneficiary would access an alternative provider that could be reimbursed with federal medicaid funds . finally , some medicaid beneficiaries could go without services , including preventive screenings and contraceptive services , which could increase costs in the future . the effects of the one - year federal funding prohibition on the operations of ppfa are also uncertain because federal funding is not the entity's sole funding source . moreover , it is not clear how a funding ban would affect any particular ppfa - affiliated clinic because the relative share of federal funding available at a given health center varies . overall , cbo estimated that $235 million would be saved — mainly from the medicaid program — from a one - year prohibition on funding to ppfa . 3762 coupled the one - year ban on ppfa funding with two years of additional funding — $235 million for each of fy2016 and fy2017 — for the federal health center program . much of the legislation to ban federal funding for ppfa and its affiliates that was introduced prior to the reconciliation bill included language that would maintain federal funding overall for reproductive health services ( and other types of services that ppfa provides ) . similar to what was included in these bills , h.r . 3762 would redirect funds to other facilities , such as health centers , on the assumption that these facilities could maintain services for medicaid beneficiaries who otherwise would have sought services at a ppfa affiliate . section 2002 ( a ) instructed three committees of the house — the committees on education and the workforce , energy and commerce , and ways and means — to submit changes in laws within each committee's jurisdiction to reduce the deficit by not less than $1 billion for the period fy2016-fy2025 . section 2002 ( b ) ( 2 ) further provided that these committees shall "note the policies discussed in title vi [of s.con.res . second , the entity provides abortions other than in circumstances where the pregnancy was the result of rape or incest or where the pregnancy places the woman's life in danger . third , the entity's medicaid expenditures for fy2014 exceeded $350 million . based on these criteria , cbo inferred that only ppfa and its affiliates and clinics would be affected ( although cbo did not rule out the possibility that other health care clinics might also be impacted ) . cbo estimated that $235 million could be saved — mainly from the medicaid program — as a result of this one - year funding restriction . the report will be updated as necessary to reflect key legislative developments .