attorneys . the bipartisan budget act of 2015 also revised the amount of the allowable ssa adjustment amounts to be more generous in fy2017-fy2019 , but less generous in fy2021 . in addition , although sequestration largely consists of automatic , across - the - board spending reductions , the law exempts a limited number of programs from sequestration and subjects others to special rules . the lhhs bill contains several programs that are exempt from sequestration , including medicaid , payments to health care trust funds , supplemental security income , special benefits for disabled coal miners , retirement pay and medical benefits for commissioned public health service officers , foster care and adoption assistance , and certain family support payments . the lhhs bill also contains several programs that are subject to special rules under sequestration , such as unemployment compensation , certain student loans , health centers , and portions of medicare . budget resolution and 302 ( b ) suballocations the procedural elements of budget enforcement generally stem from requirements under the congressional budget act of 1974 ( p.l . 93-44 ) that are associated with the adoption of an annual budget resolution . through this process , the appropriations committee in each chamber receives a procedural limit on the total amount of discretionary budget authority for the upcoming fiscal year , referred to as a 302 ( a ) allocation . the appropriations committee subsequently divides this allocation among its 12 subcommittees . these subcommittee - level spending limits are referred to as 302 ( b ) suballocations . the 302 ( b ) suballocations restrict the amount of budget authority available to each subcommittee for the agencies , projects , and activities under its jurisdiction , effectively acting as a cap on each of the 12 regular appropriations bills . enforcement of the 302 ( a ) allocation and 302 ( b ) suballocations occurs through points of order . final action on the fy2016 budget resolution ( s.con.res . 11 ) occurred on may 5 , 2015 . the joint explanatory statement associated with the budget resolution provided 302 ( a ) allocations for the house and senate appropriations committees that were consistent with the fy2016 statutory discretionary spending limits in place at that time , though these limits were subsequently amended by the bipartisan budget act of 2015 . the house and senate appropriations committees reported initial fy2016 302 ( b ) suballocations based on the overall levels provided by the budget resolution . suballocations are commonly revised throughout the year to reflect changes in the distribution of funds due across bills resulting from the latest appropriations action and changes in congressional priorities . the formal suballocations are not always publically updated to reflect changes to the distribution across bills . the senate most recently reported revised suballocations on december 18 , which was after the increases made to the statutory discretionary spending limits by the bipartisan budget act of 2015 . the house most recently reported revised fy2016 suballocations on july 10 , which was prior to the increases to those limits .