several options are available for congress . one possibility is to await further judicial developments in view of the actavis and namenda decisions . another option is to regulate the settlement of pharmaceutical patent litigation in some manner . in the 114 th congress , the fair and immediate release of generics act ( s. 131 ) , introduced by senator bingaman , would make a number of changes to the hatch - waxman act in order to discourage reverse payments settlements . in particular , s. 131 would grant any generic firm the right to share the 180-day regulatory exclusivity if it wins a patent challenge in the district court or is not sued for patent infringement by the brand company . the legislation would also oblige generic firms to abide by any deferred entry date agreed to in their settlements with brand - name firms , even if relevant patents were struck down previously . finally , brand - name firms would be required to make a decision to enforce their patents within 45 days of being notified of a patent challenge by a generic firm under the hatch - waxman act . in addition , the preserve access to affordable generics act ( s. 2019 ) , introduced by senator klobuchar , would declare that certain reverse payment settlements constitute acts of unfair competition . in particular , that bill would amend the federal trade commission act to provide that an agreement "shall be presumed to have anticompetitive effects and be unlawful if — ( i ) an anda filer receives anything of value ; and ( ii ) the anda filer agrees to limit or forego research , development , manufacturing , marketing , or sales of the anda product for any period of time. certain exceptions apply — for example , the payment of reasonable litigation expenses not exceeding $7.5 million is not unlawful . that "quick look" presumption would not apply if the parties to the agreement demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence that the procompetitive benefits of the agreement outweighed the anticompetitive effects of the agreement . s. 2019 includes a list of factors to be weighed by the courts in such circumstances . a third bill , s. 2023 , the prescription drug affordability act of 2015 , was introduced by senator sanders . title iv of this legislation would act similarly to s. 2019 . it would also create a presumption that reverse payment settlements violated the federal trade commission act , subject to certain exceptions . however , unlike s. 2019 , the parties to the agreement cannot overcome this presumption by showing that its procompetitive benefits outweighed the anticompetitive harms . congress has yet to consider legislation with respect to product hopping . if the current situation is deemed satisfactory , then no action need be taken . another alternative is to encourage more active antitrust enforcement in this area in view of the namenda decision . and although the rules governing generic substitution are currently a matter of state law , federal oversight of these principles could also discourage product hopping . the interaction between brand - name and generic firms forms an important component of the public health system of the united states .