judges of the supreme court. the process of appointing justices has undergone changes over two centuries , but its most basic feature — the sharing of power between the president and senate — has remained unchanged . to receive an appointment to the court , a candidate must first be nominated by the president and then confirmed by the senate . this report provides information and analyses related to the debate and consideration of supreme court nominations by the full senate once nominations are reported by the judiciary committee . once the full senate begins debate on a supreme court nomination , many senators typically will take part in the debate . this break from the practice of administering one of the oaths at the white house was attributed , in one report , to president obama "heeding concerns expressed by some justices — most recently john paul stevens — that a white house ceremony sends the inappropriate message that justices are beholden to their appointing president. following sonia sotomayor's example , president obama's second supreme court nominee , elena kagan , took both her constitutional and judicial oaths of office at the supreme court as well . more recently , in contrast , neil gorsuch took the judicial oath of office at a public ceremony at the white house and the constitutional oath of office in a private ceremony in the justices' conference room at the supreme court building . subsequently , the court itself , in its courtroom , also affords public recognition to the new justice's appointment , in a formal ceremony called an "investiture," at which the justice is sworn in yet again . this invitation - only event , for which reserved press seating is made available , is attended by the court's other justices , by family , friends , and former associates of the new justice , and by outside dignitaries who may include the president and the attorney general . the investiture typically occurs before the new justice publicly takes his or her courtroom seat alongside the other members of the court . some , in their remarks , underscore the importance of the senate's "advice and consent" role , and the consequent responsibility to carefully determine the qualifications of a nominee before voting to confirm . typically , each senator who takes the floor states his or her reasons for voting in favor of or against a nominee's confirmation . the criteria used to evaluate a supreme court nominee are an individual matter for each senator . in their floor remarks , some senators may cite a nominee's professional qualifications or character as the key criterion , others may stress the importance of the nominee's judicial philosophy or views on constitutional issues , while still others may indicate that they are influenced in varying degrees by all of these criteria . after the judiciary committee has reported a nomination , it is placed on the executive calendar and assigned a calendar number by the executive clerk of the senate .