numerous other points of order exist . a summary of many of these can be found in crs report 97-865 , points of order in the congressional budget process , by james v. saturno . in addition to points of order , there are other types of budget enforcement mechanisms that employ statutory enforcement known as a sequester . a sequester provides for the automatic cancellation of previously enacted spending , making largely across - the - board reductions to nonexempt programs , activities , and accounts . a sequester is implemented through a sequestration order issued by the president as required by law . such enforcement is briefly described below in the section titled " what types of budgetary enforcement exist outside of the budget resolution ? second , in the absence of agreement on a budget resolution , congress may employ alternative legislative tools to serve as a substitute for a budget resolution . when congress has been late in reaching final agreement on a budget resolution , or has not reached agreement at all , it has relied on such substitutes . these substitutes are typically referred to as "deeming resolutions," because they are deemed to serve in place of an agreement between the two chambers on an annual budget resolution for the purposes of establishing enforceable budget levels for the upcoming fiscal year ( or multiple fiscal years ) . employing a deeming resolution , however , does not preclude congress from subsequently agreeing to a budget resolution . while referred to as deeming resolutions , such mechanisms are not formally defined and have no specifically prescribed content . instead , they denote the house and senate , often separately , engaging legislative procedures to deal with enforcement issues on an ad hoc basis . as described below , the mechanisms vary in form and function , but they always ( 1 ) include or reference certain budgetary levels ( eg , aggregate spending limits and committee spending allocations ) and ( 2 ) contain language stipulating that such levels are to be enforceable by points of order as if they had been included in a budget resolution . as shown in table 1 , since the creation of the budget resolution , dates of adoption have varied , and there have been 10 years in which congress did not come to agreement on a budget resolution . as shown in table 2 , in each of those years , one or both chambers employed at least one deeming resolution to serve as a substitute for a budget resolution . it should be noted that table 2 includes only the deeming resolutions that pertain to the fiscal years for which congress did not agree on a budget resolution . for example , for fy2017 , the house and senate ultimately agreed to a budget resolution , and so data pertaining to fy2017 is not included in this report even though the senate utilized a deeming resolution before agreement on a budget resolution was reached . as described below , deeming resolutions have varied in several ways . in addition to the budget resolution , congress employs other types of budget enforcement .