other disposal bills have been broader . some proposals sought to reauthorize expired disposal authorities or establish new ones , such as to require blm and fs to offer for competitive sale a certain percentage of their lands annually for each of several years . other bills would have accelerated currently authorized land sales , such as blm lands identified as candidates for disposal under section 203 of flpma . these efforts did not accomplish broad divestiture for a number of reasons . a fundamental obstacle was that , as a condition of statehood , western states generally had agreed to disclaim forever "all right and title to the unappropriated public lands lying within said territory , and that the same shall be and remain at the sole and entire disposition of the united states. this language generally was incorporated in federal enabling acts creating western states . it also was incorporated into western state constitutions ; therefore , subsequent state laws asserting title to federal lands appear to contravene the constitutions of western states . states do not appear to have attempted to enforce these laws . the extent of federal land ownership is a policy choice for congress . recent congresses have considered , and in some cases enacted , bills related to acquisition and disposal of land . numerous proposals sought to authorize and govern federal acquisition of specific land parcels or groups of parcels . some proposed protective designations or established new federal land units , such as national monuments , national conservation areas , and national parks . other proposals sought to enhance acquisitions through increased funding and mandatory rather than discretionary appropriations for the land and water conservation fund . still other bills promoted acquisitions for specific purposes , such as to secure access for hunting , fishing , and other recreation . by contrast , numerous bills proposed to transfer particular federal parcels or groups of parcels to individuals or other governmental entities — for instance , local governments — for public purposes . other measures would have allowed western states to select from the unappropriated federal lands a percentage of the federal land acreage in the state , which could then be leased or sold to generate state funds for education . still other proposals sought to limit federal land ownership or acquisition , for example by prohibiting or restricting acquisition in states with a certain percentage of federal land ownership or by linking acquisition to comparable disposal . one of the most concerted efforts occurred in the late 1970s and early 1980s and became known as the sagebrush rebellion . the sagebrush rebellion took the form of state and local legislation , court challenges , federal administrative changes , and proposals for federal legislation . as with current , similar efforts , a primary goal was more state and local control over lands and resources . examples of actions included enactment of laws in several states asserting state authority over public lands . these figures reflect new budget authority and both mandatory and discretionary appropriations ( including for wildland fire management ) . they also include appropriations to the agencies that are not used on agency lands , ranging from little in the case of blm to roughly two - thirds for fws .