only one motion to recommit is in order . rule xix allows for 10 minutes of debate on the motion to recommit , but in most cases there is no further debate . amendatory instructions are in the form of an instruction that the committee report the resolution back to the house forthwith with the amendatory language incorporated . if the motion is agreed to , the resolution does not actually leave the floor , and the house would immediately have the resolution and amendment before it with the opportunity to vote to adopt the amendment . if the house then agrees to the amendatory language , it supplants the original committee - recommended sanctions , and the final vote will be on the resolution as amended . if the resolution is agreed to , the house takes the appropriate action based on the discipline imposed by the resolution . for example , in the event of a reprimand , the vote total is recorded in the journal . if a member is censured , the censure resolution is read while the member stands in the "well" of the house . finally , if a member is expelled , the expulsion is reported by the clerk of the house to the governor of the expelled member's state . for example , following an expulsion of a member in 1980 , the house ordered the clerk to "notify the governor of the commonwealth of pennsylvania of the action of the house. once the ethics committee has reported a sanction recommendation , several options exist to potentially change the recommendation on the house floor . these options include offering a motion to recommit , an amendment to the committee's sanction resolution , and a separate resolution with the alternative desired punishment . this section provides an explanation and historical application of these options , followed by a discussion of the potential advantages and disadvantages of each . an historical analysis of attempts to alter ethics committee sanction recommendations provides three main options for adjusting disciplinary decisions in the house of representatives: the motion to recommit , amending ethics committee sanction resolutions , and the introduction of a separate resolution with an alternate sanction . since the committee's creation in 1967 , only 16 ethics cases have been brought to the house floor . of these cases , attempts to alter the sanction recommendation have been made in seven and have been successful in three . the history of altering sanction recommendations shows that while altering a sanction recommendation is possible , it can be a difficult process . ultimately it is the house that must render a decision regarding whether a member should be disciplined . the process through which the ethics committee investigates and reports disciplinary recommendations and how the floor considers recommended sanctions can illustrate the contextual differences between ethics and legislative products from other committees . these include: the unique relationship between the house and the ethics committee , the perceived benefits of ethics committee service , cooperation between the ethics committee and other house committees , and the way sanction recommendations are considered by the house . first , the relationship between the house of representatives and the ethics committee is unique .