independent charity paps . there are restrictions on the use of pharmaceutical assistance . drug coupons may not be used in conjunction with federal programs such as the medicare part d prescription drug benefit because the coupons may implicate federal anti - kickback law . manufacturer - sponsored paps may not offer cost - sharing assistance to enrollees in medicare part d and other federal programs . however , paps operated by independent charities ( which are allowed to receive cash donations from drug companies ) may assist federal beneficiaries , if the paps comply with certain conditions . in the private sector , some health care payers and pbms have barred enrollees from redeeming manufacturer coupons for certain drugs . others have decided not to include certain pharmaceuticals on their formulary , or list of covered drugs , if the products have coupon discounts . this report provides an overview of consumer spending on prescription drugs ; explains the difference between drug coupons and paps ; and outlines federal laws and regulations and private - sector policies relating to coupons and paps . pharmaceutical assistance programs , in their current form , developed in the 1990s in response to public concern about high drug price inflation . the programs grew substantially in following decades despite a broad expansion of health insurance drug coverage and the widespread adoption of low - cost generic drugs . millions of consumers gained prescription drug coverage through medicare part d ( medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ; p.l . for a sense of how a coupon works , consider a pharmaceutical manufacturer that sells a brand - name drug to a commercial payer for $1,000 for a 30-day supply . the payer places the drug on a price tier that imposes 25% enrollee coinsurance up to the plan's annual out - of - pocket maximum . to support sales of the drug , the manufacturer offers a coupon that limits out - of - pocket costs to $100 per 30-day refill for a 12-month period . in the absence of the manufacturer coupon , an enrollee would pay $250 out of pocket each time he or she went to a pharmacy to buy a 30-day supply of the drug ( 25% of the $1,000 price ) , until the annual out - of - pocket maximum was reached . with a coupon , the consumer would pay $100 per fill and the manufacturer would cover the remaining $150 of the required coinsurance up to the maximum subsidy amount . many co - payment coupons include disclaimers stating that they cannot be used by individuals enrolled in federal health programs , including medicare , medicaid , and the veterans health administration . ( see " restrictions on coupon use ." manufacturers build the cost of co - payment coupons into their budget and pricing strategies and use analytics to target the offers . pharmaceutical manufacturers , state governments , and independent charities operate paps to help uninsured or underinsured individuals pay for prescription drugs . many nongovernmental paps are set up as 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) nonprofit organizations to provide prescription drugs or financial subsidies to qualified patients .