provisions . bars customs duties on digital products . adopts and maintains consumer protection laws against online fraud , measures to stop unsolicited online commercial messages ( spam ) , and protecting online privacy . prohibits forced disclosure of software source code with governments or commercial rivals . prohibits forced localization of data centers , and requires that parties "allow the cross border transfer of information by electronic means , including personal information , when this activity is for the conduct of the business of the covered person. encourages cooperation on cybersecurity and assistance to smes . exceptions . allows data localization requirements and limits on data transfer under limited circumstances . financial services are not covered , but have explicit provisions on data flows in the financial services chapter ( see below ) . general and institutional provisions that broadly apply to the agreement include: accession . includes language addressing how countries may accede to the agreement . provisions governing ipr protect innovations in various forms . tpp provisions seek to boost the level of ipr protections beyond current wto provisions in the 1994 trade - related aspects of intellectual property rights ( trips ) agreement , in areas such as patents , copyrights , trademarks , and trade secrets . tobacco . eliminates u.s. tobacco tariffs ( as high as 350% ) within 10 years , japanese smoking tobacco and cigar tariffs over 11 years , malaysian tobacco and tobacco product tariffs over 16 years , and vietnamese blended tobacco , cigar , and tobacco product tariffs over 16 years . creates a vietnamese trq of 500 metric tons for unmanufactured tobacco that increases gradually eliminates in - quota tariffs on unmanufactured tobacco over 11 years and on tobacco leaf in 21 years . eliminates tariffs on autos and auto parts in tpp countries over various phase - out periods , including the 2.5% u.s. auto and 25% u.s. truck tariffs over 25 and 30 years , respectively , with japan - specific safeguards in case of import surges . special provisions target u.s. - japan trade , requiring japan to address nontariff barriers relating to transparency and distribution among other issues . eliminates all tpp country import tariffs on textile and apparel products over various phase - out periods . better access to the u.s. market has been a key interest for vietnam , which would be granted an earned import allowance exempting , up to a given threshold , certain u.s. apparel imports from vietnam from the tpp rule of origin , contingent on a specific quantity of vietnamese imports of certain u.s. fabrics . access to foreign markets depends on facilitating the movement of goods and services across borders . tpp includes commitments on efficient release of goods , handling of express shipments , electronic processing of customs documentation , and inspections based on risk - management techniques , as well as enhanced transparency . tpp contains language that would prohibit countries from blocking cross - border flows of data over the internet , a primary objective of high technology companies opposed to localization requirements that require data or servers to be located in - country . e - commerce chapters have traditionally provided for nondiscriminatory treatment of digital products .