first , h.b . state laws that require abortion providers to satisfy the same standards as ascs have become increasingly more common . texas regulations define an asc as a facility "that primarily provides surgical services to patients who do not require overnight hospitalization or extensive recovery , convalescent time or observation. under texas law , ascs are required to satisfy a variety of operating , fire prevention and safety , and construction standards . in cole , the fifth circuit concluded that the plaintiffs' claim involving the asc requirement failed on both procedural grounds and on the merits . the court found that the claim was precluded by its decision in abbott . although the plaintiffs did not challenge the requirement in abbott because implementing regulations had not yet gone into effect , the fifth circuit maintained that because abbott involved the same parties and legal standards , the requirement should have been challenged in that case . the fifth circuit determined that a facial challenge to the asc requirement would also fail on the merits because the requirement did not have the purpose or effect of placing a substantial obstacle in the path of a woman seeking an abortion . the court maintained that the plaintiffs failed to show that the asc requirement was adopted for an improper purpose . although the lower court found an improper purpose based on what it concluded was a lack of credible evidence to support the proposition that abortions performed in ascs lead to better health outcomes , the fifth circuit observed: "all of the evidence referred to by the district court is purely anecdotal and does little to impugn the state's legitimate reasons for the act. in addition , the fifth circuit found that the asc requirement did not have the effect of placing a substantial obstacle in the path of a woman seeking an abortion . the texas legislature indicated that the requirement raised the standard and quality of care for women seeking abortions , and protected their health and welfare . opponents maintained , however , that the requirement would likely result in the closure of numerous abortion facilities as physicians faced difficulty obtaining admitting privileges . in 2013 , planned parenthood and a group of abortion providers and physicians , including whole woman's health , challenged the constitutionality of the admitting privileges requirement and a separate requirement involving the administration of abortion - inducing drugs . in planned parenthood of greater texas surgical health services v. abbott , the fifth circuit concluded that the admitting privileges requirement was facially constitutional . the fifth circuit found that the requirement did not impose an undue burden despite the possibility of facility closures and increased travel distances to obtain an abortion . in casey , the court indicated that if a law would be invalid in a large fraction of the cases in which it is relevant , it should be found to have an improper effect . notably , the court considered the effect of pennsylvania's spousal notification requirement only on married women who did not want to notify their husbands of their plans to have an abortion , rather than its effect on all women or all pregnant women in the state .