, in , on , or adjacent to the vending machine ) . as previously noted , in 2011 , fda published two proposed rules establishing calorie labeling requirements for food items sold in restaurants and vending machines . the two rules were finalized and published in the federal register on december 1 , 2014 , and were to take effect one year from publication ( december 1 , 2015 ) for restaurants and two years ( december 1 , 2016 ) for vending machines . on july 9 , 2015 , fda extended the compliance date until december 1 , 2016 , for restaurants and srfes . for example , as introduced in the 115 th congress , the common sense nutrition disclosure act ( h.r . 772 , s. 261 ) would permit entities that receive the majority of orders from customers who are off - premises ( eg , pizza chains ) to provide their menus online in place of menu boards in restaurants ; would give manufacturers greater flexibility in how they determine and document nutrient content analyses ; and would permit establishments with standard menu items that come in different flavors , varieties , or combinations that are listed as a single menu item to determine and disclose nutritional information using specified methods or methods allowed by the secretary . under this proposal , if a restaurant or retailer is determined to be in violation of the menu labeling requirements , the entity would have 90 days to take corrective action , and the secretary would be prohibited from taking enforcement action if the violations are corrected within those 90 days . obesity is a major public health concern in the united states . two - thirds of adults and one - third of children are overweight or obese . although many factors contribute to obesity , weight gain is generally the result of an energy imbalance — an excess of calories consumed over calories expended . high rates of obesity and chronic disease have prompted various state and local nutrition labeling initiatives , in addition to other tactics and strategies . the 1990 nutrition labeling and education act ( nlea , p.l . 101-535 ) authorized the food and drug administration ( fda ) to require nutrition labeling of most foods and dietary supplements , but it did not require the labeling of food sold in restaurants . section 4205 of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l . 111-148 ) amended the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) , establishing nutrition labeling requirements for standard menu items offered for sale in chain restaurants or similar retail food establishments ( srfes ) that have 20 or more locations , that conduct business under the same name regardless of the type of ownership of the locations , and that offer the same menu items for sale . the aca provision required fda to promulgate regulations specifying the scope of entities and foods covered by the law , as well as details regarding how the required calorie and nutrition information would be conveyed to consumers .