in the 114 th congress , h.r . the 1997 guidance did not include consideration of stormwater . in recent years , members have offered bills that would address these issues in different ways . some bills sought to codify epa's integrated planning approach — as written in the 2012 framework — into the cwa . this approach might be considered largely symbolic: the 2012 framework did not provide new authority ; it highlighted existing authority and opportunities within the cwa . a process for evaluating performance and measuring success . a process for identifying , evaluating , and selecting proposed new projects or modifications to ongoing or planned projects and implementation schedules based on changing circumstances . a major point of contention between epa and local government stakeholders has been the agency's reliance on administrative orders or judicially approved consent decrees to codify pollution reduction plans , including plans approved under the integrated planning policy , rather than through modification of cwa permits . mayors , represented by the u.s. conference of mayors , have stated that they would prefer that epa authorize compliance flexibility through permits , rather than subjecting cities and towns to legally binding consent decrees with penalties and fines for noncompliance . epa typically uses a consent decree after periods of permit noncompliance . the agency takes the position that both enforcement and permits are necessary , depending on individual circumstances . the 2012 policy provides that all or part of an integrated plan can be incorporated into a cwa discharge permit . for example , innovative practices for managing stormwater as a resource — green infrastructure practices and technologies — can be considered and incorporated into permits where such practices provide sustainable solutions for municipal wet weather control . the policy further provides that all or part of an integrated plan may be incorporated into the remedy of a federal or state enforcement action to address noncompliance with the cwa . epa initially focused the policy on new enforcement , meaning that cities already subject to consent decrees were unable to take advantage of flexibility to modify existing plans to resolve enforcement actions . however , in 2012 , epa , the department of justice , and officials of one city , the district of columbia , agreed to consider extending compliance deadlines in that city's 2005 consent decree in order to allow the city to test green infrastructure technologies . to address sewer overflows , the original consent decree called for the city to construct by 2025 three large tunnels capable of holding 31 million gallons of diluted sewage at any one time , allowing the city's wastewater treatment plant to process the effluent after storms . the 2012 agreement contemplated extending deadlines for some of the new construction required by the consent decree . further , it potentially would allow the city to avoid some construction project elements ( constructing one tunnel as planned , but reducing a second tunnel's size and eliminating the third tunnel ) , if implementation of a green infrastructure program can reasonably be expected to lead to cso reductions required by the consent decree , while also satisfying the city's responsibility to mitigate stormwater runoff .