have pledged to use . usaid encourages use of as many of the 53 indicators as applicable to their work . 480 ffp program funds . these funds complement usaid's in - kind food aid and may be used where cash assistance is most appropriate due to local market conditions or when in - kind food aid cannot arrive in time . in fy2014 , the office of food for peace contributed approximately $865 million in ida funds ( both base and overseas contingency operations funds ) to support local and regional food procurement as well as cash transfers and vouchers to address emergency food security needs . adjusting the relative funding levels for p.l . examples of evaluation tracking indicators include improvements in a child's physical growth , expanded crop area under a new technology or management practice , output per unit of an agricultural production activity , or the percent of national budget allocated to nutrition or agriculture . ftf currently uses 53 indicators to measure progress toward each result in the four levels of the results framework ( rf ) ( table a - 1 ) . to prioritize ftf investments , each focus country determines which section of the rf is most applicable in its country context and which linkages will have the greatest potential for change . all countries must seek to achieve the overall rf goal and objectives . they then select from among eight potential intermediate results those that are most likely to help them meet their particular needs . under the second level — the objectives — the rf posits six indicators ( three for each objective ) for measuring results with respect to achieving the objective . accelerating inclusive agricultural growth is assessed by ( 1 ) agriculture sector gdp ; ( 2 ) per capita expenditures of rural households ; and ( 3 ) the women's empowerment in agriculture index ( weai , discussed earlier ) . similarly , to measure progress toward the objective of improving nutritional status , especially of women and children , the rf lists three nutrition - oriented indicators: ( 1 ) prevalence of stunted children , ( 2 ) prevalence of wasted children , and ( 3 ) prevalence of underweight women . the third rf level of eight intermediate results ( irs ) is specified under the two objectives . for example , irs for agricultural sector growth are measures of improved agricultural productivity and expanding markets and trade . irs for the nutrition objective include improved use of maternal and child health and nutrition services and improved access to diverse and quality foods . the fourth level of the rf — specific sub - irs — varies by country and region . each focus country selects project - level indicators from the set of 53 indicators to best measure progress against the chosen sections of the rf . a baseline for each indicator assesses initial need and provides a reference for measuring progress . for each indicator selected , countries set targets and routinely track progress toward them .