according to 49 c.f.r . ยง661.5 , "a component is considered of u.s. origin if it is manufactured in the united states , regardless of the origin of its subcomponents. buy america provisions restrict amtrak's spending when the cost of articles , materials , or supplies bought is at least $1 million . the law requires amtrak to purchase goods that are manufactured in the united states "substantially from articles , material , and supplies mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states. fra has interpreted "substantially" to mean that the manufactured goods must have domestic component content greater than 50% , by cost . there have been several changes to buy america in the two most recent surface transportation reauthorization acts , the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 ; p.l . 112- 141 ) , enacted in july 2012 , and the fixing america's surface transportation ( fast ) act ( p.l . 114-94 ) , enacted in december 2015 . as part of map - 21 , congress sought to prevent sponsors of highway projects from segmenting a project into smaller parts , some federally funded and some not , so as to free some segments of the project from buy america requirements . to accomplish this , map - 21 specified that fhwa buy america requirements apply to all contracts eligible for assistance within the scope of a project's national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa ) document if at least one contract for the project is federally funded . this provision addressed issues that arose during reconstruction of the san francisco - oakland bay bridge by the california department of transportation ( caltrans ) . after a major earthquake in 1989 , california decided to reconstruct the bay bridge by refurbishing the western span and replacing the eastern span . caltrans determined that it could obtain imported steel for the project more cheaply than domestic steel . to avoid buy america requirements , it decided the eastern span would be built without federal funds . subsequently , and controversially , the eastern span was built using steel made in china . another effect of the provision prohibiting the segmenting of projects is that utility relocation work done as part of a federally funded highway project must now be buy america - compliant even if the contract to do the utility work does not use federal funds . this change initially caused concern among state departments of transportation and industry associations that projects would be delayed as utilities sought to obtain buy america - compliant products . in response , fhwa delayed implementation of the new requirements until january 1 , 2014 . the effects of compliance since then on highway projects , utilities , and manufacturers of products used by the utility industry are unknown . map - 21 also made changes aimed at making the fta waiver determination process more transparent . map - 21 requires fta to publish each waiver request and a detailed explanation of the waiver determination in the federal register , and to make them easily accessible on its website .