such a determination would likely depend on the specific characteristics of each credit . for example , in other contexts , courts have held the eitc to be public assistance for purposes of state law because of its refundable , grant - like nature and purpose of assisting low - income families . since the key terms are not defined statutorily nor do they appear to be terms of art ( i.e. , have a generally accepted meaning in law ) , a court might look to their customary and ordinary meanings . in general , "grant" is defined as "a sum of money given by an organization , especially a government , for a particular purpose" ; "benefit" is "a payment made by the state or an insurance scheme to someone entitled to receive it" ; and "assistance" is "the provision of money , resources , or information to help someone. furthermore , in other contexts , courts have interpreted "other similar benefits" in prwora to mean services that "assist people with economic hardship" or could potentially "create [an] incentive for illegal immigration. these definitions might support the argument that some refundable tax credits could be federal public benefits due to their refundable nature and purpose . however , some courts have held that the child tax credit is not such a benefit since , unlike the eitc , it is not limited to assisting low - income families . as these cases illustrate , a court might not reach the same conclusion for each credit , concluding that some would meet the criteria while others would not , depending on the specific characteristics of each credit . there appears to be justification for concluding that refundable tax credits are not federal public benefits under prwora section 401 , but there is also arguably support for determining that some might be , depending on their characteristics and purpose . until the irs , a court , or congress addresses whether any refundable credits are federal public benefits , the only clear restrictions on the ability of aliens to claim them are those found in the irc ( see table 2 ) . the following crs reports provide information on specific refundable tax credits: earned income tax credit: crs report r43805 , the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) : an overview , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . additional child tax credit: crs report r41873 , the child tax credit: current law and legislative history , by [author name scrubbed] . american opportunity tax credit: crs report r41967 , higher education tax benefits: brief overview and budgetary effects , by [author name scrubbed] . health coverage tax credit: crs report rl32620 , health coverage tax credit , by [author name scrubbed] . making work pay credit: crs report r40969 , withholding of income taxes and the making work pay tax credit , by [author name scrubbed] . adoption tax credit: crs report rl33633 , tax benefits for families: adoption , by [author name scrubbed] first - time homebuyer tax credit: crs report rl34664 , the first - time homebuyer tax credit , by [author name scrubbed] . the first is whether these individuals may claim the credits under the internal revenue code ( irc ) .