1599 , safla ) in july 2015 . while the food and drug administration ( fda ) does not impose specific labeling requirements on food just because it may or may not contain ge ingredients , some states have responded to public demand for ge labeling by enacting state laws requiring such a labeling scheme . as of the date of this report , three states have passed mandatory labeling laws for ge foods: vermont , connecticut , and maine . while none of these state labeling schemes are yet in effect , some industry participants have filed suit in federal court against the state of vermont trying to prevent the state's ge labeling requirements from going into effect . first , section 101 of safla would direct the fda to continue its current premarket consultation process for food derived from new plant varieties , including ge plants . under safla , the fda may require that the labeling of food produced from , containing , or consisting of a ge plant display a statement to inform consumers of a difference between food so produced and a comparable non - genetically engineered food . under this proposed requirement , the fda may require such labeling if the agency has determined that there is a material difference between the two foods and the disclosure of such difference is necessary to protect public health or to prevent the label from being false or misleading . additionally , safla would amend the plant protection act to create a notification program requiring those who plan to introduce into interstate commerce ge plants for food use to notify the secretary of health and human services , who must then evaluate the food under the premarket consultation process described above . safla's section 111 would then require the entity to submit the evaluation to the secretary of agriculture . section 201of safla would establish a voluntary ge food certification program within the usda to govern labeling claims with respect to the use or non - use of ge in the production and process of food . section 301 of safla would amend section 403 of the ffdca to deem a food misbranded if its labeling contains an express or implied claim that such food is "natural," unless the claim uses terms that have been defined by regulations promulgated by the fda . safla also contains several preemption provisions that would potentially impact a state's regulation of ge food labeling , including vermont's act 120 . section 113 of safla contains an express preemption provision that reads in relevant part , [n]o state or political subdivision of a state may directly or indirectly establish under any authority or continue in effect as to any food in interstate commerce any requirement with respect to the sale or offering for sale in interstate commerce of a [ge] plant for use or application in food that is not identical to the requirement [imposed in ... ] section 111 of this act . section 111 of safla , as mentioned above , would establish a premarket notification program for ge plants . specifically , under this section , it would be unlawful to place a ge plant in interstate commerce without approval by the department of health and human services .