a sitting speaker could preside over the election of his or her successor . however , under clause 8 ( b ) ( 3 ) of house rule i ( adopted in the 108 th congress ) , the speaker must provide the clerk a list of members designated to act as speaker pro tempore in the case of a vacancy in the office . it is possible that a member on this list could preside over an election in the case of a vacancy during a congress . in current practice , each house party caucus selects , prior to the floor vote , a candidate whose name is placed in nomination immediately before the vote . typically , the election commences with a member from each party caucus placing in nomination the party's candidate for speaker . other names may also be placed in nomination on the floor . since 1839 , the election has been by roll - call vote , a quorum being present . votes are cast v iva voce , meaning that each voting member states aloud the surname of the candidate whom he or she favors for speaker . the presiding officer appoints several members as tellers , who tally the votes . members are not required to vote for one of the candidates nominated by each major party ( or even for some other candidate formally nominated on the floor ) ; they may vote for any individual . although the u.s. constitution does not require the speaker to be a member of the house , all speakers have been members . however , some individuals not serving in the house have received votes . the long - standing practice of the house is that electing a speaker requires a numerical majority of the votes cast by members "for a person by name. this does not mean that an individual must necessarily receive a majority ( currently 218 ) of the full membership of the house , because some members may not be present to vote ( or may instead answer "present" ) . if no candidate receives the requisite majority of votes cast , the roll call is repeated . no restrictions are imposed on who may receive votes in the subsequent ballots . ( for instance , no candidate is eliminated based on receiving the fewest votes in the floor election , and a member's vote is not limited to individuals who received votes in previous ballots. ) this report briefly poses and answers several frequently asked questions in relation to the floor proceedings used to elect a speaker of the house . for a more detailed treatment of these election procedures , as well as data on elections of the speaker in each congress since 1913 , see crs report rl30857 , speakers of the house: elections , 1913-2017 . for a list of all speakers of the house and their periods of service , as well as additional discussion of selection procedures , see crs report 97-780 , the speaker of the house: house officer , party leader , and representative . upon convening at the start of a new congress , the house elects a speaker by roll call vote .