under orr regulations at 45 c.f.r . ยง400.301: ( a ) in the event that a state decides to cease participation in the refugee program , the state must provide 120 days advance notice to the director before withdrawing from the program . ( b ) to participate in the refugee program , a state is expected to operate all components of the refugee program , including refugee cash and medical assistance , social services , preventive health , and an unaccompanied minors program if appropriate.... ( c ) when a state withdraws from all or part of the refugee program , the director may authorize a replacement designee or designees to administer the provision of assistance and services , as appropriate , to refugees in that state... . as of august 31 , 2016 , 10,740 syrian refugees have arrived in the united states in fy2016 . these refugees were placed in 40 states , as shown in the following table . the law requires congressional consultation but not congressional approval . following the consultations , the president issues a presidential determination that sets the refugee ceiling and regional allocations for that fiscal year . once the presidential determination for a fiscal year has been issued , ina section 207 also allows for additional refugee admissions in response to an "emergency refugee situation. these statutory requirements are implemented through the refugee processing system , as detailed below . successful applicants are admitted to the united states in refugee status . after one year in the united states , refugees must apply to adjust to lawful permanent resident ( lpr ) status . refugees of all nationalities who are accepted for u.s. resettlement are placed in communities throughout the united states . in fy2016 , arriving refugees have been placed in 47 states and the district of columbia . the initial placement of refugees has received increased attention since the november 2015 attacks in paris , as some governors have expressed an unwillingness to accept syrian refugees in their states . in such a situation , the president may , after congressional consultations , issue an emergency presidential determination providing for an increase in refugee admissions numbers . for fy2016 , the obama administration initially proposed a refugee ceiling of 75,000 and held consultations with congress on that proposal . the proposal reportedly included an allocation of 33,000 for the near east / south asia , the region that includes syria . ( see appendix for data on placement of syrian arrivals in fy2016 , by state. ) the placement of arriving refugees in communities in the united states and the provision of initial resettlement assistance to them is the responsibility of dos's reception and placement program . under this program , prm funds cooperative agreements with domestic resettlement agencies . the placement process works as follows: every week , representatives of each of [the resettlement] agencies meet to review the biographic information and other case records sent by the overseas resettlement support centers ( rsc ) to determine where a refugee will be resettled in the united states . during this meeting , the resettlement agencies match the particular needs of each incoming refugee with the specific resources available in a local community .