such statutory exclusions are generally punitive in nature . the far similarly provides for exclusion on specified grounds , which can encompass both failure to perform as required under a contract and other misconduct . examples include ( 1 ) the commission of fraud or a criminal offense in obtaining or performing under a government contract ; ( 2 ) delinquent federal taxes in an amount that exceeds $3,000 ; ( 3 ) willful failure to perform in accordance with the terms of a contract ; and ( 4 ) "any other cause of so serious or compelling a nature that it affects the present responsibility" of a vendor . exclusion under the far differs from exclusion under the statutes previously noted in that it may be imposed only "for the government's protection," and not "for purposes of punishment. the far also requires that agency suspending and debarring officials ( who are not the contracting officers ) consider mitigating factors or remedial measures undertaken by the contractor in debarment determinations , in particular . however , while not punitive in the usual sense of the term , exclusion under the far serves to hold contractors accountable for delinquencies , and may be perceived as penal in nature by those excluded . the determination to exclude a contractor is made after an administrative proceeding , not a judicial one . contractors are generally entitled to due process in the form of notice and an opportunity for a hearing when excluded , although the nature of that process can vary depending upon the type and grounds of exclusion . for example , notice and an opportunity for a hearing must generally be provided prior to debarment , although it could potentially be provided after suspension . particularly under the far , exclusion is always discretionary ; it is not automatically imposed given the existence of potential grounds for exclusion . also , a vendor's current contracts are not automatically terminated when the vendor is excluded . instead , the agency would have to take action to terminate those contracts , as previously discussed ( see " termination for default " ) . in addition , the vendor's exclusion could be waived to permit the government to do business with a contractor in particular cases . the far permits the waiver of far - based exclusions when there is a "compelling reason," and certain statutes similarly permit waivers of statutory exclusions in the "paramount interest of the united states. the civil provisions of the false claims act ( fca ) are one of the primary tools available to the federal government to address and deter contractor fraud , and , in recent years , have enabled the government to recover billions of dollars per year for procurement and other fraud . there are seven types of conduct that can lead to civil liability under the fca . of these , the two that are arguably most relevant in the procurement context include "knowingly present[ing] , or caus[ing] to be presented , a false or fraudulent claim for payment or approval" and "knowingly mak[ing] , us[ing] , or cau[sing] to be made or used , a false record or statement material to a false or fraudulent claim.