opinions on the most likely outcome of such a determination differ . judge richard posner , of the u.s. court of appeals for the seventh circuit , stated in a 1996 concurrence that "[a] constitutional amendment may be required to change the rule whereby birth in this country automatically confers u.s. citizenship , but i doubt it . it is generally acknowledged that opposition to the conventional interpretation is the minority viewpoint . both sides of the birthright citizenship debate look back to colonial and pre - colonial times for evidence for their respective positions . some legal writers favoring a narrower reinterpretation of birthright citizenship have emphasized statements in english common law cases referring to "aliens in amity" ; they argue that even the common law doctrine of jus soli came to rely upon mutual consent between the citizen and the sovereign , and that the fourteenth amendment did not intend to abandon what they interpret as common law notions of consent . other consensualist legal writers say that to the extent the english common law made persons english subjects purely on the basis of the place of their birth , the american revolution rejected this element of the english common law and enshrined more consensualist ideals of a social contract . consensualist legal writers have also emphasized the right of expatriation , or the voluntary ending of citizenship , as a corollary that they argue supports an allegiance based approach to gaining citizenship at birth . proponents of the conventional interpretation of the citizenship clause generally argue that the american founders understood the english common law doctrine of jus soli to include only limited exceptions for children born to diplomats and hostile occupying forces , and that , as various passages in the wong kim ark decision describe , this understanding of the jus soli doctrine informed the framing of the fourteenth amendment . interpretations of the legislative history of the citizenship clause of the fourteenth amendment , and of its precursor language in the civil rights act of 1866 , are similarly divergent , even as to some of the very same passages in the congressional globe . as recognized by the supreme court , "the legislative history of the fourteenth amendment … like most other legislative history , contains many statements from which conflicting inferences can be drawn…. those in favor of narrowing birthright citizenship often point to passages in the 1866 congressional debates referring to "complete jurisdiction" or notions of "allegiance," arguing that the framers of the fourteenth amendment would not have understood today's unlawfully present aliens or their u.s. born children as meeting these requirements . however , the legislators' statements cited by consensualist writers were made largely , though not entirely , in the context of the exclusion from the citizenship clause of members of indian tribes . as proponents of retaining birthright citizenship point out , other indicia in the legislative history indicate that children of aliens were considered differently than children of indian tribe members and were broadly intended to be included within the citizenship clause's scope .