the most recent nomination to be reported with unanimous support by the committee was that of stephen breyer in 1994 . none of the five most recent nominations to the court were reported unanimously or almost unanimously . during the 20 th century , the senate usually , but not always , agreed with judiciary committee recommendations that a supreme court nominee be confirmed . the number of colored circles at the top of each column indicates the number of nominees in each particular category . of the 13 nominations reported favorably , 6 were reported with unanimous support ( while another 1 was reported with nearly unanimous support ) . the roberts nomination was reported with some opposition ( three committee members not belonging to the president's party supported the nomination ) , while the sotomayor and kagan nominations were reported with almost party - line opposition ( one committee member not belonging to the president's party supported the nominations ) . the nominations of samuel alito and neil gorsuch were reported with complete party - line opposition ( only committee members belonging to the president's party voted to report the nomination favorably ) . two nominations included in figure 2 were not reported favorably , those of robert bork ( reported unfavorably after the committee defeated a motion , 5-9 , to report the nomination favorably ) and clarence thomas ( reported without recommendation after the committee defeated a motion , 7-7 , to report the nomination favorably ) . if a majority of its members oppose confirmation , the committee technically may decide not to report a nomination , which would prevent the full senate from considering it . however , since its creation in 1816 , the judiciary committee's typical practice has been to report even those supreme court nominations that were opposed by a committee majority , thus allowing the full senate to make the final decision on whether the nominee should be confirmed . this committee tradition was reaffirmed in june 2001 by the committee's then - chair , senator patrick j. leahy ( d - vt ) , and its then - ranking member , senator orrin g. hatch ( r - ut ) , in a june 29 , 2001 , letter to senate colleagues . the committee's "traditional practice," their letter stated , has been to report supreme court nominees to the senate once the committee has completed its considerations . this has been true even in cases where supreme court nominees were opposed by a majority of the judiciary committee . we both recognize and have every intention of following the practices and precedents of the committee and the senate when considering supreme court nominees . in other words , a favorable recommendation by the committee has , in a few instances ( each occurring during the period 1968 to 1970 ) , not been followed by senate confirmation of the nomination . historically , unfavorable committee reports , or reports without recommendation , have been precursors to nominations encountering substantial opposition in the full senate , although a few of these nominations have eventually been confirmed by narrow margins .