who may serve a subpoena ? in committee rules applicable to a committee's subcommittees — has the committee granted subpoena authority to its subcommittees or withheld this authority from them ? may a committee's subcommittees adopt their own subpoena rules ? must either the committee or the subcommittee authorize an investigation before subpoenas may be authorized ? is this past practice instructive or precedential ? if there are one or more rules , who may authorize a subpoena: the committee , the chair , or the chair and ranking minority member together ? what is the role of the ranking minority member ? must the ranking minority member be notified or consulted , or does the ranking minority member have authority to disapprove the authorization of a subpoena ? are there backup procedures available to a committee chair ? for example , if the committee's rules give disapproval authority to the ranking minority member , may the chair proceed in the absence of a response from the ranking minority member or may the committee nonetheless authorize a subpoena if the ranking minority member disapproves ? what constraints are placed on a chair's exercise of subpoena authority delegated to the chair ? for example , some house committees allow the chair to authorize a subpoena only after the house has adjourned for three days . may a chair authorize a subpoena that the committee has considered or has rejected ? what time limits appear in a committee's rules ? for example , a ranking minority member may have 48 hours to respond to a chair proposing to authorize or to issue a subpoena , or a chair may be required to notify committee members within one week of the issuance of a subpoena . what is the quorum for the committee to authorize a subpoena ? must minority members be present ? must a minority member support the authorization ? what are the committee's rules to suspend or change its rules ? for example , is advance notification to all committee members required ? who may issue a subpoena: the chair , a member designated by the chair , a member designated by the committee , or a member or members designated by committee rule ? must the committee or the chair or the chair and ranking minority member approve a subcommittee investigation ? who may authorize a subpoena: the subcommittee , the chair , or the chair and ranking minority member ? who may issue a subpoena: the chair , a member designated by the chair , a member designated by the subcommittee , or a member or members designated by committee rule together ? what role do committee rules provide for the committee chair and ranking minority member , or the committee , in approving the authorization or issuance of a subcommittee subpoena ? may a subcommittee chair authorize a subpoena that the subcommittee has considered or has rejected ? what time limits appear in a committee's rules applicable to a subcommittee chair's exercise of authority , the role of the subcommittee ranking minority member , the approval or notification of the committee chair and ranking minority member , and other procedures ? what is the quorum for the subcommittee to authorize a subpoena ? must minority members be present ?