it should be noted that h.r . 5 would also add a new option for states to distribute funds available under title i - a to leas and schools . this provision is commonly referred to as the "state option" or "title i - a portability. unlike the change to the quintiles , the state option would not alter the formulas used by ed to calculate title i - a grant amounts but would give states the option to change how title i - a funds are allocated within the state . as the state option is discussed in detail in crs report r43929 , allocation of funds under title i - a of the elementary and secondary education act: h.r . 5 and the state option , by [author name scrubbed] , the remainder of this section focuses only on the quintile changes proposed in h.r . the changes to the quintiles used for weighted child counts based on the number of formula children and based on the percentage of formula children are shown in table 5 and table 6 , respectively . 5 , the ceiling for the first four quintiles on the numbers weighting scale would be increased by 1 and the ceiling for the first four quintiles on the percentage weighting scale would be increased by 0.01 percentage points . the floors for the 2 nd through 5 th quintiles would then be adjusted accordingly . as these would be relatively small changes to the quintiles , their impact would be somewhat limited . the quintile ranges in current law were based on the actual distribution of formula children among the nation's leas , according to the latest data in 2001 ( at the time nclb was being considered ) . each quintile contains one - fifth of the national total of formula children . if reauthorization legislation were to follow the model of nclb , these quintiles would need to be updated to reflect the actual distribution of formula children in fy2015 . the changes to the quintiles proposed by h.r . 5 do not follow the nclb approach . 5 , the changes to the quintiles would go into effect in fy2022 , only if the change to the new quintiles would result in no "harm" to an lea . that is , for fy2016 through fy2021 there would be no change to the quintiles used in the targeted grant and efig formulas . subsequently , the new quintiles would only be used in the determination of title i - a grants if , as a result of the change , no leas were to lose title i - a funds relative to their title i - a grant amount for the prior year as a result of the change . the quintile change , like any formula change , would shift title i - a funds among states and leas . in general , formula changes result in no leas losing funds when there is a large enough increase in appropriations to offset any losses . in recent years , appropriations for title i - a have remained relatively constant .