but who is an officer ? the most thorough elucidation of the definition of "officers of the united states" can be found in judicial interpretations of the appointments clause . that provision , which establishes the methods by which "officers of the united states" may be appointed , has generally been viewed as a useful guidepost in establishing the definition of "civil officers" for purposes of impeachment . the appointments clause provides that the president shall nominate , and by and with the advice and consent of the senate , shall appoint ambassadors , other public ministers and consuls , judges of the supreme court , and all other officers of the united states , whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for , and which shall be established by law: but the congress may by law vest the appointment of such inferior officers , as they think proper , in the president alone , in the courts of law , or in the heads of departments . in interpreting the appointments clause , the court has made clear distinctions between "officers of the united states," whose appointment is subject to the requirements of the clause , and non - officers , also known as employees , whose appointment is not . the amount of authority that an individual exercises will generally determine his classification as either an officer or employee . as established in buckley v. valeo , an officer is "any appointee exercising significant authority pursuant to the laws of the united states," whereas employees are viewed as "lesser functionaries subordinate to the officers of the united states," who do not exercise "significant authority. the supreme court has further subdivided "officers" into two categories: principal officers , whom may be appointed only by the president with the advice and consent of the senate ; and inferior officers , whose appointment congress may vest "in the president alone , in the courts of law , or in the heads of departments. the court has acknowledged that its "cases have not set forth an exclusive criterion for distinguishing between principal and inferior officers for appointments clause purposes. the clearest statement of the proper standard to be applied in differentiating between the two types of officers appears to have been made in edmo nd v. united states . in edmond , the court noted that "[g]enerally speaking , the term 'inferior officer' connotes a relationship with some higher ranking officer or officers below the president ... [and] whose work is directed and supervised at some level by others who were appointed by presidential nomination with the advice and consent of the senate. thus , in analyzing whether one may be properly characterized as either an inferior or principal officer , the court's decisions appear to focus on the extent of the officer's discretion to make autonomous policy choices and the authority of other officials to supervise and to remove the officer . applying the principles established in the court's appointments clause jurisprudence to define the scope of "civil officers" for purposes of impeachment , it would appear that employees , as non - officers , are not subject to impeachment .