114-113 is noted ) . 2995 , as reported , included three cuba provisions that would have blocked some of the obama administration's cuba policy changes announced in december 2014 to move away from a sanctions - based policy toward one of engagement and a normalization of relations . in contrast , the senate bill had three cuba provisions that would have built upon the administration's policy shift by lifting several u.s. sanctions on cuba . ultimately , none of these provisions were included in p.l . in the house bill , section 130 would have prohibited funding to allow people - to - people educational travel to cuba . such travel was first authorized by the clinton administration in 1999 , curtailed by the bush administration in 2003 , and re - authorized by the obama administration in 2011 . in january 2015 , the obama administration authorized a general license for people - to - people travel . section 131 would have prohibited funding to allow the use , purchase , trafficking , or import of property confiscated by the cuban government . the provision appeared aimed at prohibiting the importation of alcohol and tobacco products by authorized u.s. travelers as accompanied baggage . in january 2015 , the obama administration's new policy included the importation of no more than $100 of tobacco and alcohol products combined . section 132 would have prohibited funding to allow financial transactions with cuba's ministry of the revolutionary armed forces , the ministry of the interior , their subsidiaries , and any officers of these ministries or their immediate family members . the restrictions would not have applied to financial transactions with respect to u.s. agricultural exports to cuba . s. 1910 , as reported , would have eased cuba sanctions related to financing for u.s. agricultural exports , travel , and shipping . section 638 would have repealed the prohibition on financing agricultural sales to cuba , including the requirement that payment for such products shall be cash - only payment in advance or financing by third country financial institutions . section 641 would have lifted restrictions on travel to cuba . it would have prohibited funds from being used to restrict travel , and would have provided that any law , regulation , or policy restricting travel would cease to have any force or effect . section 642 would have repealed a provision of law prohibiting a vessel engaging in trade with cuba from loading or unloading any freight in the united states within 180 days after departing cuba , except pursuant to a treasury department license . for additional information on cuba , see crs report r43926 , cuba: issues for the 114th congress , by mark p. sullivan . 114-113 as enacted for fy2016 . the national archives and records administration ( nara ) is known as "the nation's record keeper. nara assists federal agencies in the collection and retention of their records and holds and makes available to the public certain federal records of permanent interest .