if so , how and when should victims be notified ? should victims have a say in whether their saks will be tested ? how will victims be linked with services , if needed ? in recent years , the federal government has addressed the sak backlog by providing financial support , conducting or funding research to address the backlog , and testing a limited number of saks from local law enforcement agencies that had not been submitted previously . should evidence be tested in cases in which the statute of limitations has expired ? do law enforcement agencies give preference to testing kits in cases in which someone was assaulted by a stranger as opposed to sexual assaults perpetrated by an acquaintance ? do police and prosecutors have the resources they need to follow up on all of the leads that could be generated from widespread testing of backlogged saks ? should all victims be notified about the results of their sak tests ? congress may wish to assess the sak backlog and debate if the federal response should be changed as the issue evolves and agencies , including nij , capture the breadth of the problem . twenty laboratories reported that more than nine months were needed . it may be used to establish elements of a crime including the time at which an alleged attack occurred . evidence obtained through a rape kit can be used for several criminal justice purposes . it can establish a dna link between two individuals , and this link may help identify , convict , or exonerate an offender in court . evidence may also be stored in dna databases for use in other cases . forensic testing of sak evidence can take several days . in some cases , rape kits remain in police custody and are not submitted to a laboratory for testing . in others , kits may be submitted to the laboratory but remain untested . the latter is generally referred to as a "backlog. when people refer to a "rape kit backlog," they are referring either to untested kits that reside with law enforcement having never been submitted to a laboratory for testing , or to untested kits that have been submitted to crime labs but are delayed for testing for longer than 30 days . some research organizations state that the problem more typically resides with those kits that were submitted to a crime laboratory but remain untested ; however , the definition of backlog appears to vary across jurisdictions . for example , in a study of the detroit rape kit backlog , over 75% of the 11,219 backlogged kits had never been submitted to a laboratory for testing ( see " detroit project " ) . while the status and location of the kits vary , the binding element of the backlogged kits is that they have never been tested . rape kits remain untested for several reasons including limited resources of laboratories and law enforcement as well as police discretion . in some cases involving older rape kits , the statute of limitations may have expired . according to nij , "it is unknown how many unanalyzed [saks] there are nationwide.