elimination of all itemized deductions . the analysis in this report shows that provisions that broaden the base can offset in part or more than offset effects of changing tax rates . some of the effects analyzed , primarily those increasing the marginal effective tax rate on capital income , are commonly considered in macroeconomic analyses of tax reform . others , such as the itemized deduction restrictions , may not be incorporated but can significantly offset the effects of lower statutory rates on both labor and capital income . the analysis also suggests that the goal of increasing economic growth as part of a revenue and distributionally neutral tax reform may not be easily attainable , a view consistent with the findings of economists considering growth effects of the tax reform act of 1986 . this finding does not mean that tax reform cannot achieve other goals . for example , an important goal of tax reform is to reduce the distortions differential tax treatment causes ( such as favoring investment in equipment compared to structures , or encouraging too much spending on housing ) . these distortions cause the economy to use its resources in a less than optimal way . this efficiency gain is different from growth and unlikely to have more than a negligible effect on measured output . another potential goal of revenue - neutral tax reform is to simplify the tax system , which may reduce the costs of taxpayer compliance as well as direct costs of tax administration . data and methods for calculating individual marginal effective tax rates the data used in the analysis to estimate individual tax rates and changes due to changes in itemized deductions are the 2008 internal revenue service ( irs ) statistics of income ( soi ) public use file . the public use file is a nationally representative sample of tax returns for the 2008 tax year . to protect the identity of individual taxpayers while preserving the character of the data , the irs made changes to the data . consequently , while reliable aggregate information can be obtained , individual taxpayer records in the data may or may not contain information from just one tax return . the unit of analysis is the tax return for a taxpayer , and irs - provided sample weights are used throughout the analysis . the analysis sample contains information for 139,651 taxpayers ( representing 142.6 million taxpayers ) . the measure of taxable income used in this analysis departs from that used in the 2014 tax code . specifically , above - the - line deductions ( that have the effect of lowering taxable income ) are not included in this analysis . thus the measure of taxable income is total income minus personal exemptions and the value of itemized deductions . current law tax parameters were adjusted to 2008 levels using the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) and are reported for married filing jointly in table a - 1 . ( parameters were different for other filing statuses. ) tax liabilities were calculated using a tax module prepared by the authors based upon the 2014 irs form 1040 as well as other forms and schedules of the regular income tax .