these questions are discussed below . the first question is whether a religious entity's first amendment rights would be violated if it were denied section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status due to actions that were based on sincerely held religious beliefs . in the seminal 1983 case bob jones university v. united states , the supreme court held that such denial is permissible under certain circumstances . in bob jones , the court upheld the irs's determination that a private religious school could have its section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status revoked under the illegality doctrine for engaging in racially discriminatory practices . in so doing , the court held that the revocation did not run afoul of the first amendment's religious clauses , even assuming the school's racially discriminatory policies were based on sincerely held religious beliefs . with respect to the free exercise clause , the court explained that the government can justify a burden on religion by showing it is necessary to accomplish a compelling governmental interest that cannot be achieved by less restrictive means . the court determined that the burden on religion in the form of revoked tax benefits was justified in light of the government's compelling interest in eradicating racial discrimination in education , and that no less restrictive means existed . the court also rejected the school's argument that the revocation policy violated its rights under the establishment clause by favoring religions that did not have such racial beliefs , with the court concluding that the policy was permissible because it was based on neutral , secular criteria . notably , the extent to which the first amendment analysis in bob jones applies in the context of churches and other houses of worship is not clear . the court , in holding that the school's first amendment rights were not violated , expressly stated that it was not addressing churches and other "purely religious institutions," and emphasized that the governmental interest supporting revocation was denying public support to racial discrimination in education . thus , the court did not address the circumstances under which the application of the illegality doctrine to a church acting on sincerely held religious beliefs would be constitutionally permissible . it does not appear that any cases since bob jones have clarified this issue . as such , it is not clear whether the bob jones analysis would support the denial of tax - exempt status under the illegality doctrine for churches and other houses of worship acting on sincerely held religious beliefs , particularly in light of the constitutional protection of noninterference in internal matters of religious institutions discussed above . in those instances in which the denial of section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status to a religious entity is permissible under the first amendment , the next question is whether the illegality doctrine would support such denial for religious entities acting in opposition to same - sex marriage .