legislative histor . postal service and the u.s . postal regulatory commission ; part - time federal executive branch employees who do not have an established regular tour of duty during the administrative workweek ; federal executive branch employees serving under intermittent appointments or temporary appointments with a time limitation of one year or less ; federal executive branch employees who are not covered by title ii of fmla ; and ; federal judicial branch employees who are employed in a unit that has employees in the competitive service ( eg , u.s. tax court employees ) . fmla eligibility is defined in terms of an employee's work history with a specific employer , and the size of the employer's workforce employed in or around the employee's worksite . in general , to be eligible to take fmla leave , an employee must work for a covered employer ( see " employer coverage " ) ; have 1,250 hours of service in the 12 months prior to the start of leave ; have worked for the employer for 12 months ( months need not be consecutive , but months that precede a break in service of 7 years or more are generally not counted ) ; and work at a location where the employer has 50 or more employees within 75 miles . in practice , these requirements mean that fmla eligibility is not transferable across employers . they also mean that eligibility is not permanent: an employee may lose eligibility while working for a given employer if his or her hours dip below the 1,250 hours required in the 12 months before leave commences requirement , if the employers' workforce within 75-miles of the worksite falls below 50 employees , or if the employer is no longer covered by the law . special rules concerning the hours - of - service requirement apply to airline flight crew employees . see appendix a for more information . the act provides rules concerning employer and employee notification requirements , employee's responsibilities for scheduling of leave , employer rights to certification , and employer recordkeeping requirements . fmla prohibits the interference , restraint , or denial of rights provided through the act , and the dismissal of or discrimination against those who protests a prohibited act . for example , employers cannot take adverse employment actions ( eg , refuse to promote , institute disciplinary action ) against employees for taking fmla leave . efforts to disqualify an employee from fmla leave eligibility ( eg , by manipulating work hours or moving employees to another worksite to avoid employing 50 workers within 75 miles of a worksite ) may be interpreted as interference with employee rights under fmla . interference with proceedings or inquires is further prohibited . employees cannot waive , nor may employers induce employees to waive , their prospective rights under fmla . employees who believe their rights under the fmla have been violated have two courses of action . employees may ( 1 ) file a complaint with the dol wage and hour division or ( 2 ) bring a private civil action against an employer for violations .