policy. according to the department of commerce , in fy2016 , 549 requests by arab league members to participate in the boycott were reported to u.s. officials . the majority ( 325 requests ) were from the united arab emirates , followed by qatar ( 73 ) and iraq ( 54 ) . other states have taken action to restrict the investment of state funds in entities that engage in bds activity . under these restrictions , state pension funds , for example , may be required to divest from companies engaged in bds activity . some scholars and commentators have argued that legislation and other government action designed to deter or eliminate bds activity potentially would raise first amendment concerns , while others have argued that such action would be consistent with the first amendment or would not implicate the first amendment at all . this section discusses key concepts and precedents that might factor into a reviewing court's analysis of the constitutionality of certain proposed and enacted laws and executive actions related to bds activity . in sum , the degree to which a restriction on bds activity would implicate the first amendment and whether , even if it did , it would nonetheless be permissible turns on a number of unsettled questions . the first and most obvious is whether the act of refusing to deal with israel or israeli - affiliated entities is expressive conduct protected by the first amendment . important to this analysis may be whether those participating in bds activity are attempting to make a political statement or are attempting to gain an economic advantage . another relevant factor may be whether the government , in enacting the restriction , may be viewed by a reviewing court to be suppressing a disfavored message or , instead , to be regulating discriminatory conduct . answers to these questions would likely turn on the text of the specific statutes at issue , as well as a number of other factors that may be difficult to predict . as noted above , some state and local governments have enacted or are considering measures to counteract bds - related or differentiation measures . state and local economic sanctions meant to influence foreign politics ordinarily raise three related constitutional issues: ( 1 ) whether they are preempted by federal law under the constitution's supremacy clause ; ( 2 ) whether they burden foreign commerce in violation of the dormant foreign commerce clause and , if so , whether they are protected by the market participant exception ; and ( 3 ) whether they impermissibly interfere with the federal government's exclusive power to conduct the nation's foreign affairs . the constitutionality of any given state or local measure would depend upon the particulars of the legislation at issue . the supremacy clause of the constitution establishes that federal statutes , treaties , and the constitution itself are "the supreme law of the land. accordingly , states can be precluded from taking actions that are otherwise within their authority if federal law is thereby impeded . the extent to which a federal statute preempts state law in a given area is within the control of congress .