their role is to remain strictly advisory . federal advisory committees can be called task forces , panels , commissions , working groups , boards , councils , conferences , or other titles . overall , the literature on federal advisory committees has shown that they can have influence on an agency's decisionmaking process . the range and depth of that influence , however , is unclear because the scope of scholarly research on federal advisory committees is limited and the design and purposes of the 1,000 federal advisory committees are vast . scholars have tended to focus analyses on national security - related or fda drug approval - related advisory committees , making it more difficult to understand the utility of advisory committees governmentwide . more recent research indicates that establishing advisory committees that focus on scientific technical programs or national policy issues might lead to higher percentages of full implementation of advisory committee recommendations than creating advisory committees that focus on non - scientific programs or grantmaking issues . this section explores available data on the creation of advisory committees , using data from the faca database . advisory committees that are exempted from faca , therefore , are not included in this analysis . in any given fiscal year , congress establishes a majority of faca committees . of the 1,009 active federal advisory committees in fy2015 , congress statutorily required the establishment of 539 ( 53.4% ) . additionally , 183 ( 18.1% ) of the active faca committees were authorized , but not required , by statute . figure 1 shows the percentage of total active committees in fy2015 by establishment authority . of the 1,009 active advisory committees , 42 were newly established in fy2015 . twenty ( 47.6% ) of the 42 new committees were required by statute . members and staff contemplating the establishment of a new advisory committee may seek examples of statutory language establishing advisory committees . table 1 below includes the statutory authority for each of the 20 new statutorily required committees established in fy2015 . table 1 includes the name of the committee , its affiliated federal agency or department , and its statutory authority . in most cases , the table includes the authorizing language's u.s. code citation . in some cases , when an advisory body's authority isn't codified , the most recent statutory authority for the committee is provided . as shown above , congress plays an important role in the establishment of faca committees . currently , 71.5% of all active committees were required to be or authorized to be established by congress . of the 20 new statutorily required committees that began operations in fy2015 , the department of the interior houses the most ( 5 ) . three of the committees were required by statute eight or more years before their operations began . in one case , the affiliated department's policies and operations led to operational delays . in another case , two previously operating committees were merged to form a single , new committee . in the final case , the affiliated agency determined that a committee that previously operated outside of faca's provisions should being operating pursuant to faca .