table 1 compares the provisions of h.r . 360 , as passed by the house , and s. 710 , as reported out of committee in the senate , with each other and with existing law . ultimately , no nahasda reauthorization legislation was enacted during the 114 th congress . tribes are largely supportive of nahasda and the native american housing block grant . the most recent authorization for most nahasda programs expired at the end of fy2013 , during the 113 th congress . ( the authorization for the native hawaiian housing block grant expired at the end of fy2005. ) the 113 th congress considered nahasda reauthorization legislation but did not enact any prior to the end of the congress . during the 114 th congress , the house and the senate considered separate versions of nahasda reauthorization legislation: in the house , h.r . 360 was introduced on january 14 , 2015 , and was passed by the house under suspension of the rules on march 23 , 2015 . in the senate , s. 710 was introduced on march 11 , 2015 . an amended version was favorably reported by the senate committee on indian affairs on june 4 , 2015 , and the senate banking committee was discharged from further consideration of the bill on august 5 , 2015 . 360 and s. 710 would have reauthorized a number of native american and native hawaiian housing programs , authorized certain new program demonstrations and set - asides for native american housing , and made several changes to nahbg requirements . both bills addressed a number of the issues described earlier in this report , although not necessarily in the same way . tribes are not a monolithic group — their sizes , histories , and cultures , and the geography of where they live , vary greatly — and tribes do not always agree about potential changes to nahasda . when this report discusses changes that have been advocated by tribes , it generally means that the changes have been repeatedly raised by some tribes or championed by the national american indian housing council ( naihc ) , a group that advocates for the housing interests of native americans . nahasda has been reauthorized twice since it was first enacted in 1996 . both bills also included certain other changes to nahasda or other native american housing programs , many of which have been supported by tribes . nhhbg funds are used to provide housing for low - income native hawaiians eligible to live on the hawaiian home lands . nevertheless , tribes have also advocated for a number of changes to program requirements that they argue could enhance their ability to improve housing conditions in tribal areas . many of the changes that have been proposed by tribes have to do with streamlining program requirements , particularly when nahasda funds are used with other sources of federal funds ; providing more flexibility for tribes to make their own decisions about housing programs ; and requiring hud to be more responsive to requests for approvals or waivers of certain requirements .