, at ppahcs ) . as a result of the funding loss and the lab restrictions , researchers found that several clinics in wisconsin and in neighboring minnesota closed . the language in h.r . 1628 does not explicitly link this new funding to the ppfa ban , but congressional leaders have made this link in their discussions of the bill . for example , speaker ryan noted that the bill would end funding for ppfa and send that money to community health centers . similarly , representative kevin brady , chairman of the house committee on ways and means , also stated that the bill would defund ppfa and redirect funds to community health centers . the cbo score for ahca estimates that a one - year ban would reduce direct spending by $156 million over the 10-year period of 2017-2026 . fqhcs are one of many types of health care facilities that could provide care to medicaid beneficiaries , but they may be particularly relevant for several reasons . first , federal law requires that all state medicaid programs cover services provided at fqhcs for eligible beneficiaries . second , fqhcs receive federal grants that require them to provide family planning ( among other services ) to medicaid beneficiaries . as a result of medicaid program requirements and the federal grants that fqhcs receive , the federal government may have leverage over fqhcs to direct their services , which it may not have over other types of providers , such as physicians in private practice . consequently , recent legislation has focused on fqhcs as an alternative to ppahcs . if medicaid reimbursements were no longer available to ppahcs , medicaid beneficiaries would have several potential options . they could remain at the ppahc and pay for services themselves or receive services paid for with nonfederal ( eg , state or donated ppfa ) funds , receive services at another ( non - fqhc ) provider , obtain services at an fqhc , or no longer receive services . various factors may affect which of these options medicaid beneficiaries would pursue . access to health care varies by location , as health systems and options vary considerably across states and localities . in some areas , one facility may be as accessible as another and may provide ( or may be able to begin to provide ) the same set of services . in other areas , this may not occur because , for example , only one provider exists , either in general or for a particular service type . moreover , facilities located in the same geographic area may not be equally accessible for patients , as one facility may be located near public transportation routes while another may not . even in areas where one facility could provide the same services as another , these facilities may be challenged to do so in the short term because they may need to hire additional providers , acquire medical equipment , or construct additional exam rooms to be able to expand services . constraints in providing services in the short term may include factors that affect patient access to care . ppahcs provide a narrow range of services to a more targeted population ( i.e.