appendix a . furthermore , h.r . 2347 would require agencies to designate advisory committee management officers to supervise advisory committees and ensure that information pertaining to advisory committees and their activities is made available on the agency's website . 2347 would also require the government accountability office to conduct reviews of agency compliance with faca . legislation similar to h.r . 2347 was introduced in the following previous congresses: 113 th congress ( h.r . it is unclear why these members were designated as representatives . regardless , this designation allows the members to provide advice to the federal government without complying with many ethics requirements placed on other federal employees . these members , therefore , do not have to recuse themselves from any recommendation — regardless of whether they may benefit from it financially or otherwise . congress may choose to consider whether faca committee members appointed to serve as representatives should receive compensation from the government for their service . moreover , congress may choose to consider amending faca to clarify whether the federal government should pay any nonfederal member of an advisory body — regardless of member designation . most members receive pay to cover their travel costs as well as a payment for per diem expenses . congress may decide it is unnecessary to provide compensation to members in addition to travel and per diem . such an amendment to faca would have reduced faca implementation costs in fy2015 by nearly $37.3 million . on the other hand , congress may conclude that paying members of federal advisory bodies will attract a more qualified membership . certain representatives or scholars from outside of the federal government may choose not to participate on a federal advisory committee unless they believe they are receiving what they perceive to be fair compensation for their time and expertise . the analysis of faca data suggests several categories in which grant review committees and special emphasis panels appear to operate differently than faca committees with other functions . the most notable example of these differences is the percentage of closed meetings grant review committees and special emphasis panels hold . more than 99.5% of grant review committee meetings and 99.9% of special emphasis panel meetings were closed to the public in fy2015 . as noted earlier , if grant review committees and special emphasis panels are removed from the analysis of open and closed meetings in fy2015 , 73.5% of faca committee meetings would be open , as opposed to 24.8% when they are included . grant review committee and special emphasis panel meetings are likely closed to the public for a variety of reasons . for example , a subject matter expert may join a faca committee to provide his or her honest expert advice on which academic studies are the most qualified to receive a federal grant . the expert may not be able to provide an opinion in a public forum without fear of retaliation or other response . additionally , meetings may be closed to protect proprietary information that a grant applicant may supply in his or her grant proposal . faca was enacted to make federal advisory committee meetings more transparent and accessible to the public .