4294 contains provisions that are not in h.r . this section summarizes the provisions common to h.r . 1090 passed the house of representatives . two bills were introduced in the u.s. house and reported out of committee that would define investment advice and add a best interest pte . the advice must be provided through either a written acknowledgement that the person providing the advice is a fiduciary ; or a mutual agreement , arrangement , or understanding that the advice is individualized to the plan or to the plan participant and that the individual who receives the advice intends to materially rely on the advice . companion legislation has been introduced in the u.s. senate . 4293 , the affordable retirement advice protection act , introduced by representative phil roe on december 18 , 2015 , and h.r . 4294 , the strengthening access to valuable education and retirement support act of 2015 ( or the savers act of 2015 ) , introduced by representative peter roskam on december 18 , 2015 , are nearly identical bills which would define investment advice in u.s. code and also provide for a best interest pte . 4293 was reported out of the house education and workforce committee on february 2 , 2016 , and h.r . 4294 was reported out of the house ways and means committee on february 3 , 2016 . companion legislation has been introduced in the u.s. senate . s. 2502 , the affordable retirement advice protection act , was introduced by senator johnny isakson on february 4 , 2016 , and s. 2505 , the savers act of 2016 , was introduced by senator mark kirk on february 4 , 2016 . 4293 amends the labor code ( 29 u.s.c. ) 4294 amends the tax code ( 26 u.s.c. ) many of the provisions in the bills are nearly identical , though h.r . the bills would define investment advice and also provide an exemption for recommendations that are in the best interest of the investor , provided specified conditions are adhered to . investment advice would be a recommendation to buy , hold , or sell a plan investment , including distributions from a plan or a rollover ; on the management of plan assets ; or of a person to manage plan assets . the person providing a recommendation could provide a written disclaimer that the recommendation is not individualized for the recipient and should not be materially relied upon for making investment decisions . the disclaimer would state: "this information is not individualized to you , and there is no intent for you to materially rely on this information in making investment or management decisions. the disclaimer must be in writing and presented in a clear and prominent manner . such a recommendation would not be considered investment advice and would not be held to a fiduciary standard . the bills provide for several "carve - outs" in which information or recommendations would not be considered investment advice .