appropriations for most programs authorized by the esea were authorized through fy2007 . on november 19 , 2015 , the conference committee agreed to file the conference report of the every student succeeds act ( essa ) by a vote of 39-1 . on december 2 , 2015 , the house agreed to the conference report based on a bipartisan vote of 359-64 . this report highlights key provisions included in the essa and provides some context regarding the treatment of similar provisions in current law , where applicable . table 1 highlights key provisions in the bill . an emphasis has been placed on issues that have received the most attention during the reauthorization process , including title i - a accountability and formula issues and title ii - a formula issues . table 2 depicts the proposed structure of the esea under the essa and includes all authorizations of appropriations for fy2017 through fy2020 . the table also indicates whether a comparable program was included in current law . table 3 provides examples of programs authorized under current law that would not be retained by the essa . the report does not aim to provide a comprehensive summary of essa or of technical changes that would be made by the bill . as congress had not enacted legislation to reauthorize the esea , on september 23 , 2011 , president obama and the secretary of education ( hereinafter referred to as the secretary ) announced the availability of an esea flexibility package for states and described the principles that states must meet to obtain the included waivers . the waivers exempt states from various academic accountability requirements , teacher qualification - related requirements , and funding flexibility requirements that were enacted through nclb . state educational agencies ( seas ) may also apply for optional waivers related to the 21 st century community learning centers program and the use of funds , determinations of adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) , and the allocation of title i - a funds to schools . however , in order to receive the waivers seas must agree to meet four principles established by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) for "improving student academic achievement and increasing the quality of instruction. the four principles , as stated by ed , are ( 1 ) college - and career - ready expectations for all students ; ( 2 ) state - developed differentiated recognition , accountability , and support ; ( 3 ) supporting effective instruction and leadership ; and ( 4 ) reducing duplication and unnecessary burden . taken collectively , the waivers and principles included in the esea flexibility package amount to a fundamental redesign by the administration of many of the accountability and teacher - related requirements included in current law . as of december 2015 , 42 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico had approved esea flexibility applications , and ed was reviewing applications from other states . the essa would terminate all waivers associated with the esea flexibility package on august 1 , 2016 . the remainder of this report focuses only on current law and does not compare the provisions in the essa with the provisions included in the esea flexibility package .