so that is important . cf . ante , ( "[o]ur holding also does not address" this question ) . this discussion is not to suggest that a supreme court case on sec aljs is forthcoming — much less that , should there be a decision , the court would strike down the sec alj selection process or tenure protections or that a decision would have an impact on aljs in other agencies . instead , the discussion is intended to set out only possible ramifications of a definitive decision on the constitutionality of sec alj appointments and tenure protections . does every losing party before an alj now have grounds to appeal on the basis that the decision entered against him is unconstitutional ? as mentioned in this report's "introduction," at least two congressional hearings have discussed the issue . on december 2 , 2015 , the subcommittee on capital markets and government sponsored enterprises of the house committee on financial services held a hearing titled "legislative proposals to improve the u.s. capital markets. one of the legislative proposals discussed in the hearing was h.r . 3798 , 114 th congress , titled the "due process restoration act of 2015. . 3798 would allow a defendant in an sec administrative proceeding involving a cease - and - desist order and a penalty to require the sec to terminate the proceeding . after the required termination , the sec may bring a civil action against the person for the same remedy . the bill would also require that in an administrative proceeding the sec must show by clear and convincing evidence , instead of the commonly used "preponderance of the evidence" standard , that a person has violated the relevant securities law . on march 19 , 2015 , the subcommittee on capital markets and government sponsored enterprises of the house committee on financial services held a hearing titled "oversight of the sec's division of enforcement. in his comments , representative garrett , chairman of the subcommittee , expressed concern about the possible infringement of constitutional protections for persons charged with securities violations in sec administrative forums . he stated in part: [w]hale the sec is first and foremost a disclosure agency . i support a strong enforcement function of the sec . this enforcement function , however , must be used in an evenhanded , non - political manner that preserves the due - process rights of issuers , regulated entities , and their employees... . while bringing more cases through the administrative proceedings can lead to lower costs for the agency and increases in efficiency , it is important to realize that those benefits come with a cost . the cost is less due - process protections for defendants . because the sec administrative proceedings use the sec's procedural rules , respondents are forced to operate on a condensed timeframe , and do not have the benefit of many of the fundamental due - process protections provided under the federal civil procedures act , and the federal rules of evidence , such as full discovery rights , the right to a jury trial , and the exclusion of hearsay evidence .