security . organizations creating , maintaining , using or disseminating personal information must take reasonable precautions to protect it from loss , misuse and unauthorized access , disclosure , alteration and destruction . furthermore , the safe harbor principles may be limited to the extent necessary for national security , public interest , or law enforcement requirements . enforcement . effective privacy protection must include mechanisms for verifying compliance , provide readily available and affordable independent recourse mechanisms in cases of noncompliance , and include remedial measures for the organization when the principles are not followed . sanctions must be rigorous enough to ensure compliance . participation in safe harbor was open to any u.s. organization subject to regulation by the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , which enforces a variety of consumer protection laws , including those related to unfair and deceptive practices , and to united states air carriers and ticket agents that are subject to regulation by the department of transportation ( dot ) . some 4,500 companies were on the safe harbor list . to qualify , organizations were required to self - certify annually in a letter to the doc that they adhered to the safe harbor principles . the ftc asserted that it was committed to reviewing all referrals of potential violations from eu member state authorities . both private sector entities and federal and state authorities that enforce unfair and deceptive practices laws were required to enforce the safe harbor agreement . private sector enforcement consisted of three components: verification ; dispute resolution ; and remedies . persistent failure to comply would result in withdrawal of "safe harbor" status , a fact that would be indicated on the "safe harbor" website , and also , potentially , by regulatory action . to date , the ftc has charged 40 companies with violations of the safe harbor framework . organizations that did not fall under the jurisdiction of the ftc and the dot were not eligible for "safe harbor. notably , this included u.s. financial firms and telecommunications carriers . following the cjeu decision , however , the ftc announced that it would no longer enforce safe harbor . on october 6 , 2015 , the cjeu ( see text box ) issued a decision that invalidated safe harbor ( effective immediately ) , as currently implemented . the cjeu decision stemmed from a complaint brought to the irish dpa by an austrian national , maximillian schrems , concerning facebook's transfer of some or all of his data from facebook's eu - based servers in ireland to its servers located in the united states in light of the unauthorized disclosures in june 2013 of u.s. surveillance activities . the irish dpa dismissed the complaint , finding that it had no basis to evaluate the complaint since facebook adhered to the safe harbor agreement and the irish dpa was thus bound by the 2000 decision by the european commission recognizing that safe harbor provided an "adequate level of protection" as required by the dpd .