, puerto rico ) . under the aca , individuals who purchase coverage through an exchange may be eligible for premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies . this assistance is directed at lower - income individuals to help with the cost of purchasing and using health insurance coverage . puerto rico did not establish an exchange , so the aca's premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies are not available . as noted above , if puerto rico had established an exchange , it could have received federal funds to be used for premium and cost - sharing assistance for individuals who enroll in the exchange . puerto rico would have had flexibility in how to provide such premium and cost - sharing assistance , subject to a section 1323 agreement with hhs . small businesses purchasing coverage through a small business health option program ( shop ) exchange may be eligible for a small business health insurance tax credit . the credit is intended to help make small - group coverage more affordable for certain small businesses . for additional information. ) puerto rico has not established an exchange ( including a shop exchange ) , so the small business tax credits are not available . if puerto rico had established an exchange , puerto rican businesses are treated as foreign businesses for u.s. tax purposes , which means they are taxed only on their u.s. source income . foreign businesses may claim the general business credit ( of which the small business health insurance tax credit is part ) against their u.s. tax liability , if they have any . under the aca , certain large employers are subject to a shared - responsibility provision . this provision does not explicitly mandate that a large employer offer health insurance to its employees ; instead , it has the potential to impose penalties on large employers that do not provide affordable and adequate coverage to their full - time employees and their employees' dependents . as hhs has observed , certain tax provisions , including the employer mandate , generally do not apply in puerto rico and the other territories . furthermore , because puerto rico is a non - mirror territory , there is no requirement that puerto rico implement a provision comparable to the employer mandate under its own tax code . as of january 1 , 2014 , the aca requires most individuals to maintain health insurance coverage or otherwise pay a penalty . some individuals are exempt from this individual mandate and the penalty . the individual mandate generally does not apply to puerto rico because statute provides that bona fide residents of the territories are treated as having coverage that complies with the individual mandate . furthermore , because puerto rico is a non - mirror territory , there is no requirement that puerto rico implement a provision comparable to the individual mandate under its own tax laws . in the preamble , hhs lists the sections of the phs act ( as added by title i of the aca ) with which non - group and group health - insurance issuers in the territories do not have to comply .