transaction. 2289 , if the cftc were not to make such a determination ( of non - comparability ) , then "a non - united states person or a transaction between two non - united states persons shall be exempt from united states swaps requirements" as long as they are in compliance with any of the eight permitted foreign jurisdictions . effectively , the bill appears to substitute as a default , for trades that involved a non - u.s. person , the swaps requirements of the eight largest foreign swaps markets ( which would encompass most of the world of swaps trading , particularly if countries in the european union were treated as one swaps jurisdiction ) for u.s. requirements — unless the cftc found a foreign jurisdiction to be lacking . one question that would presumably be left to the cftc to determine in a rulemaking would be how widely to apply this provision to "a non - united states person or a transaction between two non - united states persons," were the provision enacted . what repercussions could this have within the conglomerate ? what would be the best way to control risks of excessive losses by a single affiliate from such trades ? is any proposed legislative exemption tailored narrowly enough to meet concerns from regulators that large swap market players might funnel swaps through an affiliate to avoid u.s. derivatives requirements ? would a legislative provision allow overseas affiliates to use this exception , and if so , what would be the cross - border regulatory implications ? proponents of the provision in h.r . 2289 argue that it would prevent the redundant regulation of inter - affiliate transactions and prevent capital from being tied up unnecessarily , such as through the duplicative posting of margin for derivatives trades . the expansion of the exception , they argue , would allow businesses that centralize their hedging activities to reduce costs , simplify financial dealings , and reduce their counterparty credit risk . proponents contend that the provision would allow affiliates — such as centralized treasury units — within a corporate entity to trade swaps under the end - user exception to the clearing and exchange - trading requirements both within and outside the umbrella organization . opponents of the provision in h.r . 2289 argue that it would allow financial firms with commercial business affiliates to "take advantage of exemptions from key dodd - frank risk controls that were meant to apply only to commercial end users. opponents of widening the exception as it applies to affiliates from the dodd - frank requirements have also stated that "the potential for affiliates to cause massive losses to their parent companies cannot be denied. they cite examples such as the derivatives losses incurred by the large insurance conglomerate american international group inc.'s ( aig's ) overseas affiliate in london and derivatives losses incurred by j.p. morgan's so - called london whale trading losses in its london affiliate . they argue that any expansions of the exception should be restricted only to 100% - owned subsidiaries of a parent company , and be subject to strict risk management controls . section 301 of h.r .