these issues are discussed in the following sections . both government and industry have taken numerous steps to improve pipeline safety over the last 10 years . in 2016 , the association of oil pipe lines stated that "the oil and natural gas industry is committed to achieving zero incidents throughout our operations. likewise , the american gas association , which represents investor - owned natural gas distribution companies , recently stated that "safety is the core value for america's natural gas utilities. nonetheless , major oil and natural gas pipeline accidents continue to occur . both congress and the ntsb have called for additional regulatory measures to reduce the likelihood of future pipeline accidents . past phmsa reauthorizations included expansive pipeline safety mandates , such as requirements for the agency to impose integrity management programs , significantly increase inspector staffing , or regulate underground natural storage . in light of the most recent pipeline accidents or security incidents , congress may consider new regulatory mandates on phmsa or may impose new requirements directly on the pipeline industry . however , a number of broad pipeline safety rulemakings and many ntsb recommendations remain outstanding , and others have not been in place for long , so their effectiveness in improving pipeline safety have yet to be determined . as congress continues its oversight of the federal pipeline safety program , an important focus may be the practical effects of the many changes being made to particular aspects of phmsa's pipeline safety regulations . in addition to the specific issues highlighted in this report , congress may assess how the various elements of u.s. pipeline safety activity fit together in the nation's overall strategy to protect the public and the environment . pipeline safety necessarily involves various groups: federal and state agencies , pipeline associations , large and small pipeline operators , and local communities . reviewing how these groups work together to achieve common goals could be an overarching concern for congress . these agency roles are discussed in the following sections . pipeline safety and security are distinct issues involving different threats , statutory authorities , and regulatory frameworks . nonetheless , pipeline safety and security are intertwined in some respects — and phmsa is involved in both . the department of transportation played the leading role in pipeline security through the late 1990s . presidential decision directive 63 ( pdd - 63 ) , issued during the clinton administration , assigned lead responsibility for pipeline security to dot . these responsibilities fell to the office of pipeline safety , at that time a part of dot's research and special programs administration , because the agency was already addressing some elements of pipeline security in its role as safety regulator . the dot's pipeline ( and lng ) safety regulations already included provisions related to physical security , such as requirements to protect surface facilities ( eg , pumping stations ) from vandalism and unauthorized entry . other regulations required continuing surveillance , patrolling pipeline rights - of - way , damage prevention , and emergency procedures .