infer[ences]. in other words , it is possible that the inclusive communities court expects lower courts to ensure that plaintiffs have provided evidence at the preliminary stages of litigation that fully "connects the dots" between the neutral policy and the disparate impact , before concluding that plaintiffs have established a prima facie case . in sum , it is possible that the "cautionary standards" stressed by the inclusive communities majority might result in even fewer successful disparate impact claims being raised , and swifter disposal of claims that are raised . this could , in turn , discourage claims from being raised at all . kerner commission report 1 . the court acknowledges the fair housing act's continuing role in moving the nation toward a more integrated society . the primary dissenting opinion , written by justice alito and joined by chief justice roberts and justices thomas and scalia , argued that the statutory text and the circumstances surrounding the original enactment of the fha indicated that the act was only intended to bar overt discrimination — not disparate impact discrimination . the dissent also disputed the majority's "conten[tion] that the 1988 amendments provide convincing confirmation of congress' understanding that disparate - impact liability exists under the fha.... " instead , the dissenting justices viewed the 1988 amendments as a compromise between members of congress — some of whom agreed that disparate impact claims were cognizable under the fha and some who did not . to support this argument , the dissent cited several opinions in which the court rejected similar "implicit ratification" arguments . additionally , the dissent took issue with the majority's reliance on griggs . justice thomas wrote a separate dissent , to which no other justice joined . it argued that griggs was wrongly decided , but even if it should be afforded some precedential value , that value should be limited to title vii cases , rather than expanded to other contexts like the fha and adea . it is unclear exactly how the inclusive communities decision will change the way in which the lower courts and hud will evaluate disparate impact claims going forward , and any effect likely will vary from circuit to circuit . however , a review of several of the decision's most notable holdings elucidates some potential implications . first , the court appears to have adopted a three - step burden - shifting test for assessing disparate impact liability under the fha . at step one , the plaintiff has the burden of establishing evidence that a housing decision or policy caused a disparate impact on a protected class . at step two , defendants can counter the plaintiff's prima facie showing by establishing that the challenged policy or decision is "necessary to achieve a valid interest. the defendant will not be liable for the disparate impact resulting from a "valid interest" unless , at step three , the plaintiff proves "that there is an available alternative practice that has less disparate impact and serves the entity's legitimate needs. as a result , circuits , such as the fourth ( in cases with public defendants ) and seventh , that historically have used a balancing test likely will begin using a burden - shifting test .