the court held that congress did not . in hibbs , the court had found that congress relied on evidence of states' "unconstitutional participation in , and fostering of , gender - based discrimination" when administering family leave policies to permissibly authorize suits against state entities for interfering with an employee's right to take fmla leave to care for a spouse , son , daughter , or parent with a serious health condition . however , the coleman court indicated that there was not similar widespread evidence of sex discrimination or gender stereotyping in the administration of self - care leave policies by state employers . because congress had not identified a "specific pattern of constitutional violations by state employers," the court held that the 11 th amendment precludes money damages suits against states for interference with an employee's rights under the fmla's self - care provision . his employer informed him that he would be fired if he did not resign . coleman sought money damages , alleging that by denying him fmla self - care leave — or leave because of his own serious health condition that rendered him incapable of performing his job functions — his employer violated the fmla . in response , the employer argued that , as a state entity , the 11 th amendment shielded it from lawsuits under the self - care provision of the fmla . in coleman , the court utilized the same analysis that it earlier relied upon when considering an fmla suit against a state entity in hibb s . the court first observed that congress expressly authorized suits against state entities for interfering with an employee's rights under the fmla's self - care provision , just as it did in hibbs with regard to suits for interference with an employee's right to take leave to care for a spouse , son , daughter , or parent with a serious health condition . like hibbs , the court's decision in coleman turned on whether congress acted pursuant to a valid exercise of its section 5 power when permitting suits against states for interfering with an employee's leave under the self - care provision of the fmla . the court in hibbs addressed only whether states could be sued for interfering with an employee's fmla leave to take care of a spouse , son , daughter , or parent with a serious condition . the court did not expressly address the fmla provisions providing leave after childbirth or adoption . however , in this instance , the court collectively referred to fmla provisions providing leave after childbirth or adoption , along with leave to take care of a spouse , son , daughter , or parent with a serious health condition , as the fmla's "family care provisions. it did so when distinguishing between these provisions and the self - care provision , observing that in hibbs , the court found congress had relied on "evidence of a well - documented pattern of sex - based discrimination in family - leave policies" by states . therefore , coleman suggests , though it does not expressly say so , that states can be sued for interfering with an employee's fmla rights after childbirth or adoption .