overtime compensation . the flsa does not limit work hours ; rather , it requires additional payment for hours worked in excess of 40 per workweek . most workers covered by the flsa must be compensated at one - and - a - half times their regular rate of pay for each hour worked over 40 hours in a workweek . workers not covered by the flsa are not entitled to additional compensation for hours worked in excess of 40 per workweek . unemployment compensation . the cornerstone of the income support for unemployed workers is the federal - state unemployment compensation ( uc ) program , which is generally financed by employer taxes . whereas the specifics of uc benefits are determined by each state , generally eligibility is based on attaining qualifying wages and employment in covered work and typically does not include independent contractors . family and medical leave . the family and medical leave act ( fmla ) entitles eligible employees to unpaid , job - protected leave for qualifying family and medical reasons . because eligibility for fmla benefits is tied to an individual's work history with an employer and uses the flsa concept of employment , independent contractors are not entitled to fmla provisions . employer payroll taxes . in a traditional employment relationship , an employer is responsible for paying the employer's share of social security and medicare taxes ( payroll or fica taxes ) and for withholding the employee's share of these same taxes . independent contractors , however , are responsible for paying self - employment taxes ( i.e. , the employer and employee shares of fica taxes ) . beyond federally mandated labor standards , certain other benefits often associated with traditional employment relationships may not be available in the same form to workers in the gig economy . in many cases , employers may offer a combination of benefit access and subsidies to employees . the information in table 1 includes rates of access , participation , and take - up that civilian employees have to various benefits . these data are intended to show the relatively high prevalence of certain employer - based benefits that independent contractors , by definition , do not have access to through employers . for each benefit type below , the percentage of workers with access by work status is provided to demonstrate the higher proportion of access for full - time workers . table 1 data indicate that for some of the major benefit categories , such as health , retirement , and life insurance , a majority of employees have access to these benefits through their employers , with correspondingly high take - up rates for these benefits . the difference between access rates for full - time and part - time workers likewise shows an increasing likelihood of having access to benefits through traditional , full - time employment compared with other work arrangements . to the extent that gig employment more closely resembles part - time employment , it is likely that workers in this segment of the economy might also have relatively lower access to the traditional employment - related benefits .