presumptive eligibility . prior to the enactment of the aca , states were permitted to enroll certain groups ( i.e. , children , pregnant women , and certain women with breast and cervical cancer ) for a limited period of time before completed medicaid applications were filed and processed , based on a preliminary determination of likely medicaid eligibility by certain specified medicaid providers . such individuals then had to formally apply for coverage within a given time frame to continue receiving medicaid benefits . the aca expands the types of entities that are permitted to make medicaid presumptive - eligibility determinations as well as the groups of individuals for whom presumptive - eligibility determinations may apply . specifically , the aca allows states to permit all hospitals that participate in medicaid to make presumptive - eligibility determinations for all medicaid - eligible populations , beginning january 1 , 2014 . in addition , states that elected the option to provide a presumptive - eligibility period to children and pregnant women are permitted to provide a presumptive - eligibility period for ( 1 ) the aca medicaid expansion group , ( 2 ) the mandatory foster care coverage group through the age of 26 , or ( 3 ) low - income families eligible under section 1931 of the ssa . streamlined enrollment system . as a condition of the receipt of federal financial assistance , the aca requires states to coordinate their eligibility and enrollment systems across all of the aca low - income subsidy programs ( including medicaid , chip , and the health insurance exchanges ) . presumptive eligibility . sections 207 ( 2 ) ( b ) and 207 ( 6 ) of the senate bill would terminate existing state aca presumptive - eligibility elections as of january 1 , 2018 , and would prohibit states from making such elections going forward by modifying section 1902 ( a ) ( 47 ) ( b ) of the ssa . however , states still would be permitted to enroll children , pregnant women , and certain women with breast and cervical cancer based on a preliminary determination by a specified medicaid provider of likely medicaid eligibility . for states that elected the option to provide a presumptive - eligibility period to children and pregnant women , these provisions would repeal the state option to provide a presumptive - eligibility period any time after december 31 , 2017 , for ( 1 ) the aca expansion group , ( 2 ) the mandatory foster care group through the age of 26 , or ( 3 ) low - income families ( section 1920 ( e ) of the ssa ) . streamlined enrollment system . section 207 ( 8 ) of the senate bill would repeal the requirement for states to coordinate their eligibility and enrollment systems across all of the aca low - income subsidy programs as of january 1 , 2018 ( section 1943 ( a ) of the ssa ) . as an alternative to providing all the mandatory and selected optional benefits under traditional medicaid , the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra ; p.l .