each of these elements is described below . basic pay all members of the armed forces receive basic pay , although the amount varies by pay grade ( rank ) and years of service ( also called longevity ) . for most servicemembers , basic pay is the largest element of the compensation they receive in their paycheck and typically accounts for about two - thirds of an individual's rmc . should gna be revised to alter this effect ? could organizational restructuring of the joint staff and service staffs decrease the need for gfos , or allow positions to be held by lower graded gfos ? could certain organizations be merged to reduce the requirements for gfos ? could military relations with international partners be restructured so as to lessen the need for gfo representation ? how important is rank equivalence when senior u.s. military personnel work with their allied peers ? could national guard and reserve gfos be used to reduce the need for active duty gfos ? are there gfo positions that could be eliminated or "downgraded" to a lower rank ? are there gfo positions that could be replaced by civilian employees ? what are the costs and benefits associated with these actions ? how might this impact military effectiveness ? can the direct and indirect costs associated with gfos be reduced ? for example , could compensation or staff costs be reduced without significantly affecting the ability of gfos to carry out their duties ? regular military compensation ( rmc ) , as defined in law , is "the total of the following elements that a member of the uniformed services accrues or receives , directly or indirectly , in cash or in kind every payday: basic pay , basic allowance for housing , basic allowance for subsistence , and federal tax advantage accruing to the aforementioned allowances because they are not subject to federal income tax. it is roughly analogous to civilian salary . basic allowance for housing all servicemembers living in the united states are entitled to either government - provided housing or a housing allowance , known as basic allowance for housing ( bah ) . about 17% of gfos living in the united states receive government - provided housing with the remainder receiving bah to offset the costs of the housing they rent or purchase in the civilian economy . the amount of bah a servicemember receives is based on three factors: paygrade ( rank ) , geographic location , and whether or not the servicemember has dependents . however , there is no increase in bah after paygrade o - 7 . therefore , the amount of bah for gfos does not vary by rank , but only by locality and dependency status . paygrade and dependency status are used to determine the type of accommodation — or "housing profile" — that would be appropriate for the servicemember ( for example , one - bedroom apartment , two - bedroom townhouse , or three - bedroom single family home ) . geographic location is used to determine the average costs associated with each of these housing profiles . the average costs of these housing profiles are the basis for bah rates .