telecommunications . tisa would likely build on the gats telecommunications annex and commitments made by parties to facilitate trade and open markets to competition . according to reports , the scope is undetermined as participants debate whether obligations would apply to measures relating to access and use of only public telecommunications networks or to measures related to value added services . initial gats offers focused on value added services , but , in the context of doha , many members have put forward offers to improve their existing gats commitments or to make initial commitments . tisa could leverage or build on these offers . telecommunications is one of the most restricted sectors in foreign markets for u.s. companies , according to the ustr's annual "national trade estimate report on foreign trade barriers. the institutional provisions in the proposed tisa would provide clarity on how the agreement would operate . this section could address how to admit observers or new members into the agreement , or how tisa could be incorporated into the wto in the future . negotiators are also considering whether to implement a rotating secretariat position . a state - to - state dispute settlement mechanism will reportedly be included , but no investor - state dispute settlement mechanism as is contained in more comprehensive u.s. ftas that have a broader scope beyond services . trade negotiations can be a contentious issue in the united states as in other countries . on one hand , the limited scope and focus on services of tisa may make it less controversial compared to other trade agreements because it excludes sensitive areas of investment , agriculture , and certain manufactured goods that are often hotly debated in trade discussions . many in the business community support tisa as an opportunity to increase consistency and predictability among trading partners , to eliminate trade barriers , and to strengthen and update multilateral rules on trade in services beyond the wto gats . on the other hand , tisa may raise general debates about agreements to liberalize trade , as well as debates specific to liberalization in the services sector , especially as services can cover sensitive public policy issues like healthcare . opponents of services liberalization , including some labor unions and civil society groups , are concerned about a number of issues , including the potential impact of tisa on wages and employment as well as the authority of national , state , and local governments to regulate services . import - sensitive sectors that might become more open under tisa , and thus more competitive , may be more likely to oppose it . one issue specific to services regulation is that , while ustr is the lead trade negotiator for the united states , individual u.s. states and localities regulate many services . lawyers , for example , are state - licensed and are often required to re - apply in order to practice in other states . similarly , insurance services are regulated at a state level . some observers contend that it is unclear how ustr is consulting with state regulators who would be responsible for implementing any commitments made by ustr . the ustr has taken different approaches in the past .