appendix a . is it enough ? and , to what extent is the ic providing value for the money ? as congress considers the fy2019 nip and mip budgets , and balances the need to protect both national security and taxpayer dollars , coming to agreement with the executive branch on how much spending is enough lies at the heart of much of its oversight responsibility and power of the purse . the following types of questions may be considered: does the ic have the funding to develop or maintain collection capacity necessary to support national security policy ? does the ic have the funding necessary to develop the capacity for the timely processing and analysis of data ? is the ic organized or sufficiently integrated to realize efficiencies in the collection , processing , analysis and sharing of intelligence across its 17 components ? where can the ic accept risk relative to budget limitations ? is the ic postured to leverage international partners for coverage of emerging issues or areas where the ic has limited investment ? does the national intelligence priorities framework ( nipf ) process provide a useful means for prioritizing the allocation of resources ? does the office of the director of national intelligence ( odni ) have the authority , funding , and organization to enable oversight of the impact of intelligence programs of ic components ? defense spending: fy1950-2017 appendix b . dni daniel coats has stated his commitment to transparency "as a foundational element of securing public trust in our endeavors. many believe the ic could exercise greater transparency with respect to budgetary matters , however , and that disclosure of intelligence - related spending other than the topline number would not be harmful to national security . in the 115 th congress , legislation has again been introduced to address the issue of transparency and secrecy in the intelligence budgets , continuing efforts to require disclosure of the topline budget figure for each of the components of the intelligence community . 5406 , and a nearly identical bill , s. 2631 , both titled "intelligence budget transparency act of 2018," would require the president to disclose , in his annual budget request to congress , [t]he total dollar amount proposed in the budget for intelligence or intelligence related activities of each element of the government engaged in such activities in the fiscal year for which the budget is submitted and the estimated appropriation required for each of the ensuing four fiscal years . the bills were referred to the house and senate committees on the budget , respectively . the 115 th congress may consider reexamining the arguments , directives , and statute that currently guide disclosure of numbers associated with intelligence spending . some have asserted that america's intelligence agencies may spend more money on gathering and disseminating intelligence than the rest of the world's intelligence services put together . intelligence programs ( nip and mip ) appendix c. intelligence community entities receiving nip and mip funding six u.s. intelligence entities — those organizations with an intelligence mission that include but are not limited to the ic components defined by statute — have both mip and nip funding sources .