as poulin , et al . ( 2010 ) point out , lower - need chronically homeless individuals ( eg , those without co - occurring disorders ) may not have the same housing and services requirements . clark and rich ( 2003 ) found that "high impairment" individuals with high psychiatric symptom severity and high levels of alcohol and drug use had better housing stability and functional homelessness outcomes with supportive housing , but that low - and medium - impairment individuals did just as well with case management only . it may also be good practice to intervene with homeless individuals before health conditions and substance use issues become too severe . the report discusses what it means to be chronically homeless ( " what is chronic homelessness ? ) , the way in which assistance for chronically homeless individuals has evolved ( " evolution of the permanent supportive housing strategy " ) , and how federal programs target assistance to individuals experiencing chronic homelessness ( " federal actions to assist people experiencing chronic homelessness " ) . search term variations included "housing first," "homeless / homelessness," "chronic / chronically," and "permanent supportive housing / supportive housing. crs also reviewed bibliographies of the studies . in addition , it summarizes the research regarding chronically homeless individuals who move into psh ( " research on permanent supportive housing for chronically homeless individuals " ) . the final section discusses questions and implications of the research . tables in appendix b contain summaries of all research reviewed by crs . the term "chronic homelessness" describes individuals who have spent long periods of time experiencing homelessness and have one or more disabling conditions . the term began to appear in research literature in the 1980s . for example , a 1988 institute of medicine report described three patterns of homelessness based on the amount of time spent homeless , including chronically homeless individuals who spent a year or more at a time experiencing homelessness and who were more likely to suffer from mental illness and substance abuse issues . in the late 1990s , researchers randall kuhn and dennis culhane tested a way of characterizing homeless individuals based on the number of days they used emergency shelter and number of episodes of homelessness . although theirs was not the first research that based homelessness categories on duration of time spent homeless , it tied chronic homelessness to shelter days used , and has often been cited in efforts to end chronic homelessness . their research defined three categories: transitionally homeless individuals tend to be homeless for short periods of time and do not return to homelessness . they are also less likely than other groups to face health or substance use barriers to attaining housing . episodically homeless individuals are homeless on a more frequent basis , but with stays in shelter not exceeding several months . chronically homeless individuals may have fewer stays in shelter than those who are episodically homeless , but stay for long periods of time , to the point where "shelters are more like long - term housing than an emergency arrangement.