postal service . it would also incentivize the disposal of unneeded property by providing agencies with the authority to retain the proceeds from the transfer , sale , or lease of surplus property . the public buildings reform and savings act of 2016 ( public buildings act ) was introduced february 8 , 2016 , and reported to the house committees on financial services and transportation and infrastructure the same day . both committees reported the bill favorably on may 23 , 2016 , and it passed the house the same day . the bill was received in the senate on may 24 , 2016 . no further action has been taken . table 1 compares key provisions from cpra and the fast act and is followed by an analytical discussion . in addition , the bills would require the president to seek senate confirmation of the chairperson , which could slow down the development of recommendations if there were delays in the nomination or confirmation process . similarly , the other members of the commission would either be appointed by the president in consultation with congress ( under the fast act ) or appointed by house and senate leaders directly ( under cpra ) , which could enable congress to influence the composition of the commission . cpra would require a 45-day timeframe for congressional action . congress would have less than seven weeks to review all of the recommendations — of which there may be hundreds — before deciding whether to pass a joint resolution of disapproval . this could reduce oversight of major real property actions . consolidation projects , for example , are often complex , multi - year efforts , with long - term consequences for the agencies and communities involved , and for which congress is asked to provide hundreds of millions , or even billions , of dollars . for this reason , congress regularly holds hearings on major consolidation proposals . for example , the effort to consolidate the department of homeland security at st. elizabeth's in the district of columbia ( dc ) is estimated to cost $3.26 billion and has been the subject of several congressional hearings . the consequences of the consolidation are wide ranging , and include changing traffic patterns in washington , dc , relocating thousands of employees , and ensuring historic preservation requirements are met . similar issues have been raised regarding the consolidation of food and drug administration headquarters , a project that has received hundreds of millions of dollars since fy2000 . some might argue that congress would not have sufficient time , under the proposed time constraints , to either approve or disapprove of the recommendations . requiring congress to approve or disapprove of the entire list of recommended actions could reduce conflict among various stakeholders interested in the properties in question . some civilian agencies have found their disposal efforts complicated by the involvement of state and local governments , nonprofits , businesses , and community leaders with competing agendas . in 2002 , for example , the usps identified a number of "redundant , low - value" facilities that it sought to close in order to reduce its operating costs .