these rules have the force and effect of law . the administrative procedure act ( apa ) generally requires agencies to follow certain procedures when promulgating rules . the statute's "good cause" exception , however , permits age ncies to forgo section 553's notice and comment requirement if "the agency for good cause finds" that compliance would be "impracticable , unnecessary , or contrary to the public interest" and to bypass its requirement that rules be published 30 days before implementation if good cause exists . in 2012 , the government accountability office ( gao ) found that between 2003 and 2010 federal agencies issued about 35% of major rules and about 44% of nonmajor rules without a notice of proposed rulemaking ( nprm ) . in addition , some courts have indicated that the test for good cause to waive notice and comment is more stringent than to waive the 30-day rule . however , courts sometimes decline to decide whether the two standards are different , ruling that the circumstances do or do not support good cause under both exceptions , or do not acknowledge that the two might differ in substance . in fact , some courts distinguished between the two in some cases , but not in others . whether courts distinguish conceptually between the two standards or not , at a functional level , the two can sometimes operate independently . courts will sometimes find that good cause exists to issue immediately applicable emergency regulations , but conclude that there is no reason the agency cannot make them temporary , subject to notice and comment procedures . in addition , courts have sometimes found good cause for an agency to issue an immediately applicable interim rule when the agency permits comment on the final rule . leaving aside disagreements over the proper standard of review , under what circumstances have courts upheld agency invocations of good cause to bypass notice and comment rulemaking ? the apa's text limits good cause to an agency finding that compliance with notice and comment rulemaking is "impracticable , unnecessary , or contrary to the public interest. however , judicial application of these factors tends to converge . consequently , leaving aside minor or technical rules where compliance with section 553 is unnecessary , it may be helpful to divide good cause cases into several categories: ( 1 ) emergencies ; ( 2 ) contexts where prior notice would subvert the underlying statutory scheme ; and ( 3 ) situations where congress intends to w aive section 553's requirements . one potential reason for confusion regarding the issue is disagreement regarding the appropriate standard of review when agencies invoke the good cause exception . as an initial matter , federal courts appear to agree that the good cause exception is to be "narrowly construed. executive agencies bear the burden of persuasion in convincing a court that good cause exists , and the exception is not to be used as an "escape clause" to avoid rulemaking procedures when convenient for the agency . "bald assertions" by an agency that comments are unnecessary in a particular situation do not create good cause . otherwise , the exception would swallow the rule .