sec . national commission on the future of the army . sec . duties of the commission . sec . second , should the administration , congress , and the army agree upon which recommendations to implement , how would this be accomplished ? without an established process to vet evaluations and an implementation plan , the commission's work might become more informative in nature as opposed to an actionable plan . the commission's 63 recommendations run the gamut from creating new units , forward stationing units overseas , creating new military school and pay systems , to not implementing the army's aviation restructuring initiative . one common aspect of these varied recommendations is they each have an associated cost , and finding "offsets" might not be practical or possible to fund these initiatives . first , by what means or process would the administration , congress , and the army evaluate the ncfa's recommendations and then decide which ones to implement ? another consideration , dependent on the number of recommendations adopted for implementation , is that in many cases , costs must be established for these recommendations and this might prove to be a difficult and lengthy undertaking . once costs are estimated , there would likely be some process initiated to determine what recommendations are affordable under current and projected budget constraints and which recommendations might have to be deferred . there are a number of potential difficulties associated with implementing the commission's recommendations . perhaps the most significant hurdle to implementation is affordability but this can be addressed by a variety of means including "offsets," providing the army additional budgetary authority , or modifying or time - phasing the implementation of the commission's recommendations . developmental and technical issues and bureaucratic opposition can also pose significant challenges to the implementation of the commission's recommendations . just as it is important to have a clear understanding of the costs associated with a recommendation , policymakers may wish to consider potential developmental and technical problems and possible bureaucratic push - back in order to facilitate the effective implementation of the commission's recommendations . the final stage of implementation is oversight . while some recommendations can be implemented in fairly short order , others might take a number of years to fully realize . it is not readily apparent how congress would choose to oversee the implementation of potentially dozens of the commission's recommendations . one possible mechanism might be to establish special hearings dealing exclusively with ncfa recommendation implementation or possibly the army's annual posture or modernization hearings might be the appropriate oversight venue . other possible means of oversight could be semiannual or annual reports to congress or periodic updates to members , staffs , and congressional defense committees . the formal establishment and designation of a means of congressional oversight could prove to be beneficial to all concerned parties . title xvii — national commission on the future of the army subtitle a — establishment and duties of commission sec . short t itle . powers of the commission . sec . commission p ersonnel m atters . sec . termination of the commission . sec . funding . subtitle b — related limitations sec . short title .