in the case of h.r . 3763 , the aforementioned highway bill , adjustments to the reported text were presented to the house as rules print 114-32 , a full - text "substitute amendment" to the senate's version of the highway bill . this approach of establishing a rules committee print as the baseline text for consideration on the floor is an increasingly common method by which post - committee adjustments are made . in some instances , as was the case with h.r . 3763 , the text of a rules print is considered as an amendment to the text of a committee - reported bill , and may itself be subject to further amendment , while in other instances the text of a rules print is automatically incorporated ( or "self - executed" ) into the reported bill through a vote on the special rule governing the measure's consideration . in the view of a former house parliamentarian: this [post - committee adjustment] technique has taken hold more frequently in contemporary congresses as measures emerging from committees are sometimes extensively rewritten , often with additional and non - germane matter , merely by a vote on the special order of business resolution and not by the traditional presentation and vote on separate amendments following the standing committee stage . historically , the house has initiated floor debate on the basis of committee - reported legislation . congressional hearings , oversight activities , and relatively stable memberships allow committees to develop policy expertise on issues within their jurisdiction . in recent congresses , it has become increasingly common for the house to begin floor proceedings with the text of a rules print drafted by the rules committee in consultation with the house majority leadership and the relevant committees . in many cases the language of the print is the same as the committee - reported bill ( s ) , but in some instances the text is modified before it reaches the floor . this report examines the use of rules prints as a method of executing post - committee adjustments from both a qualitative and quantitative perspective . the first section of the report summarizes how legislation gets considered on the house floor and the important role the rules committee plays in organizing the chamber's business . section two describes the procedural evolution in how special rules from the rules committee have made post - committee adjustments to legislation . section three presents a qualitative assessment of the language the rules committee uses to communicate to members and staff the magnitude and policy significance of textual changes contained in a rules print . section four assesses the degree to which post - committee adjustments have been made in this context by comparing the number of sections contained in rules committee prints to the number of sections within the corresponding reported bill ( s ) across all rules prints made in order since the 106 th congress ( 1999-2000 ) . section five offers concluding observations . floor time for legislation is a precious commodity in the workload - packed and deadline - driven environment on capitol hill .