how has it changed over time ? has the value of these tax expenditures increased since enactment of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l . 111-148 , as amended ) ? how has the value of health - related tax expenditures changed relative to the value of total revenue collected ? what was the size of health tax expenditures relative to discretionary and mandatory outlays on health programs in past years ? likewise , has federal support for health grown more in the form of direct outlays or indirectly through revenue losses attributable to tax expenditures ? to provide some insights into these questions , this report analyzes historical data on health - related tax expenditure estimates published by the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) . this report analyzes these tax expenditures together at the budget function level , rather than focusing on the size of any single provision . for more information on individual tax expenditures , see crs committee print cp10001 , tax expenditures: compendium of background material on individual provisions — a committee print prepared for the senate committee on the budget , by [author name scrubbed] et al . for broader analysis of tax expenditures and comparisons of different categories of tax expenditures , by budget function , see crs report r44012 , tax expenditures: overview and analysis , by [author name scrubbed] . this report relies on the tax expenditure definition and estimation methodology used by the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) . to define tax expenditures , jct refers to the congressional budget and impoundment control act of 1974 ( p.l . 93-344 ; budget act ) , which defines tax expenditures as revenue losses attributable to provisions of the federal tax laws which allow a special exclusion , exemption , or deduction from gross income or which provide a special credit , a preferential rate of tax , or a deferral of tax liability… . jct uses a modified haig - simons baseline definition of income ( consumption plus changes in net wealth in a given period ) . provisions considered "tax expenditures" cause a divergence from measured income under this baseline definition , and are considered as revenue forgone from this baseline . certain tax provisions might also incur revenue losses under other forms of taxation ( eg , an exclusion might reduce income and payroll tax collection ) , but only the revenue forgone from the income tax system are included in jct's tax expenditure estimates . jct generally publishes estimates of tax expenditures during each session of congress . there are a number of ways tax expenditures can be categorized . jct categorizes provisions by budget function , such as health , commerce and housing , energy , etc . budget functions serve as one way to identify provisions that operate in a common area of policy or share a similar purpose . the department of the treasury also has its own list of tax expenditures , by budget function , and a baseline that it estimates annually for the president's budget .