there are a number of human rights concerns about nepal . many have attributed this to the earthquake of april 2015 . the fuel shortage brought on by strife in the terai is the most pressing aspect of the breakdown in cross - border trade with india . new arrangements with china appear set to alleviate some of nepal's dependence on india as a source of fuel imports . some observers have speculated that the trade blockade could lead to a negative economic growth rate for nepal . nepal has not had a negative economic growth rate since 1982 . rebuilding damaged and destroyed housing and infrastructure caused by the earthquake will likely take years . observers believe that future economic growth will be modestly stimulated by government spending on reconstruction . according to the asian development bank , the total cost of recovery from the earthquake is estimated at $7.1 billion , equal to approximately one - third of nepal's gdp . development partners have pledged $4 billion in grants and loans over five years . nepal's economy is heavily dependent on agriculture . agriculture employs 75% of the country's work force . agriculture , forestry , and fisheries account for 31.7% of gdp by sector of origin while services account for 53.2% and industry 15.1% . the united states is one of nepal's key trade partners . india ( 59.7% ) , the united states ( 8.6% ) , china ( 4.6% ) , and germany ( 3.5% ) are the key destinations for nepal's exports while india ( 57% ) and china ( 29.5% ) are the main sources of nepal's imports . the united states and nepal have signed a trade and investment framework agreement to enhance bilateral trade and investment . "u.s. exports to nepal include agricultural products , aircraft parts , optic and medical instruments and machinery. ongoing political turmoil has delayed the establishment of the national human rights commission and the truth and reconciliation and disappearance commissions . discrimination based on caste and ethnicity remains , as do problems with poor prisons , and the courts reportedly remained vulnerable to political pressure , bribery , and intimidation . there were also restrictions on the freedom of assembly and harassment of the media . corruption reportedly remains widespread , and the freedoms of refugees are limited . it is also reported that "the government made little progress in combating forced and bonded labor , which persisted despite laws banning the practice. this incident did much to undermine the legitimacy of the monarchy . king gyanendra , the former king's brother , was crowned on june 4 , 2001 , and he appointed a commission to investigate the assassinations . by mid - june , the country began returning to normal following rioting and widespread refusal to believe official accounts of the massacre . in july 2001 , then - prime minister girija prasad koirala stepped down amid fears of continuing instability and his government's failure to deal with the growing maoist insurgency . he was replaced by nc leader sher bahadur deuba , who then became the head of nepal's 11 th government in as many years .