these cases are prosecuted by doj . congress began legislating to counter domestic human trafficking more than a decade ago . the trafficking victims protection act of 2000 ( tvpa ; division a of p.l . 106-386 ) and its four reauthorizations ( tvpras ) have collectively aimed to reduce human trafficking within the united states . they have established grant programs for victims and law enforcement , strengthened criminal laws , and provided for oversight on the effectiveness and implications of u.s. policies on countering human trafficking . countering human trafficking has also been a prolific area of legislative activity for the 114 th congress . notably , the justice for victims of trafficking act of 2015 ( jvta ; p.l . in addition , the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( p.l . 113-183 ) requires hhs to establish , by september 2016 , the national advisory committee on sex trafficking of children and youth in the united states to improve the nation's response to sex trafficking and develop best practices and recommendations for states to combat sex trafficking of children , among other duties . the federal government does not currently have a national strategy broadly directed at combating human trafficking . the jvta directs the president's interagency task force to monitor and combat trafficking to conduct a review of human trafficking prevention within the united states . the report is to include ( 1 ) a catalog of the u.s. government's efforts to prevent individuals from committing trafficking offenses and prevent children from becoming victims ; ( 2 ) a survey of the literature related to deterring individuals from trafficking and preventing children from becoming victims ; ( 3 ) identification of best practices related to preventing human trafficking of children ; and ( 4 ) identification of gaps in research and data that would be helpful in formulating strategies to prevent child trafficking . the jvta also requires a government accountability office ( gao ) report to congress on each program or initiative authorized under the law and the following five statutes to determine whether any program or initiative is duplicative: ( 1 ) trafficking victims protection reauthorization act of 2005 , ( 2 ) trafficking victims protection act of 2000 , ( 3 ) victims of child abuse act of 1990 , ( 4 ) runaway and homeless youth act , and ( 5 ) missing children's assistance act . the report is to be submitted to the house and the senate judiciary committees within 180 days of the law's enactment . the report must include a description of the cost of any duplicative program or initiative and recommendations on how to achieve cost savings with respect to each such duplicative program or initiative . the jvta initiates the creation of the united states advisory council on human trafficking ( council ) , which is to be comprised of between 8 and 14 human trafficking survivors . the council is to serve as an advisory body to the senior policy operating group on trafficking in persons , reviewing federal anti - trafficking policy and programs . in addition , the council is to serve as the point of contact for federal agencies seeking input of trafficking survivors on programs and policies .