policy implementation . in 2014 , the house of representatives voted to authorize the speaker to initiate legal action against the executive branch for implementing aspects of the affordable care act in a manner contrary to the statutory language . what implementation latitude does the administration have under law , and can congress seek legal enforcement against administration implementation decisions ? congressional oversight and contempt power . after the department of justice refused to provide subpoenaed documents to the house oversight and government reform committee , the committee voted to cite the attorney general for contempt , and the administration invoked executive privilege as the justification for withholding the documents . to what extent does congress have a right to executive branch documents ? can congress force a criminal contempt prosecution to be opened ? two general observations warrant mentioning . first , the contemporary balance of power between the president , congress , and the courts is not the same as it was in 1789 , and is perhaps not the balance intended or expected by the framers of the constitution . a myriad of changes , developments , and specific events in the united states — ranging from amendments to the constitution to development in technology to the continuing evolution of american political culture — have continually influenced public opinion , political norms , and the behavior of political actors in ways that have rearranged the relative powers of the institutions . second , the relative power of the president , congress , and the courts is not on any specific trajectory . at various times since the ratification of the constitution , the power of each institution has been at times ascendant and at other times on the decline . while specific events and developments may predictably lead to an increase or decrease in relative power for one of the branches , predicting the actual future direction of power shifts between the branches is an inherently difficult task . many events that alter the power balance are either contingent or otherwise rely on the individual actions of political actors . what limits can congress place on presidential military action ? congressional organization of the judiciary . in 2015 , the supreme court examined the question of whether congress could charge non article - iii courts with certain adjudication tasks . what types of courts can congress create that do not provide article iii protections to their judges ? recess a ppointments . in 2011 , president obama made several recess appointments while the senate was in pro - forma session , which led to a lawsuit and ultimately a supreme court decision invalidating the appointments . under what conditions can the president make a recess appointment ? recognition of foreign governments . does congress have a role in foreign policy that gives it the authority to recognize foreign governments for some purposes , or does the sole power of recognition lie with the president ? the structure of the constitution reflects the collective preferences of the state delegates who drafted it in 1787 . these preferences were chiefly shaped by two things: the political philosophy of the colonial americans , and their actual political experiences as english colonists .