, cbp ) . however , the border patrol's methodology for risk assessments monitors certain metrics , along with other information , in order to estimate the level of risk at the sector level . dhs defines risk as "the potential for an unwanted outcome resulting from an incident , event , or occurrence , as determined by its likelihood and the associated consequences. the process of risk assessment identifies and evaluates potential risks or hazards and analyzes what could happen if the hazard went unchecked . the border patrol conducts risk assessments at an operational level to determine the level of risk present in specific border sectors . they are meant to inform and not dictate decisionmaking with respect to resource allocation and response . in theory , metrics should be used not only to hold dhs accountable but also to inform decisionmaking and the development of strategies for improvement . furthermore , risk assessments are not designed to measure overall performance , though dhs uses certain risk measurements that may be able to speak to performance . congress could consider whether other data and methodologies should be used to measure border security . cbp's 2012-2016 border patrol strategic plan ( bpsp ) focuses on "identifying high risk areas and targeting ... response[s] to meet" threats in those areas . this plan employs a risk - based strategy , which departs from the previous , resource - based 2004 national border patrol strategy . their efforts to develop a measure for this have created a continual evolution of metrics . metrics can describe important phenomena , such as an estimate of how many unauthorized migrants enter the united states every year and what proportion is apprehended by the border patrol . these data can help evaluate the effectiveness of border security , influence decisionmaking , and inform congress and the public . for example , a decrease in apprehensions at the southwest border may not be only a result of successful deterrence by the border patrol , it may also be the result of increased apprehensions of unauthorized migrants in mexico , who are therefore prevented from reaching the u.s. border . cbp has stated that "securing our borders means first having the visibility to see what is happening on our border , and second , having the capacity to respond to what we see. furthermore , "border patrol characterizes a secure border as one of low risk , where there is a high probability of detection coupled with a high probability of interdiction. border security can be assessed at both the strategic and operational levels . however , determining unauthorized border flows is difficult for many reasons , such as unauthorized migrants' desire to avoid detection . still , metrics , at both the strategic and operational levels , ideally provide congress with a sense of the current state of the border that helps inform public debate and possible legislation . at the strategic level , dhs can use performance metrics to provide understanding on whether efforts to secure the border are effective or efficient . these metrics also hold dhs and its components accountable and can affect its decisionmaking .