which goal mattered more ? what were the resource implications of prioritizing one over the other ? without a solid strategic - level understanding of why these bpc programs were initiated , it becomes extremely difficult — if not impossible — to truly judge whether they were effective . still , all this does not necessarily argue that an analysis of bpc's effectiveness — relative to strategic - level aims for a given program — should not ( or cannot ) be undertaken . given how many billions of dollars have been spent on these programs , a study of bpc's overall efficacy is necessary , even if it only serves as a starting point for other , more in - depth analytic work in this area . crs therefore sought to understand whether , at a strategic ( versus programmatic ) level , bpc has been an effective way to achieve strategic goals ? crs reviewed the historical record and developed a list of objectives that the united states sought to accomplish through building partner capacity activities . this list included victory in war or war termination , managing regional security challenges , indirectly supporting a party to a conflict , conflict mitigation , building institutional and interpersonal linkages , enhancing coalition participation , and alliance building . crs then selected 20 case studies since world war ii , organized by strategic rationale , to determine whether a given bpc effort had its intended strategic effect ( an explanation of the methodology can be found in the text box below ) . while it would be an analytic stretch to presume that failures or successes were a direct result of bpc efforts rather than other external or internal factors , one can make judgments based on the overall trends whether bpc meaningfully contributed ( or did not contribute ) to the accomplishment of stated u.s. strategic objectives . the following sections of this report delve into the case studies used to support the analysis in figure 1 . the sections are organized according to bpc rationale . after outlining the logic behind a given rationale ( war termination , proxy warfare , etc .

 ) , each section explores whether those strategic objectives were met and concludes with an overall assessment of the efficacy of bpc toward accomplishing that rationale . in many instances , the united states has built or expanded partner militaries with the goal of curtailing its involvement in wars . particularly in those instances in which u.s. forces were engaged in a conflict , but with limited interests , the united states has dedicated significant resources to training and equipping host nation forces . as the logic goes , enabling a host nation and transitioning security responsibility from the united states to the partner creates conditions whereby american forces are able to withdraw . put differently , at times the united states has sought to create an environment in which the level of conflict , even if it continued , could be handled by local forces , thereby creating a path to extricate u.s. forces . this is due to a variety of reasons .