membership expansion . some argue that the tpp's ultimate strategic impact will depend on whether a broader group of nations ultimately decides to join it . how do these different arguments relate ? are the potential strategic benefits of the agreement contingent on its ability to drive economic growth and prosperity ? for those who support the tpp on some grounds but not others , what rank should be given to various aspects of the agreement ? does the argument that the tpp is an important measure of u.s. leadership in asia outweigh potential concerns arising from individual terms of the agreement ? to other observers , the proposed tpp , established by like - minded countries , represents the best opportunity for the united states to pursue regional and broader multilateral trade policy goals currently unattainable in the wto and other fora . has the agreement struck the right balance between trade liberalization and establishing rules that are most beneficial for u.s. economic interests , while at the same time remaining attractive to a broader set of regional actors that could enhance the agreement's strategic value ? implications of failed ratif ication . from the standpoint of promoting greater u.s. leadership and influence in the region , congress may wish to consider whether delays or failure to ratify and implement the agreement would set back these goals . the tpp took more than five years to conclude , and if rejected by congress , it could take several years for an alternative , u.s. - led agreement , if any , to take shape . meanwhile , other countries in the region continue to pursue their own trade arrangements . would a failure to ratify the tpp impact foreign governments' views on u.s. leadership and credibility in the region , or do other foreign policies , including u.s. military presence , ultimately shape such views ? implications for countries outside the tpp . the tpp's 12 participating countries do not include several in the asia - pacific region that are strategically and economically important . some observers urge the united states to enunciate strategies that reinforce u.s. economic engagement more broadly across the region , beyond the current tpp membership , in part so that countries that currently are not in the tpp do not conclude that washington is neglecting or ignoring them . congress may wish to consider whether existing u.s. economic initiatives in asia are sufficient to achieve broad goals of furthering u.s. influence across the region , or whether other economic initiatives are advisable as an assurance of u.s. commitment to the region . if other initiatives are advisable , which nations or multilateral groups should be targeted ? congress also may wish to consider whether it is strategically important that tpp expand to include other countries outside the region . implications for the multilateral trading system . analysts hold mixed views as to how "mega - regional" negotiations may impact the multilateral trading system as represented by the wto . while some see such agreements as an opportunity for the united states to advance new trade rules and disciplines that may eventually be incorporated in multilateral initiatives , others worry they may usurp legitimacy from the wto and may negatively impact countries not involved in their negotiation .