the program itself is administered by dhs's u.s . in order to grant labor certification to an employer , dol must determine that ( 1 ) there are not sufficient u.s. workers who are qualified and available to perform the work , and ( 2 ) the employment of foreign workers will not adversely affect the wages and working conditions of u.s. workers who are similarly employed . to prevent an adverse effect on u.s. workers , h - 2b employers must offer and provide required wages and benefits to h - 2b workers and workers in "corresponding employment. h - 2b employers must pay their workers the highest of the prevailing wage rate or the federal , state , or local minimum wage . they must provide a "three - fourths guarantee" ; that is , they must guarantee to offer workers employment for at least three - fourths of the contract period . h - 2b employers also must pay worker visa fees and certain worker transportation costs . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) and dol's employment and training administration ( eta ) . dol's wage and hour division ( whd ) also has certain concurrent enforcement responsibilities . if the foreign workers are already in the united states , the employer can request a change of status to h - 2b status on the petition . in the typical case , however , the workers are abroad . if the petition is approved , they can visit a u.s. embassy or consulate to apply for h - 2b nonimmigrant visas from dos . if the visa applications are approved , the workers are issued visas that they can use to apply for admission to the united states at a port of entry . h - 2b workers can be accompanied by eligible spouses and children , who are issued h - 4 visas . an alien's total period of stay as an h - 2b worker may not exceed three consecutive years . an h - 2b alien who has spent three years in the united states may not seek an extension of stay or be readmitted to the united states as an h - 2b worker until he or she has been outside the country for at least three months . the ina grants enforcement authority with respect to the h - 2b program to dhs , but allows for the delegation of that authority to dol . dhs has delegated that authority to dol , and now dol's whd has responsibility for enforcing compliance with the conditions of an h‐2b petition and temporary labor certification . the h - 2b program is subject to an annual statutory numerical limit . under the ina , as amended by the immigration act of 1990 , the total number of aliens who may be issued h - 2b visas or otherwise provided with h - 2b nonimmigrant status in any fiscal year may not exceed 66,000 . the h - 2b program currently operates under regulations issued by dhs in 2008 on h - 2b requirements , dhs and dol jointly in 2015 on h - 2b employment , and dhs and dol jointly in 2015 on h - 2b wages .