if so , in which areas and how ? does congress want the fec to be primarily an enforcement agency , primarily a disclosure agency , or something else ? if congress wants the fec to focus on one task over others , should another agency take on other duties ? is it sufficient for some tasks to be de - prioritized , etc. to what extent should the commission have discretion to prioritize some aspects of its mission over others ? does congress want to provide more or new direction ? does congress want to retain the fec's six - member , bipartisan structure ? other factors are beyond the fec's control . the agency cannot establish its own statutory mandate . it cannot unilaterally reconcile complex and sometimes ambiguous campaign finance law . most importantly , the fec cannot change the first amendment provisions that so closely protect the very conduct that congress has charged the commission with regulating . if congress chose instead an odd number of commissioners , how , if at all , might that affect perceptions of the agency's legitimacy or partisanship ? does the fec have sufficient appropriations to carry out its current mission and future ones ? does congress want to consider findings from outside critiques of the agency , such as those conducted by the fec's inspector general or advocacy groups ? as congress considers the questions presented above and the issues noted throughout this report , it might also be important to ask which decisions are within the commission's purview and which things only congress can change . the fec can control much of its agenda . commissioners can determine those areas where they can compromise and where they must disagree . they can set the overall tone for the agency and its staff . they can decide how to allocate resources and where to prioritize enforcement . the following questions raise more specific points for consideration . does congress want to examine relations among commissioners ? does congress want to change the status quo at all ? if so , does it want to try to affect those relations through oversight , by influencing nominations , etc. does congress want to consider the fec's legislative recommendations ? if so , which ones ? they may continue in "holdover" status after those terms end . commissioners are appointed by the president and subject to senate confirmation . as discussed below , the current appointment method differs from the process congress originally enacted but that was later invalidated . the senate most recently confirmed commissioners in 2013 , as shown in table 2 . congress most recently reauthorized the fec in 1980 ( fy1981 ) . throughout its history , the fec has been controversial . topics such as disagreements among commissioners and dueling perspectives on what the agency should do , and how , receive the most prominent and consistent attention in congress , within the fec , and in the media . other topics , such as staffing and information technology , are less prominent but can substantially affect the agency's daily business . this section briefly summarizes selected but recurring areas of debate that might be relevant for congress .