in early february 2016 , the u.s . judicial panel on multidistrict litigation consolidated these actions in a massachusetts federal district court , noting that "these actions involve common questions of fact" and that "centralization … will serve the convenience of the parties and witnesses and promote the just and efficient conduct of this litigation. few states have enacted laws that expressly address fantasy sports . senator robert menendez and representative frank pallone have called on the federal trade commission ( ftc ) to implement safeguards and ensure a fair playing field in daily fantasy sports . and senator richard blumenthal has called for a federal investigation into deceptive or fraudulent practices at dfs leagues by the ftc and the department of justice . in addition , questions about the roles of skill and luck in fantasy sports prompted representative frank pallone in september 2015 to request the house energy and commerce committee to hold a hearing to consider whether fantasy sports is currently allowed by uigea . according to press reports , representative dina titus , too , has asked the house energy and commerce committee to hold a hearing on the legalities of daily fantasy sports . policy options that could shape the future of the dfs industry generally center on whether regulation should come from congress , individual states , or the dfs industry itself . congress could pass legislation specifically governing dfs games , such as laws to oversee state and tribal agencies that regulate dfs contests . a typical player is a male around 30 years of age who is extremely interested in sports and has played in fantasy leagues for several years . many dfs participants formerly played online poker , which in the united states is now legal in only three states . according to the fantasy sports trade association ( fsta ) , the industry's national trade group , dfs players spent an average of $257 on entry fees and league - related materials in 2015 . dfs is tiny relative to the gambling industry , whose casinos , indian gaming operations , racinos , and state lotteries generated nearly $70 billion in net revenue in 2014 . despite the dfs industry's modest size , its rapid growth has raised questions about its potential effect on the more established gambling industry . casinos and casino hotels employed about 400,000 people nationwide in 2014 , and they are a major source of government revenue . the companies' websites describe their offerings as "contests" and "games" and avoid such words as "gambling" and "bet. as discussed further below , the determination of whether players' rewards are earned as a result of skill or of chance may be significant in establishing the legal status of dfs . according to a study published in sports business journal , "dfs affords a huge advantage to skilled players . in the first half of the 2015 mlb season , 91% of dfs player profits were won by just 1.3% of players. a separate survey of dfs participants conducted by eilers research in summer 2015 found that 70% of contestants lost money . these studies seem to suggest that the best players dominate everybody else because a certain amount of skill goes into putting together a winning daily fantasy lineup .