urban food production is more than food related . 113-79 , agricultural act of 2014 ) . other programs were authorized in 2010 as part of the most recent child nutrition reauthorization ( healthy , hunger - free kids act of 2010 , p.l . the most widely used definition is from the 2008 farm bill ( p.l . in the united states , one study estimates that locally - produced foods ( within 100 miles from where consumed ) have the potential to meet as much as 90% of the national food demand . others are more skeptical of the contributions from urban agriculture: some highlight the fact that urban land accounts for only about 2% of available land and question whether urban farming is an efficient use of available resources and whether urban producers have "the skills and the inclination to seriously grow food. others question whether urban farming can be profitable given the costs of land ownership and other farming inputs and whether urban farms can substantially contribute to u.s. consumption , while recognizing that urban farms provide services other than commodities , such as "instilling a sense of agrarianism" and supporting businesses devoted to food access . in october 2015 , secretary of agriculture tom vilsack indicated that usda was developing resources to provide assistance to urban farmers . many existing federal programs benefiting u.s. agricultural producers may provide support and assistance for local food systems . with few exceptions , these programs are not limited or targeted to local or regional food systems , but are generally available to provide support to all u.s. farms and ranchers . these include farm support and grant programs administered by usda as well as programs within other federal agencies , such as the departments of commerce ; health and human services ; and the treasury . in addition , the obama administration has implemented departmental initiatives intended to support local food systems , such as the "know your farmer , know your food" initiative , among other activities . authorizations for many of the highlighted programs supporting local and regional food systems are contained within periodic farm bills or within child nutrition programs . community - based and individual food production in cities meets further needs of the urban population like sustainable urban development and environmental protection . some noted objectives of urban agriculture include community and economic development ; improved access to fresh , locally produced food ; transformation of vacant urban property ; collection and reuse of organic waste and rainwater ; and education , organization , and employment of local residents . several major cities have educational and apprentice programs geared to urban agriculture . a 2014 study by portland state university reports that groups engaged in urban agriculture are mostly motivated by an interest in community building , education , food quality , and sustainability .