malaysia would immediately eliminate tariffs of up to 10% . u.s. tariffs on soybean products of up to 19.1% would be eliminated within 10 years . wheat and wheat products : japan , the largest importer of u.s. wheat , limits its wheat imports through an existing trq , which accounts for 90% of its imports . but corn and rice exports could be marginally lower . u.s. imports of processed foods are projected to be $427 million higher ( 1.1% ) with tpp than without it , while beef imports would be increased by $419 billion ( 5.7% ) , and imported dairy products would post an increase of $349 million , or 10.3% . u.s. export gains stem primarily from greater market access via lower tariffs and expanded trqs , with the lion's share of the total increase of $7.2 billion concentrated in japan ( $3.6 billion ) and vietnam ( $3.3 billion ) . separately , the american farm bureau federation , a large general farm organization that supports ratification of the tpp , issued its own analysis of the effects of tpp on american agriculture in february 2016 . it concluded that tpp would boost u.s. farm income by $4.4 billion per year once it is fully implemented compared with a second scenario it modeled under which the united states does not implement tpp and the 11 remaining signatories ratify an equivalent agreement . for perspective , since 2011 , u.s. net farm income has ranged from a high of $123.3 billion in 2013 to a low of $80.7 billion in 2015 , according to usda . although support for tpp is broad - based among stakeholders within food and agriculture , it is by no means universal . for additional detail , see the section entitled " food and agriculture stakeholders' views on tpp . the tpp agreement would affect market access for a broad range of agricultural commodities and food products . what follows is a non - comprehensive selection of some of the notable changes by commodity that are included in the agreement . beef : japan ranks as the largest u.s. export market for beef and beef products , according to the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) . under the tpp agreement , japan would drop its current tariff on fresh , chilled , and frozen beef from 38.5% to 27.5% in year one , with subsequent annual reductions to 9% by year 16 . a special safeguard duty would be applied during the transition period if imports exceed specified quantities . the safeguard duty would be progressively lowered each year , while the quantitative trigger would be increased . japan would lower tariffs on other beef products as well , while vietnam would eliminate such tariffs over three to eight years . the united states , for its part , would eliminate tariffs on beef and beef products that range as high as 26.4% in no more than 15 years and in fewer than 10 years in most instances .