no further legislative action was taken . the president's fy2015 budget proposal once again sought authority and funding to establish the nnmi . the request was not part of the president's fy2015 base budget request , but rather a part of his adjunct $56 billion opportunity , growth , and security initiative ( ogsi ) proposal . the ogsi included $2.4 billion in discretionary funding to establish up to 45 nnmi institutes . no legislative action was taken on this ogsi proposal . spillovers from successful innovations resulting from a firm's investments can yield substantial benefits captured by competitors , producing a market failure that results in underinvestment in manufacturing r&d and innovation . other types of market failures — for example , the need for large - scale capital investments and training outlays that may require many years to pay off — may "limit the scale - up of innovative manufacturing processes , the installation of new capital equipment , and the full integration of manufacturing systems across supply chains. some see the sector as vibrant and healthy . those holding this view tend to point to , among other things , the sector's strong growth in output and productivity , as well as the united states' world - leading share of global manufacturing output . from its low point in march 2010 , u.s. manufacturing employment has grown by 885,000 ( 7.7% ) to a recent high of 12.338 million in january 2016 ( though it subsequently experienced a drop of 73,000 jobs through october 2016 ) . other analysts , however , believe that the u.s. manufacturing sector is at risk . those holding this view express concerns about a "hollowing - out" of u.s. manufacturing resulting from the decision of many u.s. manufacturers to move production activities offshore ; policy and program efforts of other nations to attract and grow manufacturing companies ; and a decades - long trend in declining u.s. manufacturing employment . the 2007-2009 recession and the relatively slow subsequent pace of recovery contributed to increased concerns about the health of u.s. manufacturing . some stakeholders and policymakers advocate for changes to improve the business environment , including reducing tax and regulatory burdens on manufacturers and reforming the nation's tort laws . other stakeholders and policymakers support more direct and focused efforts funded by the federal government , such as those that aim to help a particular technology or industry . in particular , president obama has undertaken and proposed the creation and funding of a variety of initiatives ( eg , the advanced manufacturing partnership , the national robotics initiative , and the materials genome initiative ) to help address concerns about u.s. manufacturing . one of the president's key proposals to help u.s. manufacturers is the establishment of a national network for manufacturing innovation ( nnmi ) . the nnmi is the main focus of this report . the report begins with a discussion of the nnmi proposal and subsequent legislative action . it reviews related institutes established during the legislative debate . it then addresses several broad policy and implementation issues that continue to face congress , including the availability of funding , the proper role of the federal government , and oversight of nnmi implementation .