111-148 , as amended ) . the irs published relevant summary statistics in its 2014 statistics of income ( soi ) report . the most current soi data about the hctc is for tax year 2013 , in which 13,693 tax returns claimed the hctc , totaling to approximately $52.3 million . in addition , the irs reviews tax returns on which the credit is claimed . dol and the pbgc are responsible for helping treasury identify who may be eligible for the credit . dol also coordinates the one - stop career center system ; these centers provide a wide range of services to assist job seekers , including providing information about available benefits such as the hctc . similarly , the pbgc identifies beneficiaries who are potentially eligible for the hctc and provides the beneficiaries' relevant personal information to the irs . the irs mails program kits to persons whose names are included on the lists provided by the swas and the pbgc . other relevant state entities include the departments of insurance and health agencies . dol requests that swas mail hctc information packets to all eligible taa beneficiaries . taxpayers must include invoices and proof of payment for qualified health insurance . in this case , the credit amount would be used to reduce the amount of taxes owed for a given taxpayer . because the hctc is refundable , if the credit amount exceeds the amount of taxes owed , the excess amount is provided to the taxpayer in the form of a tax refund . to receive advance payments of the hctc , individuals register with the hctc program . they must be enrolled in a qualified health insurance plan when they register . the program confirms an applicant's eligibility and sends him or her an invoice for the taxpayer's share of the total monthly premium ( which is 27.5% because the hctc's subsidy rate is 72.5% ) . individuals send payments for their share plus additional premium amounts for non - qualified family members ( if applicable ) to treasury . upon receipt of these premium payments , treasury sends payment for 100% of the premium ( comprised of 27.5% from the individual and 72.5% from treasury ) to the individuals' health insurance plans . because the hctc is refundable , taxpayers may receive the full amount for which they are eligible , even if they have little or no tax liability . other tax credits for which individuals are eligible have no effect on their eligibility for the hctc , nor does the hctc affect other credits , with one key exception: a taxpayer who chooses to receive the hctc is prohibited from being eligible for the premium tax credit established under the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l . in addition , preliminary data for the 2016 filing season indicated the submission of 13,015 e - filed tax returns claiming the credit , as of march 10 , 2016 . taxpayers who choose to claim the hctc after the tax year ends must complete form 8885 and attach it to their standard form 1040 . some taxpayers may choose to receive a portion of the credit through advance payments and the remainder after they file their returns .