the house interior appropriations bill , h.r . revenues from onshore leases are disbursed to the states in which they were collected , the general fund of the u.s. treasury , and the reclamation fund based on various statutory formulas . revenues from offshore leases are allocated among coastal states , the land and water conservation fund , the historic preservation fund , and the treasury . onrr receives and processes approximately 49,000 royalty and production reports monthly . it annually collects royalties on some 32,000 offshore and onshore producing leases and rents on some 29,000 nonproducing leases . onrr uses an automated liquid verification system and gas verification system to ensure the accuracy of reported offshore production information . 5538 and s. 3068 contained general provisions related to offshore energy . section 107 of both bills directed the ocean energy agencies to collect nonrefundable inspection fees in fy2017 to be deposited into bsee's osee account and specified fee amounts . section 108 of both bills authorized the secretary of the interior to transfer funds among and between bsee , boem , and onrr in accordance with reprogramming guidelines related to the earlier departmental reorganization . both of these provisions are similar to those in previous years' interior appropriations laws . section 124 of the house bill would have prohibited the use of funds in fy2017 or any other fiscal year to implement new regulations pertaining to drilling margins or static downhole mud weight in offshore wells . the provision referred to regulatory changes contained in bsee's april 2016 final rule on offshore well control . the obama administration included as part of its doi budget some legislative proposals that pertained to the ocean energy agencies . one doi proposal , concerning offshore revenue - sharing payments under p.l . 109-432 , the gulf of mexico energy security act of 2006 , sought to redirect the payments from their current recipients — the states of alabama , louisiana , mississippi , and texas — to broad federal natural resource and conservation programs . more than half of the funding would be redirected to a new coastal climate resilience program for at - risk coastal states , local governments , and communities to prepare for and adapt to climate change . a separate proposed package of federal oil and gas legislation for both offshore and onshore activities included changes such as evaluating minimum royalty rates , adjusting the onshore royalty rate , repealing legislatively mandated royalty relief , providing for shorter primary lease terms , instituting a new fee on nonproducing leases , and making certain changes in revenue collections , among other elements . the total appropriation was $1.3 million less than the fy2016 enacted total and $5.6 million less than the obama administration's request . comparing the net appropriations after offsets , the senate committee amount was $0.4 million more than the fy2016 enacted net appropriation and $5.6 million less than the request . the 114 th congress did not enact full - year interior appropriations for fy2017 , and continuing funds were provided through april 28 , 2017 , under the crs ( p.l . the crs generally provide funding at the fy2016 level , minus an across - the - board reduction of less than 1% .