in federalist no . 2 2 , alexander hamilton wrote: "to give a minority a negative upon the majority ( which is always the case where more than a majority is requisite to a decision ) , is , in its tendency , to subject the sense of the greater number to that of the lesser. or as thomas jefferson said in the parliamentary manual he prepared for the senate when he served as president of the senate ( 1797-1801 ) : "the voice of the majority decides . for the lex majoris partis [law of the greatest part , or majority rule] is the law of all councils , elections , &c. where not otherwise expressly provided. in addition , the framers did expressly provide in the constitution a limited number of instances where supermajorities are required , such as a two - thirds vote of each chamber to override a presidential veto or two - thirds of the senators voting to win the senate's consent to a treaty . nothing in either the constitution or senate rules defines a filibuster , let alone what constitutes an appropriate length of time for debating a measure or matter . from the first congress , senators recognized that debates for dilatory purposes would occasionally be used , but "they were not used frequently enough to give the senate any trace of the notoriety which the filibuster later attached to the upper chamber. even then , rule xxii commonly allows for up to 30 more hours of post - cloture consideration on most matters before a vote could occur on the clotured measure or matter . the procedural reality is that the mere threat of extended debate — perhaps foreshadowed by objections to unanimous consent requests — is often enough to block action on measures or matters , not because proponents lack majority support but because the 60-vote threshold is beyond reach barring , perhaps , various concessions to opposition lawmakers . this summary examination of earlier attempts to alter rule xxii suggests that at least four elements could influence the fate of the constitutional option . they are: the sympathetic support of the presiding officer ; the assistance of the majority leader ; the mobilization of a determined and united majority ; and skillful use of procedural moves and countermoves . needless to say , senate champions of change are essential , as are elections that produce an influx of lawmakers supportive of procedural reform . the senate's cloture rule ( rule xxii ) was revised a number of times between 1917 , when it was first adopted , and 1975 . in 1917 , rule xxii required two - thirds of those present and voting to invoke cloture . subsequently , there were these formal changes to rule xxii during the 1949 to 1975 period ; thereafter , from 1977 to 2013 , other important changes occurred . 1949: ( a ) to invoke cloture , two - thirds of the entire membership , and ( b ) cloture could not be applied to motions to proceed to consider proposals to change senate rules ( though it could , for the first time , be applied to other motions to proceed ) .