in its report on h.r . 2995 , the committee urged fincen to use its expertise in analyzing financial flows and transactions to assist investigations by domestic law enforcement agencies into human trafficking . under the bill , as reported by the senate appropriations committee , fincen would have received $113.0 million in appropriations in fy2016 , or $1 million more than the amount enacted for fy2015 and the same as the budget request . in its report on the bill , the committee encouraged fincen to alert financial institutions subject to the reporting requirements of the bank secrecy act about the growing risk of cybercriminals attempting to launder the proceeds from the theft of online data through the u.s. financial system . to lower the risk , the committee recommended that fincen provide these institutions with a list of indicators of cybercrime that they could refer to when filing suspicious activity reports ( sars ) on the laundering of money tied to cybercrimes . the committee also expressed appreciation for the contributions fincen had made in recent years to interagency efforts to combat human trafficking and slavery . during the 2015 filing season , over 60% of calls to the irs's toll - free telephone taxpayer assistance lines went unanswered ; the average wait time for those who got through was 23 minutes ; and irs assistors were allowed to answer basic tax questions only . audit rates for all individual and business tax returns in fy2014 dropped to their lowest level since fy2005 . and irs's staff involved in enforcement decreased by 7,600 persons ( or 18% ) from fy2010 to fy2014 . at the same time , the irs's work load grew considerably . from fy2010 to fy2015 , the number of individual tax returns filed with the irs rose seven million ( or 5.0% ) . the irs had to take on two new major responsibilities: implementing the aca and fatca . and cases involving identity theft increased 700% from fy2010 to fy2013 . in 2015 , the irs commissioner , the national taxpayer advocate , tigta , and gao issued statements calling for an increase in irs funding . a primary concern was that continued declines in the resources available to the irs would further diminish the effectiveness of taxpayer services , delay or cancel the implementation of critical new business systems , increase levels of tax evasion and identity theft , make the irs more vulnerable to cyberattacks aimed at stealing taxpayer information , and undermine taxpayer confidence in the fairness and efficacy of the federal income tax system . but critics of the irs , including some leaders in the house and senate , argued that the irs needed to demonstrate that it was using available resources as effectively as possible and that it was taking advantage of opportunities for greater program efficiencies and cost savings , before increases in its budget could be considered . they maintained that with careful planning and strategic uses of the hundreds of millions of dollars in user fees the irs collected each year , it should be able to meet its mandated responsibilities and make significant progress in achieving its strategic objectives .