fda continues to implement regulations under fsma . according to fda , during the past five years ( fy2011-fy2015 ) , the agency has received increases to its funding base totaling $162 million for enacted changes to its food safety programs , after accounting for permanent base reductions due to sequestration and other differences from enacted amounts as reported by fda . including enacted increases for other food safety activities , fda's budget authority for food safety and fsma implementation has totaled $168.4 million ( table 2 ) . previously , fda reported that an additional $400 million to $450 million per year above the fy2012 base is needed to fully implement fsma . available fda funding for fsma implementation and other food safety activities has been lower than what fda has said it needs to fully implement the law . fsma also authorized an increase in fda staff , which was expected to reach 5,000 by fy2014 . fda reports actual staffing levels at 3,700 ftes in fy2015 ( table 1 ) . fda officials have continued to claim that without additional funding , as requested by the administration , there will be a significant funding gap for fsma implementation . state agriculture officials and representatives of the national association of state departments of agriculture ( nasda ) have continued to push for full fsma funding so that front - line state officials can prepare for implementation . food industry groups have asked congressional appropriators for increased budget authority for fda to fully implement fsma , at levels requested by the administration , in order to maintain consumer confidence . public health and consumer safety groups , as well as victims of food - borne illness , have also continued to call for additional food safety funding . for fda's food safety activities , including fsma implementation , the enacted fy2016 agriculture appropriation provides for a $104.5 million increase in budget authority , nearly that requested in the administration's budget ( $109.5 million ) . this increase in budget authority is more than double what the house and senate fy2016 committee bills had previously proposed: the house committee bill ( h.r . 3049 ) would have increased funding for fsma by $41.5 million , whereas the senate ( s. 1800 ) would have increased funding by $45.0 million bill . both the house and senate committees had noted that these increases and previous increases provided since fy2011 "should assist the fda in preparation for the implementation of fsma prior to the effective dates of the seven foundational proposed rules. both committee reports specify budgeted amounts for the following program areas: inspection modernization and training ; the national integrated food safety system ; education and technical assistance for industry ; technical staffing and guidance development ; import safety ; and risk analytics and evaluation . the enacted fy2016 appropriations provide $987.3 million for fda's foods program — one of the agency's primary program areas focused on food safety activities . this amount is identical to that requested by the administration ( table 1 ) . fda's foods program covers the agency's food safety activities , as well as certain other food - related programs . its budget in fy2015 accounted for about one - third of the agency's total appropriation .