it was ultimately discontinued in 2010 . following the demise of npoess , noaa and the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) reorganized their next - generation polar - orbiting weather satellite activities to create the jpss program separate from the military weather satellite program . noaa considers suomi - npp , launched in october 2011 , to be the first next - generation polar - orbiting weather satellite in the jpss series . suomi - npp was originally intended to be part of the npoess program and was initially called the npoess preparatory project satellite . it was designed to be a demonstration satellite to evaluate new instruments , spacecraft , and ground data networks that later were to be part of the npoess operational satellites . with the delay and ultimate cancellation of npoess , suomi - npp took on a different mission and is currently used as an operational satellite , providing weather and climate information as part of the jpss program . the life - cycle costs for the two jpss satellites currently under construction , jpss - 1 and jpss - 2 , together with suomi - npp , will total approximately $11.3 billion . a 2013 report issued by a noaa - chartered independent review team ( irt ) stated that the current jpss program is "fragile. the report also noted that the future polar program is demonstrably not "robust. these terms have specific meanings in the report: "the irt believes that the definition of a robust program is that two failures must occur before a gap is created and an option must be available to return to a 'two failure' condition if a failure occurs. conversely , a fragile program is "one spacecraft away from catastrophe. the report elaborates somewhat on these terms and their meaning ; for example , the currently fragile jpss program is also described as a "single string system" in which any number of potential failures could result in a gap with a potential duration of months to years . in contrast , a robust program "requires multiple overlapping spacecraft developed in a manner that allows downstream components and subsystems to be used as spares for the spacecraft being prepared for launch. the irt report concludes that the ultimate objective of its recommendations should be to establish a robust polar weather program consistent with other programs of critical national importance . in one of its findings , the irt report noted that the decision to focus the jpss program on its high - priority weather mission , and to remove instruments that would measure characteristics of the earth's climate rather than its weather , is helpful in minimizing the potential for a data gap . more specifically , the report stated that the jpss program should focus uniquely on four high - priority weather instruments , noting that "this conviction is based upon the belief that nothing should compromise the uninterrupted acquisition of critical jpss weather data. this focus would apply to future polar - orbiting satellites ( i.e.