the fcc was allocated according to statutorily prescribed procedures . the hea authorized appropriations to enable the secretary of education ( the secretary ) to make new fccs to institutional revolving loan funds through fy2014 , and through fy2015 with an automatic one - year extension under the general education provisions act ( gepa ) . in addition , a limited grandfathering provision authorized the appropriation of funds through fy2020 , and through fy2021 under gepa , for fccs to ihes' perkins loan funds for the purpose of making loans to continuing students who were prior perkins loan recipients . although appropriations were last provided for this purpose in fy2004 , ihes continued to make new perkins loans to students from their revolving loan funds . in academic year 2013-2014 , approximately 1,500 ihes disbursed $1.2 billion in new perkins loans to approximately 539,000 students . authorization of appropriations for the secretary to allocate fccs to participating ihes and for ihes to award new perkins loans to students expired on october 1 , 2015 . for approximately two and one - half months thereafter , the operation of the perkins loan program was curtailed and loans could only be made to continuing students . then , on december 18 , 2015 , congress enacted the federal perkins loan program extension act of 2015 ( the extension act ; p.l . it extended the authorization of ihes to make new perkins loans to eligible students through september 30 , 2017 , but prohibited additional appropriations beyond fy2015 for the purpose of making new perkins loans and prohibited an automatic extension of the program under gepa . in addition , the extension act amended several key perkins loan program provisions relating to student eligibility to receive new perkins loans , institutional disclosures required to be made to students borrowing new perkins loans , and the distribution of perkins loan fund assets upon the program's conclusion . this report begins by giving a brief summary of the authorization for the perkins loan program prior to its expiration on september 30 , 2015 . it then provides brief descriptions of the amendments made to the perkins loan program under the extension act . finally , table 1 provides a summary of selected perkins loan program provisions prior to and after the extension act . hea section 461 ( b ) ( 1 ) previously authorized appropriations for the purpose of enabling the secretary to make fccs to ihes for their revolving perkins loan funds through fy2014 . however , gepa section 422 provides that , generally , in the absence of legislation to extend or repeal a program administered by the department of education ( ed ) , the authorization of appropriations , or the duration of a program , is extended for one additional fiscal year beyond its terminal year . the authorized level of appropriations for a program in the additional year shall be the same as that for the terminal year of the program . congress neither extended nor repealed the perkins loan program prior to its expiration on september 30 , 2014 ; thus , the authorization of appropriations for the program was automatically extended for an additional year , through fy2015 .