for others , it is too lax to be effective . does the commission have adequate personnel to carry out enforcement duties ? for example: do prohibitions on sharing information about open enforcement matters limit the potential for filing frivolous complaints for publicity ; do they limit the commission from informing the public about its enforcement activities ; or neither or both ? do the required time frames ( eg , as shown in table 2 ) allow for sufficient consideration by the commission and are they reasonable for respondents ? do those time frames , commission practices , or both or neither affect what is sometimes regarded as long delay in pending enforcement matters ? commissioners are appointed by the president and subject to senate confirmation . the senate most recently confirmed commissioners in 2013 ( the 113 th congress ) , as shown in table 1 . enforcement is important not only for encouraging compliance with law and regulation or correcting non - compliance , but also for what it represents about the state of campaign finance policy overall . for some , the fec's enforcement process is unnecessarily complex and insufficiently transparent . another crs report provides additional detail about the commission . three major enforcement options are at the commission's disposal: ( 1 ) what the agency has termed the "general enforcement process" established in feca ; ( 2 ) the alternative dispute resolution ( adr ) program ; and ( 3 ) the administrative fine program ( afp ) . the first category includes the most complex and sometimes controversial matters that the commission might handle , designated as "matters under review" ( murs ) . they may entail lengthy investigations or audits , protracted negotiations between the commission and h.r . 3487 respondents , substantial civil penalties , or litigation — although the pace can vary depending on individual circumstances . by contrast , matters handled under the afp and adr programs typically are simpler and less controversial . adr cases can involve various issues ; the program is designed to facilitate negotiation that leads to relatively speedy resolution of fairly simple matters . afp cases are limited to straightforward matters involving late filings . a five - year statute of limitations applies to campaign finance enforcement matters . whether observers prefer more vigorous , more limited , or unchanged campaign finance enforcement , there is general consensus that a clear , consistent enforcement process matters . without transparent and consistent enforcement , political actors lack guidance about what they can and cannot do , when , and how . if congress wants to provide more direction surrounding enforcement , it could pursue legislation to clarify those issues on which policy stalemates have occurred . nonetheless , pursuing legislative clarity on controversial issues might not be practically attainable in all circumstances . in addition , legislating individual policy issues would not necessarily address the fact that the commission routinely deadlocks on a variety of issues , which suggests that structural reform could be a more expedient route to curtailing split votes . as such , some contend that more vigorous enforcement of campaign finance law requires restructuring the fec .