this is frequently because it is the easiest to understand . it is where the producer most interacts with data — after it has been collected , analyzed , and turned into a usable form . for example , big data is used to create prescriptive plans that include recommendations on seed and fertilizer application rates , soil analysis , and localized weather reports . other stages in the big data cycle , such as the collection and management of data , can be more complex , and frequently hold the biggest challenges for the agricultural industry . both public and private big data can exist independently of one another ; consequently , they are discussed separately in this report . this was done by design to illustrate an increasingly complicated topic . it does not , however , represent how observers think about big data in the context of agriculture . most see big data in agriculture at the end use point , where farmers use precision tools to potentially create positive results like increased yields , reduced inputs , or greater sustainability . while this is certainly the more intriguing part of the discussion , it is but one aspect and does not necessarily represent a complete picture . big data is a complicated topic , not only from a technological and analytical standpoint , but also from a legal , ethical , and regulatory standpoint . the number of key players continues to grow , as does the list of benefits and challenges . as congress follows the issue a number of questions may arise , including a principal one — what is the federal role ? these should not be considered exhaustive and do not imply endorsement of a named product or company . this report is also limited to the agricultural industry . within the industry , farming and ranching operations use big data in different ways . where possible both are discussed ; however , an increasing focus is placed on the use of big data in the production of crops . this imbalance is not intentional , but rather reflects the availability of resources for this discussion . for the purposes of this report , the term big data will be discussed in two contexts: public and private . public - level big data represent records that are collected , maintained , and analyzed through publicly funded sources , specifically by federal agencies ( eg , farm program participant records , soil survey , and weather data ) . private big data represent records generated at the production level and originate with the farmer or rancher ( eg , yield , soil analysis , irrigation levels , livestock movement , and grazing rates ) . both private and public big data play a key role in the use of technology and analytics that drive a producer's evidence - based decisions . both also present challenges , such as privacy and security , for producers and policymakers . as previously stated , a commonly accepted definition of the term big data does not exist . at first glance , it appears that the term is used to describe a large collection of records . this categorization , however , is generally considered to be an understatement .