section 1 of p.l . 113-198 required cms to continue through cy2014 the instruction to medicare administrative contractors not to enforce medicare's direct supervision requirement for outpatient therapeutic services furnished at cahs and small rural hospitals . section 1 of s. 1461 , which was passed by both the house and senate on december 8 , 2015 , extended the nonenforcement instructions through cy2015 ( december 31 , 2015 ) . current status: the nonenforcement instruction of medicare's direct supervision requirement for outpatient therapeutic services furnished at cahs and small rural hospitals expires after december 31 , 2015 . — social security — and chapter 157 of the u.s.c. — quality , affordable health care for all americans , as created by the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l . current status: appropriated funds to carry out the mfp rebalancing demonstration will no longer be available after september 30 , 2016 . for the most part , states establish their own payment rates for medicaid providers . federal statute requires that these rates be sufficient to enlist enough providers so that covered benefits will be available to medicaid enrollees at least to the same extent they are available to the general population in the same geographic area . most states pay for services on a fee - for - service basis , which means health care providers are paid by the state medicaid program for each service provided to a medicaid enrollee . increasingly , states are using different medicaid payment models , such as capitated payments ( i.e. , fixed per - member , per - month payments ) , shared savings arrangements ( i.e. , providers share in achieved savings ) , and bundled payments ( i.e. , single , preestablished amounts for the set of services ) . aca section 2704 established the demonstration project to evaluate integrated care around a hospitalization to evaluate the use of bundled payments for the provision of integrated care for medicaid enrollees . such payments will be made for episodes of care that include beneficiaries' hospital stays and concurrent physician services . the demonstration project is limited to eight states , and it was to begin on january 1 , 2012 , and last for five calendar years . however , this demonstration was never implemented . current status: this demonstration expires after december 31 , 2016 . expired provisions in the 114 th congress , first session appendix a provides a list of expired health insurance provisions . specifically , it lists medicare , medicaid , state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , and private health insurance programs and activities under chapter 7 of the united states code ( u.s.c .

 ) — social security — and chapter 157 of the u.s.c. — quality , affordable health care for all americans , as created by the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l . 111-148 , as amended ) — where available , that have expired during the 114 th congress , first session ( i.e. , after december 31 , 2014 , and before the date of this report ) .