rules . each committee must adopt rules ; those rules must generally be published in the congressional record not later than march 1 of the first year of each congress . a committee may not meet on any day ( 1 ) after the senate has been in session for two hours , or ( 2 ) after 2 p.m. when the senate is in session . each committee must designate a regular day on which to meet weekly , biweekly , or monthly . ( this requirement does not apply to the appropriations committee. ) a committee is to announce the date , place , and subject of each hearing at least one week in advance , though any committee may waive this requirement for "good cause" ( rule xxvi , paragraph 5 ( a ) ; rule xxvi , paragraph 3 ) . special meeting . three members of a committee may make a written request to the chair to call a special meeting . the chair then has three calendar days in which to schedule the meeting , which is to take place within the next seven calendar days . if the chair fails to do so , a majority of the committee members can file a written motion to hold the meeting at a certain date and hour ( rule xxvi , paragraph 3 ) . open meetings . unless closed for reasons specified in senate rules ( such as a need to protect national security information ) , committee and subcommittee meetings , including hearings , are open to the public . when a committee or subcommittee schedules or cancels a meeting , it is required to provide that information — including the time , place , and purpose of the meeting — for inclusion in the senate's computerized schedule information system . any hearing that is open to the public may also be open to radio and television broadcasting at the committee's discretion . committees and subcommittees may adopt rules to govern how the media may broadcast the event . a vote by the committee in open session is required to close a meeting ( rule xxvi , paragraph 5 ( b ) ) . quorums . committees may set a quorum for doing business so long as it is not less than one - third of the membership . a majority of a committee must be physically present when the committee votes to order the reporting of any measure , matter , or recommendation . agreeing to a motion to order a measure or matter reported requires the support of a majority of the members who are present . proxies cannot be used to constitute a quorum ( rule xxvi paragraph 7 ( a ) ( 1 ) ) . meeting r ecord . all committees must make public a video , transcript , or audio recording of each open hearing of the committee within 21 days of the hearing . these shall be made available to the public "through the internet" ( rule xxvi , paragraph 5 ( 2 ) ( a ) ) . proxy voting . a committee may adopt rules permitting proxy voting .