if so , lenders of what size ? 1210 would require . the key questions that policymakers face in choosing which , if any , of the legislative proposals to support include the following: are borrower and lender incentives sufficiently aligned so that consumers will be adequately protected and loans will be prudently underwritten when the lender keeps the mortgage in portfolio ? is it necessary to limit the portfolio qm option to small lenders because the relationship banking model that they often employ is believed to result in a more accurate assessment of a borrower's ability to repay ? should any type of mortgage held in portfolio — including balloon or interest - only mortgages — be eligible ? should the lender be required to follow certain prescribed underwriting procedures or to document a borrower's financial status ? could an expanded portfolio qm reduce lenders' regulatory burden while ensuring that consumers have sufficient protections ? the answers to these and other questions , which have been explored in this report , may help policymakers in evaluating the legislation . title xiv of the dodd - frank act established the atr requirement . under the atr requirement , a lender must determine based on documented and verified information that , at the time a mortgage loan is made , the borrower has the ability to repay the loan . a lender must consider and verify certain types of information prior to originating a loan , including the applicant's income or assets , credit history , outstanding debts , and other criteria . lenders that fail to comply could be subject to legal liability , such as the payment of certain statutory damages . under the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) rule implementing the atr requirement , a lender can comply with the atr requirement in two ways . first , a lender can originate a mortgage that meets the relatively less prescriptive underwriting standards of the general atr option . under the general atr option , the loan does not need to satisfy specified criteria , but the lender must not make a mortgage "unless the creditor makes a reasonable and good faith determination at or before consummation that the consumer will have a reasonable ability to repay the loan according to its terms. second , a lender could originate a mortgage that satisfies the more prescriptive standards of the qm rule . a qm is more prescriptive than the general atr option in the sense that , to receive qm status , the mortgage must satisfy specific underwriting and product - feature requirements and document compliance with the requirements . when a lender originates a mortgage that receives qm status , it is presumed to have complied with the atr requirement , which consequently reduces the lender's potential legal liability of its residential mortgage lending activities . a lender can comply with the atr rule by making a mortgage that is not a qm and instead satisfies the general atr option , but the lender will not receive the additional legal protections . the definition of a qm , therefore , is important to a lender seeking to minimize its legal risk of its residential mortgage lending activities , specifically its compliance with the statutory atr requirement .