appendix a . estimated highway apportionments appendix b . estimated public transportation apportionment . the fahp does not provide money in advance . rather , a state receives bills from private contractors for work completed and pays those bills according to its own procedures . the state submits vouchers for reimbursement to fhwa . the fast act ( ยง9001 ) creates a new national surface transportation and innovative finance bureau within dot to administer federal transportation financing programs , specifically the tifia program , the sib program , the railroad rehabilitation and improvement financing ( rrif ) program , and the allocation of authority to issue private activity bonds for "qualified highway or surface freight transfer facilities" ( 26 u.s.c . the bureau will also be responsible for establishing and promoting best practices for innovative financing and public - private partnerships ( p3s ) , and for providing advice and technical expertise in these areas . the bureau will administer the new discretionary nationally significant freight and highway projects grant program and will have responsibilities related to procurement and project environmental review and permitting . the fast act ( ยง1441 ) also establishes a new regional infrastructure accelerator demonstration program "to assist entities in developing improved infrastructure priorities and financing strategies for the accelerated development of a project that is eligible for funding under the tifia program. the program is designed to make grants to regional infrastructure accelerators that will support and promote innovative financing and public - private partnerships . the fast act authorizes $12 million in fy2016 from the general fund for the program . the public transportation provisions of the fast act are contained in title iii of division a , the federal public transportation act of 2015 , which authorizes federal public transportation programs for fy2016 through fy2020 . subtitle c of the federal - aid highway title includes 18 provisions identified as pertaining to "acceleration of project delivery. as in the two most recent long - run reauthorization acts , the safe accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea ; p.l . 109-59 ) and map - 21 , the provisions primarily involve efforts to expedite surface transportation project delivery by changing how the environmental review process is implemented . for individual highway and transit projects , that process generally involves preparing documentation and analysis necessary to demonstrate that any project - related impacts to the human , natural , or cultural environment are identified ; that the effects of those impacts are taken into consideration among other factors considered during the decisionmaking process ( eg , economic or community benefits ) ; and that any applicable state , tribal , or federal compliance requirements are met .