most of these recommendations were not incorporated into the legislation . funding for safety program is also likely to remain an issue for indian tribes . the tribal coalition proposal argued for increased funding by directing funds from highway safety programs to tribes , such as a 2% set - aside from fhwa's highway safety improvement program ( hsip ) . it also proposed raising the set - aside of section 402 grant funding from 2% to 3.5% . neither proposal was included in the fast act . if these set - asides had been applied to the fy2015 authorization , tribes would have received approximately $8 million extra in direct funding for safety - related projects . the fast act requires two studies by the secretary of transportation pertaining to highway safety on tribal lands: one on the quality of transportation safety data collected on tribal lands and the other on identifying and evaluating "options for improving safety on public roads on indian reservations" ( §1117 ( c ) ( 1 ) ) . although tribes have the option of entering into agreements with either fhwa or bia to oversee transportation projects , bia retains responsibility for bia - owned lands or lands held in trust . this has become an issue in the environmental review of projects pursuant to the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) . fhwa and bia have different requirements for projects that involve similar right - of - way circumstances , and a tribe needs approval from bia on bia - owned or trust land even if the tribe has an agreement with fhwa . in certain situations , bia will require a more resource - intensive environmental assessment when fhwa will process the request as a less resource - intensive categorical exclusion . as the department of transportation inspector general notes the following: bia requires environmental assessments for existing roads if the tribe needs to establish or amend a right - of - way , whereas flh [federal lands highway] grants categorical exclusion in these cases . consequently , bia determinations on the required level of environmental review could reverse flh's decisions regarding nepa requirements . according to flh and tribal officials , bia's requirements for environmental assessments — in cases where flh does not require them — results in unnecessary effort , time , and cost for the tribes . a legislative option would be to require bia to apply dot regulations when implementing nepa . relatedly , there have been proposals to allow tribes the option of assuming nepa responsibilities like the states currently have . it is believed that this might speed the approval of transportation projects . however , a tribe making this election would have to waive sovereign immunity to allow itself to be sued in federal court to carry out the responsibilities of a federal official . part of the problem with rights - of - way in indian country is the complexity of land ownership and rights . additionally , documentation of existing rights - of - way is often poor .