in some cases , these changes have come about in response to changes in law . under article 1 , section 8 of the u.s. constitution , congress has the authority to raise and support armies ; provide and maintain a navy , and to provide for organizing , disciplining , and regulating them . in the past , congress has used this authority to establish criteria and standards for recruiting individuals into the military , promoting them , and separating or retiring them from military service . recent legislative efforts have focused on improving the reporting of demographic diversity data for recruitment , retention and promotion of servicemembers ; developing and improving processes for managing , reporting and responding to harassment and discrimination ; and developing standards for the inclusion of women into new occupations and unit assignments . in recent years , congress and the administration have taken actions to build a more diverse and representative military workforce in parallel with efforts to diversify the federal civilian workforce . today's armed forces are more inclusive and have a higher percentage of women and racial minorities in service and in leadership roles than at any time in history . in section 528 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2016 ( p.l . 114-92 ) , congress reaffirmed a commitment to maintaining a diverse military stating: diversity contributes to the strength of the armed forces... . it is the sense of congress that the united states should — ( 1 ) continue to recognize and promote diversity in the armed forces ; and ( 2 ) honor those from all diverse backgrounds and religious traditions who have made sacrifices in serving the united states through the armed forces . military manpower requirements derive from national military strategy and are determined by the military services based on the workload required to deliver essential capabilities . the 2015 national military strategy highlights the importance of diversity in acquiring those capabilities , stating: to enhance our warfighting capability , we must attract , develop , and retain the right people at every echelon . central to this effort is understanding how society is changing… therefore , the u.s. military must be willing to embrace social and cultural change to better identify , cultivate , and reward such talent . in this regard , dod's pursuit of a diversity management program is one means to broaden the potential pool of high - quality recruits and to retain those individuals who can best fill required roles at every level . dod's definitions of diversity and equal opportunity have changed over time , as have its policies towards inclusion of various demographic groups in military service and occupational assignments . throughout the history of the armed services , congress has established some of these criteria based on demographic characteristics such as race , sex , and sexual orientation . the gradual integration of different demographic groups into the military has continued since the 19 th century ; however , in the past decade there have been rapid changes to laws and policies with regard to diversity , inclusion , and equal opportunity in the armed forces .