this distinction does not depend on aircraft size . some small uas can achieve basic blos capability using a live feed from an onboard camera presented to the operator on a visual display . larger uas operated from dedicated control stations achieve blos capability through similar means , but also often include other sensing capabilities such as moving map displays , airborne radar information , and air traffic collision avoidance systems to enhance operator situational awareness . so far , faa is restricting commercial users and model aircraft operators to vlos operations . the proposed rule for commercial uas would maintain this restriction , a limitation that would rule out many potential uses of uas , such as aerial surveying and inspections and package delivery . furthermore , faa requires that each uas be controlled by a dedicated pilot operating one aircraft at a time , just as occurs with manned aircraft . the bill also would direct faa to expedite processing of exemptions to allow certain beyond - line - of - sight operations , programmatic exemptions based on previous analysis , extended visual - line - of - sight and marginal visual flight rules weather conditions , and heavier uas . the bill also directs faa to establish a joint data collection and analysis program at the william j. hughes technical center in new jersey to analyze test site data , implement an air traffic management pilot program for airspace below 1,200 feet , and create a partnership to test the management of small uas operated at low altitude . a number of other bills addressing privacy and security concerns of domestic uas operations have also been introduced . since multiyear authorization for faa programs and funding under fmra expired at the end of fy2015 , many anticipate congressional deliberations on a new comprehensive faa reauthorization measure during the second session of the 114 th congress . safety , security , and privacy issues regarding domestic uas operations and uas integration are likely to be issues of particular interest in these deliberations . several uas have been spotted over sporting events , and in some instances drones have crashed at public events such as football games and tennis matches . in some of these instances , operators have faced criminal charges in addition to potential faa enforcement action . in addition to safety concerns , uas pose a potential threat to security . small uas can be used by criminals and terrorists for espionage , surveillance , and intelligence gathering at critical government and industrial facilities . criminals are also using unmanned aircraft to smuggle drugs and contraband across u.s. borders and over prison walls and fences . somewhat larger uas could be used to carry out terrorist attacks by serving as platforms to deliver explosives or chemical , biological , radiological , or nuclear weapons . chemical and biological agents pose a particular concern , as uas used for aerial pesticide applications could readily serve as platforms to carry out attacks . small uas could similarly be used to disperse small amounts of certain agents that may be lethal in minute quantities . even a hoax attack — for example , releasing a powdery substance and making false claims that it contains anthrax virus — could cause widespread panic .