this provision only applies to the central states plan . central states has indicated that it is likely to become insolvent by 2026 . mpra allows certain multiemployer plans that are expected to become insolvent to apply to treasury for authorization to reduce benefits to participants in the plan , if the benefit reductions can restore the plan to solvency . mpra requires the treasury to accept the plan sponsor's determinations with respect to the criteria for the benefit suspensions and may reject the application [only] if the plan sponsor's determinations were "clearly erroneous. if pbgc were to exhaust the funds in the revolving fund , pbgc would be able to provide financial assistance equal only to the amount of premium revenue . if a large plan such as central states were to become insolvent , pbgc would only be able to pay financial assistance equal to the amount of its premium revenue . participants in multiemployer plans that receive financial assistance from pbgc would not receive 100% of their promised benefits . in the event of pbgc's insolvency , financial assistance from treasury is not assured . erisa states that "the united states is not liable for any obligation or liability incurred by the corporation. as shown in table 1 , central states paid $2.8 billion in benefits in 2014 . if pbgc were required to provide financial assistance to the central states plan , it is likely that pbgc would quickly become insolvent . the reductions may include both active participants ( eg , those still working ) and those in pay status ( eg , those who are retired and receiving benefits from the plan ) . the coalition of multiemployer pension plan stakeholders that formulated the proposal to reduce participants' benefits assumed that congress would not authorize financial assistance for pbgc . table 2 summarizes the financial position of pbgc's multiemployer program . the value of pbgc's expected future assistance to central states is included as a liability for pbgc . under mpra , only plans in critical and declining status may cut benefits . one criterion for a plan to be in critical status is that the plan's funding ratio must be less than 65% . a plan is in declining status if the plan actuary projects the plan will become insolvent within the current year or , depending on certain circumstances as specified in mpra , within either the next 14 or 19 years . mpra requires that plans demonstrate that benefit reductions are distributed equitably . it lists a number of factors that plans may , but are not required to , consider . these factors include the age and life expectancy of the participant ; the length of time an individual has been receiving benefits ; the type of benefit ( such as early retirement , normal retirement , or survivor benefit ) ; years to retirement for active employees ; and the extent to which participants are reasonably likely to withdraw support for the plan , which could cause employers to withdraw from the plan . mpra requires that benefit reductions be made only to the extent that the plan will be restored to solvency .