we must do it . and it will be painful because we will have to make hard choices. — general mark welsh , chief of staff , u.s. air force we can't – particularly with $17 billion less in 2017 – we're not going to be able to do it all . — deborah lee james , secretary of the air force the u.s. air force is in the midst of an ambitious modernization program , driven primarily by the age of its curren t aircraft fleets . it has undertaken three major programs , repeatedly declared to be the service's top procurement priorities: the f - 35a strike fighter , to replace several aircraft types whose designs date from the 1970s ; the kc - 46a tanker , to replace kc - 135s designed in the 1950s ; the long - range strike bomber ( lrs - b ) , initially to replace b - 52s and b - 1s , whose designs date from the 1950s and 1970s , respectively . in addition , the air force continues to procure variants of the c - 130 cargo aircraft and a relatively small number of remotely piloted aircraft systems ( rpa , as the air force refers to unmanned aerial systems ) . this has the effect of flattening all spending , as programs that might otherwise grow are constrained , extended , and / or delayed ( "moved right," in budget parlance ) to keep the modernization accounts under their caps . it is not unreasonable to hypothesize that absent the caps , the program budgets might show greater growth . figure 1 and figure 2 both show an increase in fy2018 and fy2019 , then a drop for fy2020 . also , the increases for fy2018 and fy2019 do not appear very large in figure 1 . if an air force modernization bow wave exists , why doesn't it show more vividly on the charts ? in response , one could note that some of those programs , like t - x and crh , have been delayed from when they were initially required , leading to additional costs to keep the older aircraft that would otherwise have been replaced operating past their designed service lives . there are three reasons . two are substantive ; one is purely graphical . first , because the fydp includes only six years' data ( the year currently executed , the requested year , and the following four years ) , the effects of the bow wave are difficult to portray , as the highest development and procurement costs of the new starts and lrs - b would take place after fy2020 . what is seen in figure 1 and figure 2 can be considered the seeds of the challenge , with the full effects coming in the years beyond the chart . second , the air force has been managing its current programs to remain under its topline budget cap .