this report addresses eligibility for social security spousal benefits for individuals in a same - sex marriage . the dates are considered , for example , when establishing whether a same - sex marriage is valid and the duration - of - marriage requirement is met for purposes of determining entitlement to social security benefits . in some cases , the specified dates are consistent with the recent supreme court decisions affecting social security eligibility for same - sex couples: united states v. windsor ( june 26 , 2013 ) and obergefell v. hodges ( june 26 , 2015 ) . table a - 1 summarizes the different types of social security benefits payable to eligible family members based on a worker's record , including basic eligibility requirements and basic benefit amounts before any applicable adjustments . benefits payable to family members may be subject to adjustments for a variety of reasons . according to the court , federal statutes that refer to a marriage for federal purposes should be interpreted as applying equally to legally married same - sex couples . the court did not address section 2 of doma , which allows individual states to refuse recognition of same - sex marriages . in response to the windsor decision , ssa started processing social security ( oasdi ) applications for some claimants in same - sex marriages . because eligibility for spousal social security benefits depends on the applicant meeting the relationship requirement to the number holder , as outlined in 216 ( h ) , some but not all applicants in a same - sex marriage were eligible for these benefits during the period between the windsor and obergefell decisions . as discussed in the previous section , the social security act's section 216 ( h ) states that when determining family relationship for purposes of a person's application for benefits as a spouse or surviving spouse , ssa looks to the laws of the state — as interpreted by the courts of that state — where the number holder is domiciled at the time of the application , or at the time of the number holder's death . thus , in order for ssa to have recognized a same - sex couple as married during this period of time , the couple must have had a valid marriage and the number holder must have been domiciled in a state that recognized such marriage at the time of the application . for example , an applicant in a same - sex marriage was eligible for spousal benefits if the couple married and lived in a state that recognized same - sex marriage . however , an applicant in a same - sex marriage was not eligible for spousal benefits if the couple legally married in one state and then , at the time the applicant filed the application , the number holder moved to another state that did not recognize same - sex marriage . the agency indicates that new information regarding implementation of the obergefell decision will be posted to its website as it becomes available .