, not confirmed ) . of the 56 district court nominations that received final senate action during the final year of the clinton presidency , 38 were first submitted to the senate during his final year ( 2000 ) . the statistics account only for nominations made to u.s. circuit and district court judgeships . this report does not analyze or take a position on the number or percentage of judicial nominations that would be appropriate for the senate to approve during the final year of a presidency . the statistics provided in this report were generated from an internal crs judicial nominations database . the statistics reported in table 4 show final senate action ( i.e. , the final disposition ) on all u.s. district court nominations that were pending before the senate , either in committee or on the executive calendar , during a president's eighth year in office . of the three most recent presidents with a full eighth year in office , the number of u.s. district court nominees confirmed during the eighth year ranged from a low of 24 ( in 2008 , during the george w. bush presidency ) to a high of 33 ( in 1988 , during the reagan presidency ) . the number of nominations not approved by the senate and returned at the end of a president's eighth year in office ranged from a low of 12 during the reagan presidency to a high of 25 ( in 2000 , during the clinton presidency ) . in contrast to final senate action on circuit court nominations , a majority of district court nominations that received final action during each president's eighth year in office were confirmed by the senate ( rather than returned ) . specifically , as shown by table 4 , at least 50.0% of all district court nominations on which the senate acted during a president's eighth year in office were confirmed — specifically , 54.5% , 55.4% , and 73.3% were confirmed during the eighth year of the george w. bush , clinton , and reagan presidencies , respectively . consequently , fewer than half of the district court nominations that were pending before the senate during each president's final year in office were not approved by the senate — 45.5% , 44.6% , and 26.7% were returned during the eighth year of the george w. bush , clinton , and reagan presidencies , respectively . also in contrast to u.s. circuit court nominations , a majority of new district court nominations made for the first time during each president's eighth year were confirmed by the senate . of the 44 district court nominations that received final senate action during the final year of the george w. bush presidency ( as reported in table 4 ) , 26 were first submitted to the senate in 2008 , his final year in office . of the 26 , 15 ( 57.7% ) were confirmed and 11 ( 42.3% ) were returned ( i.e. of the 38 , 24 ( 63.2% ) were confirmed and 14 ( 36.8% ) were returned .