these changes are still in effect . 3010 to the committee on appropriations . the other type of motion to recommit , offered much more frequently , includes instructions and must contain language directing that the legislation be reported "forthwith," meaning that if the house adopts such a motion , the measure remains on the house floor , and the committee chair ( or designee ) immediately rises and reports the bill back to the house with any amendment ( s ) contained in the instructions of the recommittal motion . the house votes on agreeing to the amendment ( s ) before moving to final passage of the bill as it may have been amended . typically , if the motion to recommit has been agreed to , the amendment in the instructions is agreed to by voice vote . however , amendment ( s ) in the instructions are subject to division of the question if it consists of two or more separable substantive propositions . when a motion to recommit with instructions is offered , the clerk will report it in the following form: mr. scott of virginia moves to recommit the bill h.r . 10 to the committee on oversight and government reform with instructions to report the same back to the house forthwith with the following amendment: add at the end of section 6 the following new subsection: ( f ) requiring protection of students and applicants under civil rights laws. — section 3008 ( sec . 38-1853.08 , d.c. official code ) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: " ( i ) requiring protection of students and applicants under civil rights laws. — in addition to meeting the requirements of subsection ( a ) , an eligible entity or a school may not participate in the opportunity scholarship program under this act unless the eligible entity or school certifies to the secretary that the eligible entity or school will provide each student who applies for or receives an opportunity scholarship under this act with all of the applicable protections available under each of the following laws:" ( 1 ) title iv of the civil rights act of 1964 ( 42 u.s.c . 2000c et seq. ) both types of motions to recommit are debatable for 10 minutes . the majority floor manager of a bill or joint resolution may ask that debate time be extended to one hour . in either case , debate time is equally divided between the member making the motion and a member opposing it . instructions in a motion to recommit generally may not propose to do that which may not be done by amendment under the rules of the house . for example , instructions that do any of the following would be out of order: propose an amendment that is not germane to the measure . amend or eliminate an amendment already adopted by the house , unless permitted by a special rule . an ad hoc committee like this has no permanence and is not required to meet . such motions to commit are frequently used in conjunction with the house rules package on the opening day of congress , before standing committees have been established .