pay data were then collected for the remaining 13 positions . in order to be included , annual pay data for each position needed to be available from at least five committees ( four for minority positions ) . titles were identified through a two - step process . the first step identified 302 job titles used in senate committees in fy2014 . tables in this section provide background information on senate pay practices , comparative data for each position , and detailed data and visualizations for each position . in the second step , the remaining 25 titles were assessed to determine how many of the 20 senate committees for which data were available employed staff with each title . twelve position titles that were used by six or fewer panels ( five for minority positions ) were excluded . when committees had more than one staff member with the same job title , data for no more than two staff per committee were collected . senate committee staff had to hold a position with the same job title in the same committee for the entire fiscal year examined , and not receive pay from any other congressional employing authority for their data to be included . every recorded payment ascribed in the legistorm data to those staff for the fiscal year is tabulated . data collected for this report may differ from an employee's stated annual salary due to the inclusion of overtime , bonuses , or other payments in addition to base salary paid in the course of a year . pay data for staff working in house committee offices are available in crs report r44322 , staff pay levels for selected positions in house committees , 2001-2014 . data describing the pay of congressional staff working in the personal offices of senators and members of the house are available in crs report r44324 , staff pay levels for selected positions in senators' offices , fy2001-fy2014 , and crs report r44323 , staff pay levels for selected positions in house member offices , 2001-2014 , respectively . data presented here are subject to some challenges that could affect findings presented or their interpretation . some of the concerns include the following: given the large number of positions with titles held by one senate employee , data provided here almost certainly do not represent all of the jobs carried out by senate committee staff . the manner in which staff titles are assigned might have implications about the representativeness of the data provided . of positions for which data were collected , two broad categories emerge . the first category identifies position titles that usually apply to one staff member per committee . since almost all available data were collected for those positions , pay information provided is likely to be highly representative of what senate committees pay staff in those positions .