it has four mission directorates . the science mission directorate manages robotic science missions , such as the hubble space telescope , the mars rover curiosity , and satellites for earth science research . the aeronautics research mission directorate conducts research and development on aircraft and aviation systems . the space technology mission directorate develops new technologies for use in future space missions , such as advanced propulsion and laser communications . the human exploration and operations mission directorate is responsible for human spaceflight activities , including the international space station and development efforts for future crewed spacecraft . in addition , nasa's office of education manages formal and informal education programs for school children , college and university students , and the general public . while congress is generally supportive of most nasa programs , government - wide fiscal constraints make funding decisions challenging . the discretionary portion of the fy2017 request , $18.262 billion , would be 5.3% less than the fy2016 appropriation . the house and senate bills include no mandatory funding . this report presents an overview and selected highlights of nasa's proposed fy2017 budget and the fy2017 appropriations legislation reported by the house committee on appropriations ( h.r . acceleration of the launch to 2022 is not recommended , given potential impacts to the rest of the science portfolio. the house report recommends at least $260 million for europa orbiter and lander missions , with the orbiter launch no later than 2022 and the lander launch no later than 2024 . the senate report calls for "an expeditious launch and reduced travel time" in order to maximize the scientific return of a europa mission , but it does not specify a funding level or a launch date . it directs nasa to provide a report on options for the mission "to assist the committee in evaluating potential mission configurations. the fy2017 request for the aeronautics research mission directorate is $790 million , an increase of 23.5% from fy2016 . the request includes new aviation horizons ( nah ) , a new initiative of experimental aircraft and systems demonstrations . nah projects on subsonic aircraft would receive $100 million in mandatory funding from the president's proposed 21 st century clean transportation plan . an additional $56 million in mandatory funding would fund a low - boom supersonic flight demonstrator . as shown in table 1 , the house bill would provide $78 million less than the request for aeronautics , while the senate bill would provide $189 million less . the house committee's recommendation includes $61 million ( of discretionary funds ) for a low - boom flight demonstrator . the house and senate committee reports both direct nasa to work with the federal aviation administration on research related to the integration of unmanned aerial systems in the national airspace system . the fy2017 request for the space technology mission directorate is $827 million , an increase of 20.4% from fy2016 . space technology was first established as a separate account in fy2011 . each year since then , the administration has proposed to increase space technology funding . congress has provided increases each year except fy2014 , but always less than the administration's request .