this is not so for medicaid . actual medicaid spending for a family is determined by the amount and type of medical services it consumes . moreover , the medical services consumed by a family are related to the health of family members . medicaid is also paid to the provider of services . how does this translate in terms of dollars received ? in 2012 , the annual median benefit to families who received at least one need - tested benefit was estimated to be $3,300 ( i.e. , half the families who received at least $1 in aid received an amount less than or equal to $3,300 , the other half received more than $3,300 ) . however , the median does not necessarily reflect the circumstances of most families receiving need - tested aid . figure 7 shows the estimated number of families receiving selected need - tested benefits by the total dollar amount of annual benefits received from all programs in 2012 . the figure shows that many families received a relatively small benefit during the year — more than 10 million families received less than $1,000 in benefits . this represents about 1 in 4 families that received need - tested benefits . as noted above , half of all families received less than $3,300 during the year . relatively few families received large benefits . the figure shows that as the annual benefit amount per family increased , the number of families receiving benefits decreased . the distribution of annual benefits among families in 2012 is what is known as a "skewed" distribution . it is asymmetrical , with many families bunched at one end of the distribution — in this case at the lower dollar amounts . however , a few families tend to receive high benefit amounts . a characteristic of this skewed distribution is that the relatively few families that receive high annual need - tested benefit amounts account for a disproportionately large share of all spending . for the purposes of this report , the benefit total received by the 25% of families that received the highest amounts — $9,027 or more in 2012 — is used as the high benefit amount concentrated among relatively few families . figure 8 examines total spending for the selected need - tested programs by the amount of annual benefits received by families . it shows that 11% of all spending on the selected need - tested benefits was for families with annual benefits of less than $3,300 ( the median ) . this means that the 50% of all families with annual benefits less than $3,300 accounted for 11% of all spending . on the other hand , families with annual benefits of $9,027 or more accounted for 64% of all spending . an earlier section of this report ( " how many people are eligible for need - tested benefits , and how many actually receive them ? " discussed the extent to which individuals received benefits from any and each of the need - tested programs examined in this report . of additional interest is the extent to which benefits were received from one program only or from more than one .