pay data were then collected for the remaining 17 positions . in order to be included , annual pay data for staff in each position needed to be available from at least five committees ( four for minority positions ) . this eliminated another 6 positions , leaving 11 . when committees had more than one staff member with the same job title , data for no more than two staff per committee were collected . table 2 provides the maximum payable rates for house committee staff since 2001 in both nominal ( current ) and constant 2016 dollars . constant dollar calculations throughout the report are based on the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) , various years , expressed in 2016 dollars . table 3 provides the available cumulative percentage changes in pay in constant 2016 dollars for each of the 11 positions , members of congress , and federal civilian workers paid under the general schedule in washington , dc , and surrounding areas . table 4 - table 14 provide tabular pay data for each house committee staff position . the first step identified 358 job titles used in house committees in 2014 . of those titles , 282 , or 78.8% , were filled by only one staff member , and were excluded . in the second step , the remaining 76 titles were assessed to determine how many of the house committees for which data were available employed staff with each title . fifty - nine position titles that were used by six or fewer panels ( five for minority positions ) were excluded . house committee staff had to hold a position with the same job title in the same committee for the entire year examined , and not receive pay from any other congressional employing authority for their data to be included . every recorded payment ascribed in the legistorm data to those staff for the fiscal year is tabulated . data collected for this report may differ from an employee's stated annual salary due to the inclusion of overtime , bonuses , or other payments in addition to base salary paid in the course of a year . pay data for staff working in senate committee offices are available in crs report r44325 , staff pay levels for selected positions in senate committees , fy2001-fy2014 . data describing the pay of congressional staff working in the personal offices of senators and members of the house are available in crs report r44324 , staff pay levels for selected positions in senators' offices , fy2001-fy2014 , and crs report r44323 , staff pay levels for selected positions in house member offices , 2001-2014 , respectively . data presented here are subject to some challenges that could affect findings presented or their interpretation . some of the concerns include the following: given the large number of positions with titles held by one house employee , data provided here almost certainly do not represent all of the jobs carried out by house committee staff . the manner in which staff titles are assigned might have implications about the representativeness of the data provided . of positions for which data were collected , two broad categories emerge .