reporting requirement . as mentioned previously , p.l . 114-113 require gao to submit a report to congress describing the status of identifying , coding , and evaluating critical needs of cybersecurity positions at dhs and executive branch agencies . laws aiming to define and identify the workforce mandate the use of these initiatives . two laws include provisions that aim to define and identify federal cybersecurity positions: 1 . opm could be required to notify appropriate congressional committees on the status of the cybersecurity dataset , including when the dataset is completed and released to the public on opm's online workforce data portal . in exercising its oversight authority , congress may require these notifications to occur annually , semi - annually , quarterly , or on any other standard timeline . opm could also be required to brief appropriate congressional committees on the structure and functions of the dataset upon its release . this could include ( but not be limited to ) the data it presents , how the data can be used to generate a government - wide count of the cybersecurity workforce , how it will be kept up to date , and anticipated enhancements and adjustments to be made . the laws do not , however , explicitly require gao to evaluate opm's dataset . in its oversight capacity , congress could additionally direct gao to study the operation and effectiveness of the opm cybersecurity dataset one year after it becomes operational . all federal agencies have responsibilities for protecting their individual systems and networks under federal law . some agencies , such as dhs and dod , possess broader cybersecurity roles compared to other agencies . dhs has responsibility for protecting unclassified federal civilian systems and networks and assisting agencies in responding to cyber threats and attacks . dhs is also the lead agency for coordinating with the private sector to protect critical cyber infrastructure assets . dod is responsible for defending the nation against cyberattacks of "significant consequence," as well as conducting military operations in cyberspace . dod is also responsible for assisting dhs in fulfilling its government - wide cybersecurity roles . the federal cybersecurity workforce plays an integral role in maintaining and improving the government's cybersecurity . cybersecurity professionals are responsible for designing and building secure information networks and systems , identifying and addressing vulnerabilities within those networks and systems , and collecting and analyzing data necessary to respond to cyberattacks efficiently and effectively , among other things . federal stakeholders and researchers have stated that robust federal cybersecurity is not possible without cybersecurity professionals . developing and maintaining a robust federal cybersecurity workforce , however , has been an ongoing challenge . the chief human capital officers council working group found skills gaps in cybersecurity positions ( and other positions ) government - wide , which prompted the obama administration to create a cross - agency priority ( cap ) to reduce those gaps by half by the end of fy2013 . according to a january 2015 gao report , however , efforts to close these cybersecurity gaps were at an "early stage of maturity.