federal grants are available for a variety of purposes . federally funded grant projects may include purchasing fire and police equipment , constructing housing for low - income populations , providing disaster recovery assistance and other social services , and funding educational activities . organizations generally coordinate the application and administration of federal grants , and individuals are beneficiaries of the grant projects and services provided by organizations . organizations seeking federal grant funds are required to register in federal grant systems prior to applying for federal grants . once grant funds are awarded , recipients are required to report information to federal agencies regarding the use of the federal grant funds . the information provided to the federal government by federal grant recipients is contained in several different federal databases . there are currently over 2,321 congressionally authorized federal assistance programs . the growing number , perceived fragmentation , and complexity of these programs create challenges for federal agencies and congressional stakeholders in standardizing various financial and administrative aspects of federal grant program management . federal agencies administering grant programs face challenges in providing timely , accurate , and detailed information on federal grant awards . this can be attributed , in part , to the way grant funds are distributed from the federal to the local level . this may also be attributed to the limitations of the databases used to track the distribution of federal grant funds . these limitations include questions regarding the validity of the data , and the limited ability to track the distribution of grant funds to the subgrant recipient level . before a federal grant is awarded , officials seeking federal grants for their organization are required by law to obtain a unique identifier assigned and maintained by dun and bradstreet ( d&b ) . this unique identifier is known as a data universal numbering system ( duns ) number . federal agencies use the duns number to identify federal grant applicants . once a grant seeker obtains a duns number , the organization must register in the system for award management ( sam ) in order to be eligible to apply for federal grants . federal agencies use sam to collect additional information on potential federal grant recipients . each federal grant award is assigned a number that is then associated with the grant recipient . federal agencies use the award number to track grant data in agency grant management and financial management systems . when congress authorizes a federal grant program , the federal agency administering the grant program reports grant program information to the catalog of federal domestic assistance ( cfda ) . after a federal grant award is made , the federal agency that made the award collects information about the grant recipient and the grant project . of the above reporting requirements for federal grant applicants , two databases allow opting out of providing publically searchable information: the dun and bradstreet ( d&b ) duns number database and sam . the information provided in a federal grant application is inputted by the federal agency into the grant management system within the agency and a unique grant award number is created .