co . relying on the all writs act , the court in new york tel . co . upheld an order directing the new york telephone company to assist the government in installing a pen register — a device for recording the outgoing numbers dialed on a telephone — for which it already obtained a probable cause warrant to do so . the court observed that the act extends "to persons who , though not parties to the original action or engaged in any wrongdoing , are in a position to frustrate the implementation of the order or the proper administration of justice. while the court accepted that the all writs act can apply to third parties , it observed that "unreasonable burdens may not be imposed. to determine the reasonableness of the order in that case , the court assessed a seemingly non - exhaustive list of factors , including ( 1 ) the company was not "so far removed from the underlying controversy" to avoid compliance ; ( 2 ) the order required only "meager assistance" from the company ; ( 3 ) the telephone company was a "highly regulated public utility with a duty to serve the public" ; ( 4 ) the company had not proffered a "substantial interest in not providing assistance" ; the use of the pen register was not "offensive" to the company ; ( 5 ) the company regularly employed such devices for billing purposes: ( 6 ) the company had previously promised to provide the fbi instructions on how to install its own pen register ; ( 7 ) the order was in no way "burdensome" ; ( 8 ) the order provided the company be fully reimbursed for its efforts ; ( 9 ) compliance with the order required "minimal effort" by the company ; and ( 10 ) there were "no disruptions to its operations. additionally , the court observed that the order was "consistent with the intent of congress. as noted by one commentator , although the court established a list of factors to consider , it is not clear , among other things , how much weight should be given to each factor , or how these factors might apply to future cases , like the request before the central district of california . in recent years , courts have been required to apply the all writs act and the n ew york tel . co. factors to requests by the government to access data stored on various locked electronic devices . for instance , in an unreported 2014 ruling , the southern district of new york ( s.d.n.y. ) what burden might this place on apple and other companies going forward ? read new york tel . co. and subsequent lower court case law to require an unnamed company to unlock a smart phone . however , in a pending case in the eastern district of new york , a magistrate judge issued a preliminary ruling in october 2015 rejecting the government's request to unlock an iphone 5c running an earlier version of ios .