acronym . should the curriculum be expanded ? does the curriculum provide the right mix of tactical v. technical skills needed to serve in joint billets ? questions about how jpme is delivered: what is the appropriate mix of students ( eg , military - civilian , branch of service , officer - enlisted , foreign military / civilians ) ? can jpme be adequately provided in a non - resident setting ? jsou was established as a satellite program of the jfsc . section 552 of the fy2012 ndaa also authorized credit for completion of jpme i at the national defense intelligence college ( now known as the national intelligence university ) . the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2015 amended 10 u.s.c . ยง2154 to authorize senior level service courses of at least 10 months to meet the requirements of jpme ii if designated and certified by the secretary of defense . previous law required jpme to be taught in residence at the joint forces staff college or senior level service schools . this legislation appears to provide more flexibility to dod in how jpme ii coursework is completed . while there have been few substantial changes to jpme in recent years , some within dod and congress have raised concerns about the state of joint education . secretary of defense ashton carter announced in december 2015 that the department of defense ( dod ) would be launching a review of the department's structure and efficiency in the context of the gna reforms . a dod memorandum dated january 4 , 2016 , outlined the key questions that would be addressed in this review . with respect to the joint officer management system , dod plans to consider , do current law and policy governing joint duty qualifications provide the right human capital development to meet our joint warfighting requirements ? are there adjustments that can be made to balance the often competing demands of joint professional development and other specialized expertise or other career development considerations ? a spokesman for dod indicated that this review might result in internal policy changes and / or legislative proposals . other questions that have been raised by those in the defense community include questions about faculty and staff at institutions certified to provide jpme: are faculty knowledgeable and do they have the appropriate qualifications ? is there an appropriate mix of civilian and military faculty ? is faculty compensation appropriate ? are the students - to - faculty and administrator - to - faculty ratios appropriate ? questions about the adequacy of jpme curricula in providing necessary knowledge and skills: does the curriculum adequately deliver desired leader attributes ? is there adequate coordination between jpme - granting institutions ? could jpme credit be earned at additional degree - granting institutions ( eg , additional service schools or civilian institutions ) ? questions about the role of jpme in terms of career management and officer development: what should the appropriate balance be between service - centric pme and jpme ? should completion of jpme continue to be tied to officer promotion ? what should the jpme requirements be for reserve component ( rc ) members ?