few markets , if any , achieve all of these characteristics . there are also situations where a tax , or subsidy , can improve economic efficiency , by correcting for a market failure . taxes distort these decisions by interfering with prices . the european union even requires its member countries to implement a vat . many of these countries also include personal and corporate income taxes alongside their vats . multiple proposals have been introduced in the 114 th congress to shift revenue collection away from income and toward consumption . 25 and its companion legislation in the senate , s. 155 , would replace the income tax with a national retail sales tax , often referred to as a "fair tax. 1040 would offer taxpayers the ability to opt into a consumed - income tax . this report will provide a survey of consumption taxes and their basic structures , including the vat , the nst , and the consumed - income tax ( also known as a cash - flow tax ) . after an overview of these tax structures , the report will discuss the effects of consumption taxes on economic efficiency , the distribution of the tax burden , and tax administration . in order to provide goods and services , a government must raise revenue . generally there are three tax bases from which governments can raise this revenue directly from individuals: income , wages , and consumption . the united states implements taxes on all three of these bases . the first tax base , income , includes all income from both labor and capital ( eg , wages and interest on investments ) . in the united states , income is taxed through a federal income tax , which applies differential tax rates on income from labor and capital . the second tax base , wages , includes all income that results from labor . the payroll tax , which in part funds the social security program , is a type of wage tax . the third tax base , consumption , includes all money spent on goods and services . a number of narrow consumption taxes exist at the federal level , such as the gasoline excise tax . broader consumption taxes are popular at the state level in the form of sales taxes . state sales taxes are a commonplace consumption tax in the united states . there are differences , however , across states regarding the base to which state sales taxes are applied . for example , many state sales taxes exempt certain necessities from their sales tax base , such as certain medicines under virginia's state sales tax . a broad and comprehensive consumption tax could be applied to all money spent on goods and services for final consumption . examples of broader consumption taxes can be found in europe , where many countries implement national - level consumption taxes referred to as value added taxes ( vats ) . these taxes generally do not have as many exemptions as consumption taxes in the united states , and therefore have a broader tax base . a broader tax base , other things equal , allows more revenue to be collected with lower tax rates .