senators set the terms and conditions of employment for staff in their offices . this includes job titles and descriptions , rates of pay , subject to minimum and maximum levels , and resources available to them to carry out their official duties . there may be interest in congressional pay data from multiple perspectives , including assessment of the costs of congressional operations , guidance in setting pay levels for staff in member offices , or comparison of congressional staff pay levels with those of other federal government pay systems . publicly available information sources do not provide aggregated congressional staff pay data in a readily retrievable form . the most recent publicly available senate staff compensation report was issued in 2006 , and relied on anonymous , self - reported survey data . data in this report are based on official senate reports , which afford the opportunity to use consistently collected data from a consistent source . pay information in this report is based on the senate's report of the secretary of the senate , published semiannually , in periods from april 1 to september 30 , and october 1 to march 31 , as collated by legistorm , a private entity that provides some congressional data by subscription . additionally , this report provides annual data , which allows for observations about the nature of senators' personal staff compensation over time . this report provides pay data for 16 staff position titles that are typically used in senators' offices . the positions include the following: administrative director casework supervisor caseworker chief of staff communications director counsel executive assistant field representative legislative assistant legislative correspondent legislative director press secretary scheduler "specials director," a combined category that includes the job titles director of projects , director of special projects , director of federal projects , director of grants , projects director , or grants director staff assistant state director senators' staff pay data for fy2001-fy2015 were derived from a random sampling of senators' offices in which at least one staff member worked in a position in each year . for each fiscal year , fy2001-fy2015 , a random sample of 25 senators' offices was taken for each position . in order to be included , senate staff had to hold a position with the same job title in the senator's office for the entire fiscal year examined , and not receive pay from any other congressional employing authority . for some positions , it was not possible to identify 25 offices that employed staff for an entire year . in circumstances when data for 14 or fewer staff were identified for a position , this report provides no data . every recorded payment ascribed in the legistorm data to those staff for the fiscal year is included . data collected for this report may differ from an employee's stated annual salary due to the inclusion of overtime , bonuses , or other payments in addition to base salary paid in the course of a year . generally , each position has no more than one observation per senator's office each fiscal year .