to what extent can such capability be effectively contracted out ? many analysts argue that a prerequisite for effectively using data throughout an organization is having a culture that not only values using data to drive decisions , but also integrates data gathering and analysis into the very fabric of an organization , making it part of standard routines and operating procedures . congress could consider legislation as a path to promote the use of data to inform decisions . in considering legislation , congress may wish to examine: to what extent does dod have the right culture to foster the use of data in decisionmaking ? to what extent do the incentives within dod promote , or inhibit , the use of data ? what steps can be taken to incorporate data gathering and analysis into the routine processes of dod ? the result is not just greater inefficiency and wasted resources . it also harms the effectiveness of the department of defense , and , thus , our national security . the result of these shortfalls in information , as secretary gates has explained , is that department leaders and their overseers in congress cannot measure the results of our national security policies , or make judgments about priorities for our military , or accurately assess the tradeoffs involved in different courses of action . the extent to which dod is successful in promoting the use of data to inform decisionmaking will depend , in part , on congressional action . congress could choose to allocate resources to support building the systems and workforce necessary to gather and analyze data . congress could also pass legislation to influence the decisionmaking process within dod , as it did when it passed the weapons system acquisition reform act of 2009 . answering the following questions could help congress determine further actions to take in its efforts to improve defense acquisitions . a prerequisite for conducting effective data analysis is having the appropriate information systems and the qualified personnel needed to conduct effective and sophisticated analysis . congress may want to consider whether or not to commit resources to build analytical capability , such as investing in it systems , or increasing the capacity of the offices within dod , including the cost analysis and program evaluation or the service acquisition executives within each service , or other relevant offices . in considering how to allocate resources , congress may wish to examine: to what extent does dod have a clear strategy for understanding what data it needs , and how to deploy the right technology architecture and capabilities ? here is how former secretary of defense robert gates described the dilemma . he said , quote , "my staff and i have learned that it was nearly impossible to get accurate information and answers to questions , such as , 'how much money did you spend ? to what extent does dod have a strategy for hiring qualified personnel to conduct data analysis ? to what extent does dod have a clear strategy for how to use data analytics to improve acquisitions and business operations ? and , 'how many people do you have ? '