the fda promulgates standards of identity for food through the rulemaking process . the participants of the hearing may present documentary evidence and oral testimony and have the ability to cross - examine the witnesses . following the hearing , the final stage of the process involves the agency issuing a tentative order , including detailed findings of fact and conclusions upon which the order is based . any party of record may object to this proposed order and request an oral argument before the fda . the fda then publishes the final order setting forth the standard of identity . the fda enforces standards of identity through the misbranding provision in the ffdca ( section 403 ) . once the agency deems a food to be misbranded under this provision , then the agency can exercise various enforcement options against the manufacturer or other industry representatives . while congress has not amended the fda's legal authority to create standards of identity , congress has introduced legislation in the past to encourage fda's promulgation of specific standards of identity . for example , the trade facilitation and trade enforcement act of 2015 includes a provision declaring that it "is the sense of congress that the commissioner of food and drugs should promptly establish a national standard of identity for honey for the commissioner responsible for u.s. customs and border protection to use to ensure that imports of honey are ( 1 ) classified accurately and for purposes of assessing duties ; and ( 2 ) denied entry into the united states if such imports pose a threat to the health or safety of consumers in the united states. in support of this provision , senator gillibrand has stated the united states should adopt a national standard of identity for honey in order to protect consumers and to safeguard the integrity of honey products by preventing unscrupulous importers from flooding the market with misbranded honey products . if such a provision becomes law , the fda may then promulgate a standard of identity for honey through the administrative rulemaking process . this report also provides an overview of related legislation in the 114 th congress . a standard of identity establishes the composition of a food , including mandatory and optional ingredients , and fixes the amounts or relative proportions of each ingredient or a specific method of manufacture . congress intended that standards of identity would resemble "recipes" for specific foods . these standards of identity seek to prohibit economic adulteration and mislabeling of food by providing consumers with the "assurance that they will get what they may reasonably expect to receive. section 401 of the ffdca provides the primary statutory authority for the fda to promulgate standards of identity for food via regulation . the provision states that [w]henever in the judgment of the secretary such action will promote honesty and fair dealing in the interest of consumers , he shall promulgate regulations fixing and establishing for any food , under its common or usual name so far as practicable , a reasonable definition and standard of identity , a reasonable standard of quality , and / or reasonable standards of fill of container .