for example , under h.r . 1704 , the ftc would enforce the new requirements "in the same manner , by the same means , and with the same jurisdiction , powers , and duties" as it has under the ftca , except that the exceptions to its section 5 authority "shall not apply. the bill does not alter the fcc's authority under sections 201 , 222 , 338 ( i ) , or 631 , although it does require the ftc to consult with the fcc before promulgating rules regarding an entity within the fcc's jurisdiction . if this type of bill were enacted , common carriers and cable and satellite providers would all be subject to both the new requirements in the bill , as enforced by the ftc , and the fcc's existing requirements . alternatively , some bills both expand the ftc's jurisdiction and eliminate some or all of the fcc's authority to regulate in this area . similar provisions apply to satellite television carriers . these data security requirements for cable and satellite operators include protections for a subscriber's viewing history . several of the bills being considered in the 114 th congress propose changes to the ftc and fcc's existing enforcement authority regarding data security and / or breach notification , while two others would leave the current system essentially unaltered . businesses must also conduct an annual review of security measures . finally , states may have general consumer protection laws that could potentially be used to remedy the harm caused by a data breach . for example , illinois law makes unlawful "unfair methods of competition and unfair or deceptive acts or practices ... in the conduct of any trade or commerce. this law includes prohibitions on "deception fraud , false pretense , false promise , misrepresentation or the concealment , suppression , or omission of any material fact , with intent that others rely upon the concealment.... " individuals whose personal information is compromised in a data breach may attempt to use such a consumer protection law to allege that the breached entity's failure to disclose its inadequate security measures amounts to an unfair or deceptive practice in violation of state law . a major question related to consideration of federal legislation addressing data security and breach notification is whether , and to what extent , the federal law should preempt these existing state laws , thereby displacing state - by - state requirements in favor of a uniform , federal standard for entities covered under the general requirements established in the proposed legislation discussed above . federal preemption is rooted in the supremacy clause of the u.s. constitution , which states that "[t]he constitution , and the laws of the united states which shall be made in pursuance thereof ; and all treaties made , or which shall be made , under the authority of the united states , shall be the supreme law of the land. under the supremacy clause , congress can override any state and local law that falls within congress's legislative authority .