no further action was taken . on july 22 , 2015 , delegate eleanor holmes norton of the district of columbia introduced h.r . 3387 , the open and transparent smithsonian act of 2015 . the bill would have made si subject to the freedom of information act , privacy act , and federal advisory committees act , and required si to hold open meetings . 3169 was referred to the committee on oversight and government reform , which amended and voted to report the measure on november 16 , 2016 . 3387 was placed on the union calendar on december 12 , 2016 . the activities of si are overseen by the regents of the smithsonian institution . day - to - day operations of si and some related entities are overseen by the secretary and staff . some individual si entities also have boards of overseers as well as independent professional leadership and staff . with some exceptions , the regents have broad authority to oversee and amend their activities . in 2014 , boris johnson , then mayor of london , announced plans to establish a large cultural area in queen elizabeth olympic park , a part of east london that had been cleared and used to support the 2012 summer olympic games . no further action was taken . on october 7 , 2015 , representative sam johnson of texas introduced h.r . 3702 , the smithsonian collections space authorization act . the bill was a companion measure to s. 2057 and would have authorized provisions identical to that measure . some of these expenditures include the employment of staff who are considered federal employees . congress has authorized si to oversee activities in at least one country , panama , and it carries out activities in another , belize , apparently with at least after - the - fact approval from congress , as demonstrated by annual appropriations for work conducted in part in that country by the smithsonian tropical research institute . both locations support researchers conducting activities that cannot be carried out in washington , dc , and the need to go where research can be conducted would seem to provide a rationale that also applies to domestic research facilities beyond the washington , dc , region . si's current activities beyond the washington , dc , region , with the exception of the new york - based cooper hewitt smithsonian design museum and national museum of the american indian – new york , the george gustav heye center , arguably support the increase of knowledge , if not its immediate diffusion , since none of the research locations appear to have a museum or other substantial public display component . any museum or other display mechanism for si collections appears to support the diffusion of knowledge goal , but that piece of the si mission has always occurred ( or at least originated , in the case of si's internet presence and television efforts ) in the united states .