leverage . in the post - 2000 low - interest - rate environment , many market participants sought to boost investment returns through the use of leverage — supplementing their own capital with debt or derivatives . because all derivatives trading is done on margin , a relatively small initial investment may generate a large return ( or loss ) . thus , the losses in u.s. mortgage lending were magnified into much greater losses throughout the global financial system . proponents of the provision in h.r . 2289 argue that it would prevent the redundant regulation of inter - affiliate transactions and prevent capital from being tied up unnecessarily , such as through the duplicative posting of margin for derivatives trades . the expansion of the exception , they argue , would allow businesses that centralize their hedging activities to reduce costs , simplify financial dealings , and reduce their counterparty credit risk . proponents contend that the provision would allow affiliates within a corporate entity to trade swaps under the end - user exception to the clearing and exchange - trading requirements both within and outside the umbrella organization . opponents of the provision in h.r . 2289 argue that it would allow financial firms with commercial business affiliates to "take advantage of exemptions from key dodd - frank risk controls that were meant to apply only to commercial end users. opponents of widening the exception as it applies to affiliates from the dodd - frank requirements also have stated that "the potential for affiliates to cause massive losses to their parent companies cannot be denied. they cite examples such as the derivatives losses incurred by aig's overseas affiliate in london and by jpmorgan's so - called london whale trading losses in its london affiliate . they argue that any expansions of the exception should be restricted to 100% - owned subsidiaries of a parent company and be subject to strict risk - management controls . section 301 of h.r . 2289 as passed by the house seemingly would expand the hedging activities in which affiliates of nonfinancial entities could engage while being able to use the end - user exception . under current statutory language , affiliates may use the end - user exception "only if the affiliate , acting on behalf of the [non - financial entity] and as an agent , uses the swap to hedge or mitigate the commercial risk of the person or other affiliate. section 301 would expand that language by allowing affiliates to engage in more hedging activities while using the exception . specifically , section 301 would permit an affiliate to use the end - user exception only if the affiliate enters into the swap to hedge or mitigate the commercial risk of the person or other affiliate of the person that is not a financial entity , provided that if the hedge or mitigation of such commercial risk is addressed by entering into a swap with a swap dealer or major swap participant , an appropriate credit support measure or other mechanism must be utilized .