provisions under h.r . 2898 that would alter some aspects of the delta smelt biop and change the implementation of the salmon biop have caused some to contend that h.r . 2898 , if passed , would set a new precedent for how esa is implemented , put listed species in peril , and politicize the implementation of esa . others note that h.r . 2898 would create conflicting directives because some sections would be implemented in a manner consistent with esa and other sections would direct implementation of operations beyond those allowed under current esa biops ( eg , specifying pumping rates and other activities not currently allowed ) , potentially causing harm to listed species . these contentions could have nationwide implications for how species are treated under biops . for example , some might refer to h.r . 2898 are needed to update the biops with new data , science , and increased monitoring to maximize water supplies for users . critics argue that these changes would override existing biops and increase stress on fish populations that have been steadily declining in the last few years . they also claim that these provisions could have broad implications for other listed species . the overall approach to addressing the needs of delta smelt and salmon under h.r . 2898 would contrast with the approach taken by the delta smelt and salmon biops . how would such directions be reconciled with requirements that the cvp be operated in conformity with state water law and under the standard that there shall be "no redirected water supply or fiscal impacts ? how can such impacts be avoided , and , if they cannot , who might bear responsibility or pay for unavoidable costs ? lastly , what would be the implications of constructing the state waterfix project based on the proposed provisions ? this section discusses proposed legislative changes that would address the drought in california , including changes specific to the cvp and swp , and those that would affect other projects and areas . the topics that are discussed include: management of fish populations and water flows , including definitions in h.r . 2898 and s. 1894 , managing delta smelt under h.r . 2898 and s. 1894 , managing salmon under h.r . 2898 and s. 1894 , operational flexibility during drought , and flexibility for project operations to manage omr flows during high - water events ; water transfers ; water rights protections and existing obligations ; and new storage project studies in california . this section discusses broader or crosscutting issues for congress that the bills pose . some of these issues have been featured prominently in the debate over the two bills . 2898 and s. 1894 contain provisions that could alter the implementation of the esa and , in some cases , potentially set a precedent for how federal agencies address endangered and threatened species listed under the esa . this section summarizes some of these provisions and discusses their potential implications for the esa . the broader implication for esa under both bills is that agencies would be managing water supplies to the maximum extent possible ( according to varying standards set in each bill ) for users .