most federal housing programs are administered by hud . other issues that the 114 th congress considered were related to the housing finance system and the ability of households to obtain mortgages . 114-113 — the protecting americans from tax hikes act ( or "path" act ) . the high levels of lead found in the city of flint's drinking water , and the corresponding public health concerns raised by the elevated blood lead levels detected in children in flint , raised a number of questions for federal policymakers . many of these questions involve the state of the nation's water infrastructure . others involve how best to identify and address environmental hazards in the home . hud's office of lead hazard control and healthy homes ( olhchh ) administers two grant programs designed specifically to address the hazards presented by lead - based paint in homes , an environmental risk for which the federal government has played a significant role in both regulation and remediation . hud's olhchh also administers a smaller healthy homes demonstration grant program , which provides competitive grants to address housing - related hazards to children beyond lead - based paint . in light of the situation in flint , several proposals were introduced in the 114 th congress to provide additional funding for the healthy homes program , although none were enacted . in the past , congress has regularly extended a number of temporary tax provisions addressing a variety of policy issues , including housing . this report is meant to provide a broad overview of the issues and is not intended to provide detailed information or analysis . however , it includes references to other , more in - depth crs reports on the issues where possible . a number of the housing issues that the 114 th congress considered had to do with federally assisted housing programs that are intended to provide affordable housing for eligible lower - income households . two issues related to fair housing have also prompted congressional interest and were active during the 114 th congress . this set of temporary provisions is commonly referred to as "tax extenders. the bubble featured rapidly rising home prices in many areas of the country as well as looser credit standards for obtaining mortgages . the years of housing market turmoil that followed featured sharp declines in house prices , increased mortgage foreclosures , tighter mortgage credit standards , and lower levels of home sales and homebuilding . since about 2012 , many national housing market indicators have been improving from their performance during the years of housing market turmoil . for example , house prices have been rising and negative equity and foreclosure rates have been falling . however , foreclosure rates and negative equity continue to be higher than is generally considered to be normal , and home sales and mortgage originations have been relatively low . in addition , housing affordability continues to be an issue for many households in general , and for low - income renter households in particular . rising home prices impact the affordability of housing for prospective homebuyers , while increasing numbers of renter households and the corresponding effects on vacancy rates and rents have implications for the affordability and availability of rental housing .