some such studies exist and are discussed above . in addition , agencies may — though they are not explicitly required to — revisit the original cost - benefit estimate when conducting a retrospective review of their regulations . this provides a potential means of validating the results of the bottom - up method , whereas the top - down method does not have a similar opportunity for ex post validation . the biggest potential problem with the bottom - up approach , however , is that the aggregated estimate is unlikely to represent the costs and benefits of all rules . not all rules are included in the aggregate , because cost - benefit estimates are not currently conducted or required for all regulations . furthermore , even for rules in which a cost - benefit analysis is required , monetizing certain types of costs and benefits can be challenging , and any effects of regulations that are not monetized are not able to be included in a bottom - up aggregate . because of these limitations about what may be missing from the bottom - up estimate , a top - down approach may be more likely to capture fully the overall cost of regulations , as the top - down approach could conceivably provide a way to include in its estimate of indirect costs and effects of regulations that are not included in the bottom - up approach . however , the top - down approach has several potential problems when it comes to implementation , most of which are conceptual and methodological . any estimates of the cost of regulation resulting from a top - down approach are entirely reliant on the validity of the model , identification of its components and structure , and the theory behind it . the validity of an estimate is especially reliant upon the validity of the proxy measure of regulation . in practice , overcoming these conceptual and methodological hurdles is difficult , if not impossible , meaning that the results of a top - down approach should be treated with a great deal of caution . finally , the top - down approach does not make a comparison of costs to benefits . such a comparison appears to be outside the purpose of the top - down approach , but having both estimates of costs and benefits can provide a more complete representation of the cost - effectiveness of a country's regulation . because of the role congress plays in delegating legislative authority to federal agencies to issue regulations , congress has shown an interest in conducting oversight of those regulations , both for individual regulations and the regulatory system generally . one way for congress to conduct oversight of the regulatory system as a whole is to monitor the total cost and benefits of federal regulation . inaccuracies in cost - benefit estimates conducted by agencies could have the effect of undermining public confidence in the regulatory process . so , too , could a misunderstanding or over - reliance on estimates of the total cost of regulation that are not intended to be considered precise findings .