athena . in october 2014 , the sec reached a $1 million settlement with athena capital research llc , a hft trader , which was charged with employing $40 million to rig prices of various stocks in 2009 . athena was charged with manipulating shares of nasdaq - listed stocks , which weakened the exchange's end - of - day procedures for reducing stock price volatility , according to the sec . more specifically , the agency charged that athena "placed a large number of aggressive , rapid - fire trades in the final two seconds of almost every trading day during a six - month period to manipulate the closing prices of thousands of nasdaq - listed stocks. it did so through an algorithm that was code - named gravy to engage in this practice known as marking the close in which stocks are bought or sold near the close of trading to affect the closing price . briargate . in october 2015 , the sec reached a $1 million settlement with briargate trading llp and co - founder eric oscher . between october 2011 and september 2012 , briargate was charged with orchestrating a scheme that involved placing sham trades called spoof orders for the purpose of creating "the false appearance of interest in [new york stock exchange] stocks" to manipulate their prices . after it entered spoof orders , briargate's trading protocol reportedly placed bona fide orders on the opposite side of the market for the same stocks , taking advantage of the artificially inflated or depressed prices — then immediately after the bona fide orders were executed , it canceled the spoof orders . the 114 th congress has seen the introduction of some legislation potentially impacting hft and has held hearings touching on the subject of hft practices and regulation as part of congressional oversight authority over the sec and the cftc . although no legislation has been introduced in the 114 th congress directly impacting the regulation or oversight of hft , several bills have been introduced imposing a tax on a broad array of financial transactions involving securities and derivatives . these include s. 1371 , s. 1373 , and h.r . 1464 , which would each impose a tax rate that varies depending on the underlying security . specifically , the bills would subject transactions involving stocks and interests in partnerships and trusts to a 50 basis - point - tax ( 0.5% ) , transactions involving bonds and other forms of debt ( other than tax - exempt state and local bonds , and bonds with a maturity of less than 60 days ) to a 10 basis - point - tax ( 0.10% ) , and derivative transactions to a half basis - point - tax ( 0.005% ) . it is unclear , however , if these proposals would have an impact on certain hft strategies that involve issuing and then canceling a large volume of bid orders ( strategies related to spoofing ) . this is because the bills impose "a tax on the transfer of ownership in each covered transaction with respect to any security.