the regulations , which are located at 49 c.f.r . parts 190-195 , address minimum safety standards for design , construction , operation , testing , inspection , and maintenance of pipeline facilities , as well as pipeline personnel qualifications and emergency response plans for oil pipelines , with stricter standards to be applied in some areas of high population and environmental sensitivity . congress has shown interest in safety of gathering lines . various provisions in the psa and dot regulations determine whether dot regulates an onshore or offshore pipeline as a gathering line and how it regulates the pipeline . onshore gas gathering lines in rural areas are not federally regulated for safety . federal oversight of offshore pipeline safety , including producer - operated offshore pipelines on the ocs and gathering lines , may fall within the jurisdiction of doi , dot , or another federal agency — or be subject only to state regulation . states that have submitted a proper certification to dot may promulgate more stringent safety standards for intrastate gathering lines regulated by dot , provided they are compatible with federal minimum safety standards . in addition , some intrastate gathering lines are not federally regulated for safety , and thus states may regulate them without becoming certified . however , the court held a requirement pertaining to a security fence to be preempted . the court held that the psa did not expressly preempt the setback requirement because it was designed to address aesthetic concerns and preserve property values and only incidentally ( rather than directly and substantially ) affected safety . the fourth circuit held that local land use regulations are not preempted by pipeline safety standards even when they forbid a company from siting a facility in a proposed location . conflict preemption could occur when a state law or action conflicts with the psa or regulations promulgated thereunder because it is impossible to comply with both federal and state law or the state action poses an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of congressional objectives in the psa to "provide adequate protection against risks to life and property posed by pipeline transportation and pipeline facilities. one study found that a few states have laws regulating safety of intrastate gathering lines that appear to be stricter than federal minimum safety standards ; however , these state laws may not apply to rural gathering lines . another component of the relationship between federal and state authority is the degree to which the psa preempts state laws on pipeline safety . on this issue , the psa provides the following: a state authority that has submitted a current certification under section 60105 ( a ) of this title may adopt additional or more stringent safety standards for intrastate pipeline facilities and intrastate pipeline transportation only if those standards are compatible with the minimum standards prescribed under this chapter . a state authority may not adopt or continue in force safety standards for interstate pipeline facilities or interstate pipeline transportation . p roduction of natural gas and crude oil from shales and other unconventional formations in the united states has expanded significantly due to new technologies such as hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling .