also in p.l . 115-141 , section 508 of division p required the fcc to submit a report to congress evaluating broadband coverage in indian country and on land held by a native corporation pursuant to the alaska native claims settlement act , with the fcc required to complete a proceeding to address the unserved areas identified in the report . other introduced legislation specifically related to tribal broadband includes the following: h.r . 800 ( huffman ) , introduced on february 1 , 2017 , as the new deal rural broadband act of 2017 , includes a provision ( §4 ) that would have established a tribal broadband assistance program . the department of agriculture would have been authorized to make grants , loans , or loan guarantees to entities to ( 1 ) plan , construct , acquire , or improve facilities or equipment for the purpose of providing broadband service on tribal lands ; ( 2 ) provide broadband service on tribal lands ; ( 3 ) develop among tribal members technical expertise related to broadband service ; and ( 4 ) improve the adoption of broadband service by individuals on tribal lands . the bill would have authorized $25 million for each of fiscal years 2017 through 2022 . referred to the committee on agriculture , and in addition to the committees on natural resources and energy and commerce . 1581 ( ruiz ) , introduced on march 16 , 2017 , as the tribal digital access act of 2017 , would have amended the communications act of 1934 to add access to telecommunications and information services in indian country and areas with high populations of indian people to the universal service principle relating to access to such services in rural , insular , and high cost areas . referred to the committee on energy and commerce . 3268 ( aderholt ) , the fy2018 agriculture appropriations bill , funds community connect grants and broadband loans , and is accompanied by the house appropriations committee report ( h.rept . 115-232 ) , which includes the following: tribal communities. — the committee notes that tribal communities continue to struggle with gaining access to broadband service . the committee encourages the secretary to provide a report that identifies the specific challenges indian tribal organizations ( itos ) have in gaining access to broadband service and provide a plan for addressing these challenges , including how the community connect program can assist itos . 4506 ( torres ) , introduced on november 30 , 2017 , as the jobs for tribes act , would have directed gao to conduct a study assessing a range of federal programs ( including broadband and telecommunications programs ) available to assist indian communities with business and economic development . referred to the committees on natural resources ; foreign affairs ; and education and the workforce . 5007 ( ruiz ) , introduced on february 13 , 2018 , would have directed the fcc to submit to congress a report evaluating broadband coverage in indian country and on land held by a native corporation and to complete a proceeding to address the unserved areas identified in the report . referred to the committee on energy and commerce .