111-148 , as amended ) . the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , which administers the co - op program , has awarded loans to 24 co - ops since 2012 . one of the 24 was unable to secure a state license to operate and was dropped from the program prior to offering coverage . cms awarded about $2.4 billion to the remaining 23 co - ops . seven of the 23 co - ops are operational as of the date of this report . the other 16 either have ceased operations or are in various stages of winding down operations . the fact that more than half of the co - ops have failed has prompted questions about the program's design , administration , and funding and about the operations of the co - ops . through a series of questions and answers , this report describes the co - op program , outlines program requirements , and explains the terms of the loans . in addition , the report provides information about the loan amounts awarded and the current operating status of the co - ops . the information in this report is taken from section 1322 of the aca , its implementing regulations , guidance , and loan documents . the aca requires the hhs secretary to establish the co - op program according to the parameters outlined in section 1322 of the aca . final regulations on the co - op program were issued in december 2011 , and cms began awarding start - up and solvency loans in 2012 . all loans were to be awarded by july 1 , 2013 . the co - op program provides start - up and solvency loans to qualified nonprofit issuers ( co - ops ) . the terms of the loans are described in statute , regulations , the foa , and the terms of the loan agreements between co - ops and cms ( the administrator of the loans ) . cms may use any remedies available under the law to collect monies owed . however , cms's ability to collect from failed co - ops will be complicated by the fact that each co - op is subject to the state insurance receivership proceedings that are discussed above . in general , co - ops that received loans are expected to repay the loans with interest according to the terms of the loan agreement . cms has awarded loans to 24 co - ops . one of the 24 , the vermont health co - op , was denied state licensure to sell health insurance plans in 2013 and was dropped from the co - op program . the loans awarded to the other 23 co - ops total about $2.4 billion . these 23 co - ops and the amounts they were awarded are shown in table 2 . as of the date of this report , seven co - op issuers are operational . for purposes of this report , a co - op issuer is considered operational if it currently offers health plans and there are no indications that the co - op issuer will stop renewing or offering health plans in the future .