each of these principles is discussed further in the materials below . however , it is important to note at the outset that different tribunals reached different conclusions as to whether va is required to set aside contracts for vosbs , instead of placing orders through the fss , based on their application of these principles . the arguments of kingdomware and its amici — who include 41 members of congress — in their filings with the supreme court generally resemble those made before gao and the lower courts , with some additions . foremost among these arguments is that va is generally required to set aside contracts for vosbs whenever the rule of two is satisfied because section 8127 ( d ) uses the word shall , and shall is the "language of command , not discretion. the force of this mandatory language is not diminished , according to kingdomware and its amici , by section 8127 ( d ) 's reference to set - asides being "[f]or purposes of meeting" va's goals because this language is prefatory , not operative , and one principle of statutory interpretation is that prefatory language "does not limit or expend the scope of the operative clause" of a statute . kingdomware and its amici further note that the text of va's 2009 regulations themselves mirror section 8127 ( d ) and that it is only in the preface to these regulations that va expressed the view that purchases through the fss are exempt from set - asides for small businesses . these prefatory statements are , kingdomware and its amici argue , either not entitled to deference because the statute and va regulations are unambiguous in requiring set - asides or , alternatively , are entitled to limited deference because they appear in the preface to the regulations , not the regulations' text . kingdomware and its amici also note a principle of statutory interpretation which holds that ambiguous statutes involving veterans' benefits are to be construed in favor of veterans ; the statutory history of the 1999 , 2003 , and 2006 acts ; and the legislative history of the 2006 act — all of which , they say , support their position . in addition , they note that the federal circuit's view that va is required to set aside contracts only if va has not met its goals as to contracting with vosbs is "unworkable in practice," because contracting officers generally do not know whether va has or will meet its goals for a particular year at the time when they award a particular contract . in contrast , the government's arguments , particularly in its final filing with the supreme court on the merits ( there were later filings on the mootness question ) , differ markedly from those made before gao and the lower courts . the government still takes the view that va's interpretation of section 8127 ( d ) is entitled to deference .