equity reits ( i.e. , reits that invest in property rather than mortgages ) account for 94% or the total ( $875 billion ) . its primary business is ownership of real estate assets . unlike ordinary corporations , reits generally face little or no corporate level tax because distributions to shareholders are treated as deductible expenses . to qualify , a reit must meet a number of tests , including having at least 75% of its assets and gross income in real estate and distributing at least 90% of profits to shareholders . dividends paid to individual shareholders are taxed at ordinary individual income tax rates ( rather than the lower rates that generally apply to dividends ) . basically a reit is taxed similarly to a partnership in many ways , which is subject to the individual income tax , and largely avoids the corporate - level tax . reits have a number of restrictions that require concentration of their assets in passive investments , primarily real estate , and ensure broad ownership . the allowance for taxable reit subsidiaries adopted in 1999 , however , has expanded the scope for reits to operate properties . over time , the rules governing reits have been relaxed , both by legislative and regulatory changes , to allow more involvement not just in holding real estate assets , but also in managing properties and services . reits were originally designed to be passive real estate owners ( if they did not simply own mortgages ) , with properties operated by others . these requirements and restrictions are listed in table 1 . the tax reform act of 1986 allowed reits to perform customary services and , thus , to operate their properties directly rather than to employ independent contractors . legislation in the late 1990s , especially allowing taxable reit subsidiaries , also expanded the scope of operations . taxable reit subsidiaries also introduced the possibility of reducing taxes by shifting profits into the reit parent through higher than market rents , an effect for which some evidence was found ( although such transactions are subject to a 100% penalty ) . these and other changes expanded the scope of assets organized as reits . prior to the 2015 legislation and following a regulatory change in 2001 , corporations have been able to spin off their real estate assets into a separate reit through a tax - free reorganization . the number of firms spinning off their properties or considering doing so has been growing . one of the changes in the consolidated appropriations act was to restrict this practice . reits are organized as equity , mortgage , or hybrid reits , depending on whether they hold real estate , mortgages , or a combination of both . today , most reits are equity reits . reits fall into three classes as far as regulation and trading: ( 1 ) public reits traded on the stock exchange , ( 2 ) public reits not traded on the stock exchange but subject to registration with the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , and ( 3 ) private reits . reits are subject to a number of other restrictions and rules .