nonetheless , recusals are a rare occurrence on the court . in the last five terms , only a handful of opinions have been released by an eight - member court , and none have been released by a court of seven or six members . predicting the outcome of any supreme court case , let alone some of the most high profile cases , is a difficult task , as the ultimate outcome of a case may depend on a number of complicated factors , not all of which are known to the public . nonetheless , based on the current eight justices' past voting practices and written opinions , several cases have been widely seen as having the potential to result in 4-4 splits in the absence of justice scalia . table 1 provides a list of cases that could result in a 4-4 tie at the court this year , including the outcome in the lower court , which would stand if five votes do not exist at the supreme court to reverse the lower court's ruling . notably , absent from the list is fisher v. university of texas , a case challenging the use of racial preferences in college admissions at the university of texas . when this case first reached the court in 2013 , justice kagan recused herself from the matter . her recusal in the case currently before the court will result in a seven - member court deciding fisher . while the court's practice from roe v. wade and doe v. bolton may suggest that fisher could be held over for reargument pending the appointment of a new justice , the court's willingness to opine on the underlying constitutional ruling two years ago in fisher i with an eight - member court may indicate that the court could be willing to issue a ruling on the merits with a seven - member court , as well . if the cases listed in table 1 or others result in a 4-4 vote split , the court will then have to decide between issuing a summary affirmance of the lower court ruling or having the case reargued when a new appointee fills justice scalia's seat on the court . justice scalia's death occurs in the midst of a busy term at the supreme court , with dozens of pending cases remaining on the high court's docket . given the possibility that justice scalia's successor may not be confirmed in the near future , many of the court's pending cases may result in a split vote between the current justices . if such a situation arises , in light of the statutes , rules , and practices governing the supreme court , it appears the court possesses significant authority and discretion in determining whether either ( 1 ) to issue an order summarily affirming the lower court's ruling ; or ( 2 ) to allow a case to be reargued so that a new justice can eventually participate in the ruling and settle the split on the high court . the potential of many pending split decisions on the court underscores the sign ificance of justice scalia's death for the 2015 term and the important role justice scalia's successor will serve on the supreme court .