in addition , h.r . 3370 and the jobs in america act ( h.r . for a detailed discussion ) . in other words , regional centers pool the investments of multiple eb - 5 investors . 107-273 ) provided remedies f or those affected by ins' 1998 decision s by allowing investors affected by the retroactive changes to apply to re - establish eligibility for an eb - 5 visa . at the end of fy2015 , there were 17,367 pending i - 526 petitions and 4,049 pending i - 829 petitions . as of january 31 , 2016 , the processing times were 16.3 months for the i - 526 and 16.9 months for the i - 829 . regional centers are intended to provide a coordinated focus of foreign investment toward specific geographic regions ( see section entitled " what is a regional center ? the regional center program differs from the standard eb - 5 visa in three ways ( table 1 ) . first , although both pathways require individual investors to create at least 10 jobs , in the regional center context indirect job creation may be counted instead of or in addition to direct job creation . second , unlike the standard eb - 5 visa , foreign nationals investing in a regional center are unlikely to be involved in the management and daily activities of the commercial enterprise . third , the eb - 5 visa category is permanent , while the regional center program is temporary . as previously mentioned , the program is set to expire on september 30 , 2016 . foreign nationals may invest in any of the regional centers that are currently approved to qualify for their conditional lpr status . also , investments may be both within a regional center and a tea . although a regional center does not have to be in a tea , almost all foreign nationals applying for eb - 5 status invest with regional centers whose defined boundaries constitute a tea . ( see figure 1 . ) the eb - 5 petition / application process , which is largely administered by uscis , requires various steps before an individual can obtain his / her full ( i.e. , unconditional ) lpr status . individuals who are admitted to the united states on the basis of eb - 5 visas are granted a conditional resident status . after approximately two years they can apply to remove the conditionality if they have met the visa requirements ( i.e. , invested and sustained the required investment and created the required jobs ) . for a foreign national investor , the first step of the process consists of filing uscis form i - 526 , immigrant petition by alien entrepreneur . at this point , a foreign national has to prove that he / she meets the requirements for eb - 5 classification , including that the capital being invested came from a legitimate source , and that he / she has presented a valid business plan or showed that the investment will go to a uscis - certified regional center .