that percentage remained the same in may 2016 . it is , in fact , to exhort and urge agencies to seize this opportunity , and use the scorecard as a management tool to better guide decision making and investments within the agency . while the grades themselves are illustrative of overall performance , it is the multiple elements that make up the grades on which agencies and our committee will focus to ensure we deliver on the transformative promise of fitara . the committee scored agencies across four of the seven requirement areas of fitara to develop a final score: data center consolidation plans , planned it portfolio review savings , transparency of it project risk assessment , and incremental development for it projects . across the four metrics and the final score , agencies earned a total of 14 "a" ratings out of 120 total grades . the only agencies to get a passing grade in each of the four categories were the department of commerce and the general services administration , which both received overall b ratings . gao has stated that legislative oversight of agencies and their progress in implementing fitara will continue and perhaps increase during 2016 , as plans and expectations become more concrete . another issue to be resolved is that omb approved 22 out of 24 agencies' original self - assessments and fitara implementation plans , but gao found that not all of the self - assessments were accurate . omb imposed an april 30 , 2016 , deadline for agencies to submit updated fitara common baseline self - assessments and gao has reported that as of may 2016 , 22 of the 24 cfo act agencies had made their plans publicly available . since fitara was signed into law in december 2014 , the senate has held two hearings and the house has held four hearings on fitara implementation: risky business: examining gao 's 2015 list of high risk government programs senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs ( full committee ) february 11 , 2015 reducing unnecessary duplication in federal programs: billions more could be saved senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs ( full committee ) april 14 , 2015 the role of fitara in reducing it acquisition risk joint hearing: house committee on oversight and government reform ( subcommittees on information technology and government operations ) june 10 , 2015 the role of fitara in reducing it acquisition risk , part ii — measuring agencies' fitara implementation joint hearing: house committee on oversight and government reform ( subcommittees on information technology and government operations ) november 4 , 2015 the federal information technology reform act scorecard 2.0 joint hearing: house committee on oversight and government reform ( subcommittees on information technology and government operations ) may 18 , 2016 federal agencies' reliance on outdated and unsupported information technology house committee on oversight and government reform may 25 , 201 . the house committee on oversight and government reform released a "fitara scorecard" in conjunction with its november 4 , 2015 , hearing on the status of fitara implementation ( see table 1 ) .