these provisions remain in effect . specific frequencies were designated for immediate auction by the commercial spectrum enhancement act but the law was written to apply to any federally used frequencies scheduled for reallocation and possible auction . the spectrum act required the establishment of a technical panel within the ntia to review transition plans that each federal agency must prepare in accordance with provisions in the act . the technical panel is required to have three members qualified as a radio engineer or technical expert . the director of the office of management and budget , the assistant secretary of commerce for communications and information administrator of the ntia , and the chairman of the fcc have been required to appoint one member each . a full discussion and interpretation of provisions of the act as regards the technical panel and related procedural requirements such as dispute resolution have been published by the ntia as part of the rulemaking process . the spectrum pipeline act added specific criteria for the technical panel to consider in approving plans , including whether a plan will "increase the net expected auction proceeds in an amount not less than the time value of the amount of the payment.... . unlicensed spectrum is not sold to the highest bidder and used for the services provided by the license - holder but is instead accessible to anyone using wireless equipment certified by the fcc for those frequencies . both commercial and noncommercial entities use unlicensed spectrum to meet a wide variety of monitoring and communications needs . suppliers of wireless devices must meet requirements for certification to operate on frequency bands designated for unlicensed use . examples of unlicensed use include garage door openers and wi - fi communications . wi - fi provides wireless internet access for personal computers and handheld devices and is also used by businesses to link computer - based communications within a local area . links are connected to a high - speed landline either at a business location or through hotspots . hotspots are typically located in homes or convenient public locations . implementation of the spectrum act and the spectrum pipeline act raises a number of policy issues such as allocation of spectrum between licensed and unlicensed use and how to structure competitive bidding systems to maximize both competition and innovation . actions taken by the fcc that are intended to improve competitive access to spectrum include modifying fcc auction rules to provide licenses with smaller area coverage ; encouraging participation by designated entities ; and establishing limitations on the number of licenses available to verizon or at&t . spectrum caps might limit the amount of spectrum available through auction to the top two carriers in key auctions such as those for repurposed television spectrum . the spectrum act and the spectrum pipeline act focus on three key policy tools for increasing the availability of radio frequency spectrum for wireless broadband: allocating additional spectrum through competitive auctions ; reassigning federal spectrum for commercial use ; and opening up spectrum for unlicensed use . the introduction of 5g is expected to develop from current trials to rapid commercial expansion in the period 2020-2025 . trials for early 5g technologies are scheduled to begin in late 2016 .