contingency forces . these were to consist of light , mobile forces that were conus - based and "ready to go on a moment's notice. which are not working well ? what functions are currently accomplished by working outside existing or established dod processes ? what changes to dod's culture might be necessary to foster a climate of innovation and experimentation ? what , if anything , might be done to improve the quality of military and strategic advice delivered to senior defense and national security leaders ? over dod's history , reform efforts have tended to be prompted when leaders in the executive branch or congress perceive deficiencies in the way that the department formulates requirements , build capabilities , or manages its costs . for example , cost overruns in the 1980s led the reagan administration to establish the packard commission , tasked with identifying ways to improve efficiency across the government , with particular attention paid to dod . simultaneously , congressional concern that dod was failing to build the institutional capabilities necessary to effectively prosecute joint operations led to the goldwater - nichols reform act of 1986 . after the end of the cold war , concerns that dod strategy was no longer keeping pace with changing strategic realities led to the formulation — and institutionalization — of the quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) process ; concerns that the qdr was not effectively articulating and accounting for u.s. national security risks led congress to reform the quadrennial strategy process ( now called the defense strategy review ) in the fy2015 ndaa ( p.l . key reform initiatives and proposals , with particular emphasis on reforms and changes to defense strategy , management , and organization , since 1980 include the following: 1983-1984 — president's private sector survey on cost control ( the "grace commission" ) on june 30 , 1982 , president reagan signed executive order 12369 formally establishing the president's private sector survey on cost control in the executive branch . an executive committee under the chairmanship of j. peter grace was established , consisting of 161 high - level private sector executives — mostly chairmen and chief executive officers — from many of the nation's leading corporations . the report delivered nearly 2,500 recommendations to president reagan to improve efficiency and deliver cost savings across the executive branch . with respect to defense specifically , in june 1983 the grace commission stated that the department of defense could save $92 billion over three years by reducing major weapon purchases , closing military commissaries in the united states , consolidating or shutting down military bases , and reforming the military health care system . the grace commission also identified federal retirement programs , specifically including the uniformed services retirement system , as potential sources of substantial cost savings . it also proposed alternatives formulated solely on the basis of cost savings rather than on uniformed services manpower force requirements . president reagan endorsed , and implemented , a large proportion of the commission's recommendations across the executive branch . as a result , the dod's acquisition system was improved , the department of veteran's affairs health system was overhauled , and the base realignment and closure process closed dozens of facilities .