stakeholders' views on the tpp agreement vary . some groups generally oppose or support trade liberalization ; others' positions hinge on specific provisions in the tpp text . most business groups generally support the agreement , while most labor unions and certain nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) are generally opposed . the discussion that follows focuses on specific commitments in the agreement and debate over those measures . the tpp contains provisions related to dispute settlement and governance of the agreement . the text of the tpp agreement spans 30 chapters . the potential trans - pacific partnership agreement has both economic and broader strategic policy implications for the united states . the tpp is ambitious in at least four ways: ( 1 ) its size — it would be the largest u.s. fta by trade flows and could expand in a region that represents over half of all u.s. trade ; ( 2 ) the scope and scale of its liberalization — the parties , while not always at the desired level of ambition , have agreed to reduce barriers to goods , services , and agricultural trade and to establish rules and disciplines on a wide range of topics , including new policy issues that neither the wto nor existing ftas yet cover ; ( 3 ) its potential evolution as a "living agreement" — it may continue to be expanded in terms of its membership and its rules and disciplines , and a number of countries officially have expressed an interest in joining tpp if it goes into effect ; and ( 4 ) its geo - political significance — it has become , for some observers in the united states and asia , a symbol of u.s. commitment to and influence in the asia - pacific , a region of growing economic and military importance where u.s. leadership increasingly is being challenged . in particular , internationally - recognized and other core principles for the protection of worker rights and the environment have become a significant aspect of u.s. trade agreement negotiations . in addition , the tpp includes an entirely new chapter that seeks to establish disciplines on how state - owned enterprises engage in international trade , with a goal of limiting potential negative impacts on private actors from nonmarket practices . the 12 tpp countries have varying competitive advantages , sensitivities , and levels of economic development . as a result of these differences and the "give and take" of trade negotiations , achieving common tpp rules and disciplines also involves certain exceptions in different forms , and phase - in periods of varying lengths . when examining the specific commitments of the agreement it is important to examine these exceptions , as they may impact the agreement's practical application . this section examines the major issues addressed in the tpp negotiations , beginning with the treatment of trade in merchandise goods . for each issue the report provides background information , a discussion of the provisions in the text , particularly as they relate to previous trade agreements , and a summary of the debate on the topic , including , where relevant , u.s. trade negotiating objectives .