the rules are enforced by a series of contracts . one group of contracts is between a card brand , such as mastercard , visa , or american express , and the banks that issue the payment cards or process payments . another group of contracts is between these banks and those accepting the payment cards such as retailers and hotels . since all of these contracts are private business transactions , relatively little is known about the terms . an exception to this occurs when the parties contest certain provisions in court . for example , in the litigation resulting from the target data breach of 2013 , the parties introduced some of these provisions into evidence . oversight of financial services cybersecurity reflects a complex and sometimes overlapping array of state and federal laws , regulators , regulations , and guidance . cybersecurity is a critical component of protecting the vital services to the economy provided by the financial sector . maintaining the confidentiality , security , and integrity of the data held by financial institutions is critical to sustaining the level of trust which allows businesses and consumers to rely on the financial services industry to supply services on which they depend . in recognition of the importance of the information systems that support financial services , regulators have increasingly devoted attention to cybersecurity concerns by issuing regulations and various forms of guidance . as discussed herein , the federal government's oversight of the financial sector includes cybersecurity and involves at least four separate types of oversight and specific encouragement of voluntary cooperation . depository institutions are subjected to comprehensive prudential regulation and supervision for safety and soundness . the federal securities regulators , who administer a regime that mandates disclosure of material information by publicly traded companies , oversee the major components of the securities industry by means of a system of self - regulation . this consists of an array of sros , such as the national securities exchanges and securities associations registered with the sec . some federal agencies are charged with specific aspects of consumer protections that apply to products of the financial services industry . some federal laws , which apply broadly , require financial institutions to safeguard information . acronyms and abbreviations are listed in a glossary at the end of this report . financial services are a critical part of any modern economy . these services include accepting deposits ; making loans ; processing payments ; providing insurance and other financial products to spread risks ; dealing in securities such as stocks , bonds , and derivatives ; and offering , administrating , or advising employee benefit programs . commercial and investment banks , stock and commodity markets , and insurance companies using various securities and commodity contracts , funds , trusts , and other financial vehicles provide these services . banking institutions are subject to comprehensive prudential regulation touching many aspects of their daily operations . regulation of the financial sector is based on both form ( the type of charter the entity has ) and function ( what the entity does ) .