these provisions are below summarized in table 6 . should the routine approval of voluntary retirement requests at 20 years of service be reconsidered ? if so , should the voluntary retirement age be increased uniformly , or only for certain categories of officers ( for example , those in less physically demanding career fields ) ? if longer careers are contemplated , should the grade structure and promotion system be changed to adapt to this new career pattern ? should there be greater flexibility to move from more physically demanding specialties to less demanding ones in order to facilitate continuation of service ? there are a number of statutory mechanisms that mandate the separation of military officers under certain conditions . as discussed above , several of them stem from failure to advance to the next higher grade . others occur upon reaching a specific age , in the event of serious disability , for substandard performance , and for force shaping purposes . there has been criticism of the general practice of allowing servicemembers to retire after 20 years of service on the grounds that it encourages individuals to leave the service at a time when their experience could be of great value to the services . others note that this practice helps maintain a youthful and vigorous military , and that the structure and budget of the armed forces is not designed to sustain an abundance of relatively senior officers ( typically , at twenty years of service , such officers are lieutenant colonels / commanders ) . this report provides an overview of selected concepts and statutory provisions that define and shape important aspects of active duty officer personnel management along with a set of questions that policymakers may wish to consider when discussing proposed changes to current law . the topics discussed below are often inter - related , such that adjusting the parameters of one can affect the operation of others . for example , reducing the number of authorized positions at a higher grade would likely result in slower promotion timing , decreased promotion opportunity , and greater number of mandatory separations under the "up or out" provisions or individuals deciding to leave military service due to perceived lack of upward mobility . throughout this report , reference will be made to the grade or paygrade of an officer . table 1 below provides a summary of the various grades in the army , navy , air force , and marine corps . as the navy terms for its grades differ from the other services , this report will typically use paygrade or , if using grade , both terms separated by a slash . for example , the paygrade for an entry - level officer in all services is o - 1 , while the grade for such officers is ensign in the navy and second lieutenant in the army , air force , and marine corps . thus , officers in this grade will be referred to in this report as either "o - 1" or "second lieutenant / ensign. for voluntary separation: title 10 , chapters 367 ( army ) , 571 ( navy and marine corps ) , and 867 ( air force ) for involuntary separation: see table .