3713 would change that . it would allow a court to reduce a sentence that was imposed for an offense committed prior to the fsa , to reflect the fsa amendments , unless the court had already done so or unless the original sentence was imposed consistent with the fsa amendments . criminal history points are a feature of the u.s . sentencing commission's sentencing guidelines . the guidelines assign points based on the sentences imposed for prior state and federal convictions . for example , the guidelines assign 1 point for any past conviction that resulted in a sentence of less than 60 days incarceration ; 2 points for any conviction that resulted in a sentence of incarceration for 60 days or more ; and 3 points for any conviction that resulted in a sentence of incarceration of more than a year and a month . the sentencing commission's report on mandatory minimum sentences suggested that congress consider expanding safety valve eligibility to defendants with 2 or possibly 3 criminal history points . the report indicated that under the guidelines a defendant's criminal record "can have a disproportionate and excessively severe cumulative sentencing impact on certain drug offenders. the commission explained that the guidelines are construed to ensure that the sentence they recommend in a given case calls for a term of imprisonment that is not less than an applicable mandatory minimum . in addition , the drug offenses have escalated mandatory minimums for repeat offenders . moreover , similarly situated drug offenders may be treated differently , because the states punish simple drug possession differently and prosecutors decide when to press recidivism qualifications differently . 3713 would change the safety valve in two ways . first , a defendant would be safety valve eligible with 4 or fewer criminal history points if he had not been convicted previously of a 2-point drug trafficking or violent crime ( one that resulted in a sentence of 60 days or more ) , or any 3-point offense ( one for which he was incarcerated for more than 13 months ) . second , the proposal would permit the court to waive the criminal history disqualification , in cases other than those involving a past serious drug felony or serious violent felony conviction , if it concluded that the defendant's criminal history score overstated the seriousness of his criminal record or the likelihood that he would commit other offenses . the controlled substances act and the controlled substances import and export act establish a series of mandatory minimum sentences for violations of their prohibitions . class a offenses involve trafficking — that is , importing , exporting , or manufacturing , growing , possessing with the intent to distribute — a very substantial amount of various highly addictive substances , such as more than 10 grams of lsd . class a offenses carry a sentence of imprisonment for not less than 10 years or more than life . class b offenses involve substantial but lesser amounts , such as 1 gram of lsd . class b offenses carry a sentence of imprisonment for not less than 5 years or more than life , and imprisonment for not less than 10 years or more than life in the case of a subsequent conviction .