the amendment was tabled . instead , the senate adopted an amendment , s.amdt . 3970 , that would prohibit funds in the appropriations bill from being used to "direct a grantee to undertake specific changes to existing zoning laws" in carrying out the affirmatively furthering fair housing rule ( ยง240 of the senate - passed appropriations bill ) . the provision is included in the final appropriations law . see ยง243 of p.l . under existing federal law , persons convicted of committing certain crimes are either barred from receiving federal rental housing assistance or local program administrators are given authority to bar such persons from receiving assistance . the rule has been controversial . when the proposed rule was published , in june 2013 , hud received more than 1,000 comments . commenters raised concerns that the requirements intrude on the authority of local jurisdictions and constitute social engineering ; raised concerns that compliance will be costly , especially for small jurisdictions and phas ; asked questions as to whether hud will continue to allow investment in low - income , segregated areas ; and expressed uncertainty about how hud will enforce the rule . during the fy2016 appropriations process , the house adopted an amendment to the thud appropriations bill ( h.amdt . 2577 ) that would have prohibited funds in the bill from being used to enforce the affirmatively furthering fair housing rule . the amendment was not included in the final appropriations act . a similar amendment was proposed to the fy2017 appropriations bill in the senate . 3897 would prevent funds from being used to carry out the final rule . an amendment accepted during floor consideration of the senate - passed thud appropriations bill ( s.amdt . 3905 ) would have prohibited any funding in the bill from being used to provide housing assistance to persons convicted of a broader set of crimes than are currently subject to restrictions under federal law . specifically , the amendment would have barred assistance funded under the bill for persons convicted of aggravated sexual abuse , murder , human trafficking , and child pornography ( ยง249 of the senate - passed bill ) . this provision is not included in the final fy2017 appropriations law . the federal flood risk management standard ( ffrms ) is the principal mechanism for accomplishing the flood risk management policies established by president obama in executive order ( e.o. ) first published in january 2015 , the ffrms aims to improve the resilience of communities and federal assets against the impacts of flooding and the standard is applicable to certain federally funded projects . section 236 of the house appropriations committee - reported fy2017 thud appropriations bill would have prohibited any funding appropriated under the bill from being used to implement , administer , carry out , or enforce e.o . 13690 until at least 90 days after the secretary of hud makes specified reports to the house and senate appropriations committees regarding the effects of the new ffrms . this provision is not included in the final fy2017 appropriations law . hud appropriations are included as a part of the transportation , hud , and related agencies appropriations bill ( thud ) each year .