the program has four components . new starts funds capital projects with total costs over $300 million that are seeking more than $100 million in federal funding . small starts funds capital projects with total costs under $300 million that are seeking less than $100 million in federal funding . core capacity grants are for projects that will increase the capacity of existing systems . the expedited project delivery pilot program will provide funding for eight projects in the previous three categories that require no more than a 25% federal share and are supported , in part , by a public - private partnership . the capital investment grants program funds for any project are typically disbursed over a period of years . much of the funding for this program each year is committed to projects with multiyear grant agreements signed in previous years . for fy2017 , the obama administration requested $3.5 billion for the program , $1.323 billion ( 61% ) more than the $2.177 billion provided in fy2016 . the senate bill would have provided $2.338 billion , the authorized level , which is 7% ( $161 million ) above the fy2016 level . the house committee on appropriations recommended $2.5 billion . a new starts grant , by statute , can be up to 80% of the net capital project cost . since fy2002 , dot appropriations acts have included a provision directing fta not to sign any full funding grant agreements for new starts projects that would provide a federal share of more than 60% . that provision was not included in the senate bill . the house - reported bill included a provision prohibiting grant agreements where the federal share was more than 50% . critics of lowering the federal share provided for new starts projects note that the federal share for highway projects is typically 80% , and in some cases is higher . they contend that the higher federal share makes highway projects relatively more attractive than public transportation projects for communities considering how to address transportation problems . advocates of this provision note that the demand for new starts funding greatly exceeds the amount available , so requiring a higher local match allows fta to support more projects with the available funding . they also assert that requiring a higher local match likely encourages communities to estimate the costs and benefits of proposed transit projects more carefully , reducing the risk of subsequent cost overruns . the passenger rail investment and improvement act of 2008 authorized $1.5 billion over 10 years in grants to the washington metropolitan area transit authority ( wmata ) for preventive maintenance and capital grants , to be matched by funding from the district of columbia and the states of maryland and virginia . under this agreement , congress has provided $150 million to wmata in each of the past six years . wmata faces a number of difficulties . it is dealing with a backlog of maintenance needs due to inadequate maintenance investment over many years , and it has experienced several fatal incidents , most recently in january 2015 , and a number of other incidents that have raised questions about the safety culture of the agency .