these targets were not achieved . by 2025 , energy firm bp projects that natural gas consumption in china will reach almost 400 billion cubic meters ( bcm ) , more than double china's estimated 2015 natural gas consumption of 191 bcm . if consumption does grow at those rates , in addition to increasing natural gas production , china will need to invest in the requisite infrastructure to transport and consume greater natural gas volumes , including shipping terminals , pipelines , and natural gas power plants . figure 3 shows where china stood compared to the united states regarding proved reserves , supply sources , and usage in 2014 . china has made significant strides in diversifying its natural gas supplies . domestic production has risen 164% in the last ten years , to 135 bcm in 2014 . natural gas imports , which did not begin until 2006 , have grown from one bcm to over 58 bcm in 2014 . in 2014 , imports were split 46% from lng and 54% from pipelines , with turkmenistan being the single largest supplier ( 44% of imports ) . figure 4 highlights the dispersion of china's natural gas resources and the country's infrastructure constraints . in some cases , natural gas deposits do not have pipelines in place to bring that gas to market . this is the situation in china's northeastern provinces of jilin and heilongjiang . growth in china's demand for natural gas has slowed in recent years . state media reported that annual consumption in 2015 was 191 bcm , up 3.7% from 2014 . this represented the lowest rate of annual growth in a decade ( see figure 8 ) . china's government expects its overall energy consumption to grow in 2016 , with natural gas rising to 6.2% of primary energy needs . ( see figure 9 . ) part of the slowdown in consumption growth is attributed to the sluggish economy . in november 2015 , china cut natural gas prices to spur demand . predictions of future growth in gas consumption vary . the deputy head of cnpc's economic and technology research institute projected 7.3 % growth for 2016 , while the deputy head of cnooc's economic and technology institute projected between 4.5% and 5% growth . the large differences in projections by the two companies reflect the difficulty in obtaining good data on chinese natural gas consumption . a 2014 study used a regression model to estimate residential gas price and income elasticities in chinese urban centers . the study found that the price elasticity of natural gas was much more negative in northern china than in southern china — in other words , a rise in gas prices would be expected to cause much larger consumption declines in northern cities than in southern ones . the authors suggested that this was due to the widespread availability of coal in the north , which can be easily substituted for gas in most cases . natural gas vehicles ( ngvs ) have been one of the major factors behind the fast growth in gas usage in china , chiefly because of their cost competitiveness , although ngv users have encountered severe problems at filling stations during winter's chronic gas shortages .