for the reservoirs specifically serving the cvp ( i.e. it is unclear the extent to which these provisions were used prior to 2017 allocations . proposals and debates related to water allocations in california typically revolve around the two major water projects that serve the state's agricultural and municipal water suppliers: the federal cvp and the state of california's swp . the 115 th congress is considering legislation that proposes additional changes to cvp operations . the april 1 snow - water equivalent is another important measure of california's water supplies . as of that date in 2017 , statewide snow - water equivalent was approximately 164% of the historical average . in recent years , congress has enacted drought - related provisions aiming to benefit the cvp and the swp , including extending authorization for the reclamation states emergency drought relief act ( p.l . as a result of increased precipitation , water levels at several of california's largest reservoirs also continued to rebound in 2017 relative to prior years ( see figure 2 ) . in march 2017 , all five of california's largest reservoirs were at more than 100% of their historical average and 73% - 99% of their total capacity at this time . , shasta , trinity , folsom , new melones , millerton lake , and the federal half of san luis ) , water year 2017 began with a total of 4.9 million acre - feet in storage but by mid - march this amount had almost doubled , with more than 9 million acre - feet in storage . although these projects supply water to users throughout the state , the major cvp and swp pumps that supply water for central and southern california are located at the southern end of the bay - delta . thus , an important distinction when discussing cvp water allocations and deliveries is between "north - of - delta" ( nod ) and "south - of - delta" ( sod ) water users . congress plays a role in cvp water management and has previously attempted to make available additional water supplies in the region by facilitating water banking , water transfers , and new storage . 102-250 ) , providing authority to incorporate water storage into dam safety projects ( p.l . 114-113 ) , and providing additional funding to reclamation for western drought response in fy2015 ( $50 million ) and fy2016 ( $100 million ) energy and water development appropriations bills , and most recently , subtitle j of the wiin act ( p.l . legislation enacted at the end of the 114 th congress ( the wiin act , enacted december 16 , 2016 ) incorporated provisions from multiple california drought - related bills that had been under consideration . among other things , these provisions directed agency officials to pump at the highest levels allowable under existing biological opinions , for longer periods . the wiin act also authorized higher levels of pumping than currently allowed during certain temporary storm events , unless managers showed that the increased levels would harm the long - term health of the listed species . these and other changes had been proposed in legislation dating to the 112 th congress .