appendix b . generic entity identifiers under certain circumstances , as specified in the federal acquisition regulation , a generic entity identifier may be used for the purpose of reporting contract award data to the federal procurement data system . the various circumstances under which a generic entity identifier may be authorized are as follows: contracts valued at $30,000 or less awarded to a contractor that is a student ; "a dependent of either a veteran , foreign service officer , or military member assigned outside the united states and its outlying areas ( as defined in [far §] 2.101 ) " ; or "located outside the united states and its outlying areas and the contractor does not otherwise have a unique entity identifier. contracts valued at more than $30,000 that are awarded to "individuals located outside the united states and its outlying areas for work to be performed outside the united states and its outlying areas. "[w]hen specific public identification of the contracted party could endanger the mission , contractor , or recipients of the acquired goods or services . the contracting officer must include a written determination in the contract file of a decision applicable to authority under [far §4.605 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( iii ) ]. the general services administration's integrated award environment ( iae ) program office maintains and assigns authorized generic entity identifiers . the use of a generic entity identifier helps to mask the identity of a particular contractor while ensuring the accounting of the obligations associated with the contractor . on the other hand , the use of generic identifiers limits transparency and precludes a contractor from being able to "access and perform its own reporting requirements ... , because the contract is not associated with the contractor in federal - wide processes . as such , the use of a generic duns number [generic entity identifier] should be limited to those actions where it is truly necessary. a cage code is not required for acquisitions that involve a generic duns number ( or a generic entity identifier ) and that are funded by some agency other than dod or the national aeronautics and space administration . software 1. . data integration toolkit ( ditk ) : the data integration toolkit will allow the government the ability for real - time access to integrate d&b global data into the iae [gsa's integrated award environment] applications and solutions described in this contract and allow the government to build an interface with d&b , deliver data via the internet. data integration batch ( dib ) : the data integration batch will provide an automated infrastructure that electronically transmits files of customer records or transactions for correction and updating , and for matching and updating with the d&b database . the same infrastructure is used to return matching results and appended information to the customer. integration manager ( im ) : the integration manager is the onsite software system that will be used to integrate government business customer information from diverse systems using the d - u - n - s number® and is designed to allow the government the ability to harmonize its data across many systems.