, borrowing from the public ) . congressional interest in the financial conditions of depository banks , also referred to as the commercial banking system , has increased following challenging economic conditions and changes in the regulatory environment . specifically , the recession that began in december 2007 and ended in 2009 is frequently referred to as the great recession in part due to the financial crisis that unfolded . both large and small banking institutions experienced losses related to the declining asset values ( of mortgage - related assets ) , resulting in a substantial increase in bank failures . consequently , higher prudential requirements for u.s. banking institutions were implemented . the roe is a measure of financial return for shareholders . unlike roa , roe does not have a barometer of "acceptable" performance because it can increase due to either asset profitability or depleting capital positions , making it difficult to establish a benchmark standard . nonetheless , double - digit roe returns such as those prior to the recession tend to be more acceptable for shareholders . the fdic reported industry declines in both roa and roe during the 2007-2009 recession as the numerators of both ratios fell even faster than their denominators . the negative returns coincided with the wave of loan defaults that also occurred during the recession , which led to the deterioration of capital , increases in the number of banks on the fdic's problem list , and increases in bank failures . the roa and roe measures , which are illustrated in figure 4 , have exhibited a reversal in course since the recession . figure 5 shows the increase in noncurrent assets ( i.e. , loans or bonds ) and charge - offs after 2007 . non - current assets are loans or bonds that borrowers do not repay as scheduled . the allowance for loan and lease losses ( alll ) is a component of regulatory bank capital set aside for anticipated ( or estimated ) loan losses . the asset growth rate ( represented by the more volatile striped bars ) is computed by simply calculating the percentage change of the average total assets from year to year . the asset growth rate ( represented by the solid bars ) is computed using a moving average smoothing technique that reduces short - term volatility in data . some economists prefer analyzing smoothed data series to curtail overstating observed activity or directional change . hence , the asset growth rate using the moving average or smoothing methodology fell below negative 2% beginning in the first quarter of 2009 , which had not occurred since the 1990-1991 recession ; the second and fourth quarters of 2009 also saw negative asset growth . given the magnitude of loan repayment problems , banks grew more cautious about lending ( or allowing their asset portfolios to grow ) to avoid the risk of further weakening their alll and capital reserve positions . the bank lending rate has increased since the 2007-2009 recession . since the 2007-2009 recession , the banking system holds larger shares of cash and smaller shares of residential mortgages , which is computed in figure 7 using 1-4 family residential mortgages and home equity lines of credit .