circuit . they made several arguments in the alternative: that the court had authority to , and should , issue an extraordinary writ under the all writs act ; that epa's public statements about its legal authority to regulate co 2 emissions constituted final agency action subject to judicial review ; and that the court should strike down the 2011 settlement agreement that epa reached with several other states and environmental groups setting a timeline for deciding on section 111 rules for power plants . a panel of the d.c . circuit rejected these arguments and denied the petitions , saying the following: petitioners are champing at the bit to challenge epa's anticipated rule restricting carbon dioxide emissions from existing power plants . but epa has not yet issued a final rule . it has issued only a proposed rule . oklahoma also sued to challenge the proposal in federal district court in oklahoma and did not prevail ; the 10 th circuit denied oklahoma's motion for an injunction pending appeal . states and energy companies also filed emergency petitions for an extraordinary writ in the d.c . circuit in august 2015 , after epa had released , but not published , the final cpp . a circuit panel again denied these petitions on september 9 , 2015 . petitions for panel reconsideration and for rehearing en banc to essentially revive the earlier lawsuits challenging the proposed rule were denied as well , on september 29 , 2015 . in addition to the direct legal challenge to the cpp rule for co 2 from existing power plants under caa section 111 ( d ) , 25 states — led by north dakota and west virginia — have filed petitions in the d.c . circuit challenging epa's final nsps rule for co 2 from new , modified , and reconstructed power plants under caa section 111 ( b ) , which it calls the "carbon pollution standards. the states have been joined by other petitioners including a labor union , a rural electric cooperatives association , several other fossil - fuel - related companies and utilities , and several industry and trade groups ; most of the petitioners overlap with those who also filed challenges to the cpp , although there are somewhat fewer petitioners challenging the nsps . the petitions have been consolidated under the case caption north dakota v. epa . most of the states and a number of the nonprofit organizations that intervened in support of epa in the cpp case also intervened in the nsps challenge in support of epa . in the section 111 ( b ) litigation , one of the primary issues is epa's establishment of standards of performance based on technologies including carbon capture and sequestration / storage ( ccs ) . natural gas plants and modified coal plants can reach the final nspss with efficient generation technology , but new coal plants would need to implement partial ccs . critics of the nspss for power plants say , for example , that ccs technology is not yet commercially available nor fully technically feasible , and therefore that it is not "adequately demonstrated" or the "best system" under section 111 ( b ) .