appendix a . summary of the emergency supplemental appropriations request for zika response efforts the following describes the administration's february 2016 zika emergency supplemental request components by agency . it was reported on april 18 that the administration submitted a revised zika supplemental request to congress , which would maintain departmental request totals , while redirecting some of the hhs funds requested for contingency use to vaccine research and development at the national institutes of health ( nih ) . detailed information about this is not publicly available , and the following narrative does not reflect this revision . health and human services the administration's emergency supplemental appropriations request to respond to the zika outbreak seeks for hhs a total of $1.509 billion . each hhs agency request includes the statement that funds would be "to prevent , prepare for , and respond to zika virus , other vector - borne diseases , or other infectious diseases and related health outcomes , domestically and internationally...." most of the requested funds would support research , surveillance , vaccine and test development , and various domestic preparedness activities . a portion would support international response activities . the request proposes that all supplemental appropriations to hhs be designated as emergency spending , and remain available until expended . centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) a total of $828 million of the february 2016 request is for the cdc - wide activities and program support account . proposed request language would , among other things , authorize the cdc director to transfer funds between cdc accounts , and authorize funds to be used for real property acquisition and improvements to non - federal facilities . funds would be used as follows: grants and technical assistance to puerto rico and u.s . territories — $225 million to , among other purposes , monitor pregnant women and establish a registry of women infected while pregnant ; expand mosquito control activities ; and enhance laboratory testing capacity . domestic response — $453 million to provide grants to southern and other u.s. states with aedes mosquitoes for surveillance , improved test methods and testing capacity , public education and outreach , mosquito control measures in areas at risk , and additional federal and state response activities . international response activities — $150 million to expand the public health workforce , and enhance infectious disease surveillance and emergency response activities , in zika - affected countries ; and to support the laboratory network of the pan american health organization ( paho ) , the regional arm of the world health organization ( who ) for the americas . public health and social services emergency fund ( phssef ) the phssef is a fund used by appropriators to provide the hhs secretary with ongoing or one - time emergency funding , such as for the response to disease epidemics .