the district court denied the motion . it determined that the motion failed on the third prong: granting an interlocutory appeal would not materially advance the case . unlike in a typical civil case , this case was likely to be resolved on a motion for summary judgment , with no lengthy discovery process and no facts in dispute . therefore , the court determined that "[d]ispositive motions can be briefed and decided in a matter of months — likely before an interlocutory appeal could even be decided. such an argument could be crafted in this way . first , congress only appropriates funds to the agencies to conduct activities that are permitted under federal law . the executive branch would likely characterize such a dispute as a matter of statutory interpretation — should the agency's statutory authority be interpreted to permit the challenged action ? alternatively , taking cues from burwell , a congressional institutional plaintiff like the house might allege that the executive's action — such as issuing a rule it argues is not within the agency's authority — is a violation of the appropriations clause . second , if the house believed the agency's action to be beyond its statutory authority , it could argue that congress did not appropriate funds to carry out that activity . third , therefore , the house could argue , just as in burwell , that by issuing the rule , the executive had drawn funds from the treasury without a congressional appropriation . this same pattern could also be applied to an instance in which the house believes an agency is acting in contravention of an appropriations rider , which prohibits the expenditure of funds for a particular purpose . these hypotheticals raise concerns that despite the burwell court's nod to the "extraordinary" facts before it , its reasoning could be coopted to grant standing to congressional institutional plaintiffs in potentially numerous cases . given that almost all executive actions require the expenditure of funds , it appears as though many disagreements about statutory interpretation could be repackaged in this way as violations of the appropriations clause . the arguably blurred lines between the categories of "constitutional" and "statutory" claims , which the district court attempted to strictly divide , were evidenced in the fact that the majority of the merits phase of the "constitutional" cost - sharing subsidy claim in burwell was spent on interpreting the aca . it is unclear how the burwell court would have reacted to these kinds of arguably statutory claims recast in appropriations clause terms . however , at the very least , in order to avoid the specter of general legislative standing , which the burwell court warns against , future courts may need to install some limiting principle to prevent routine allegations that an agency acted in excess of its statutory authority from being repackaged into cognizable violations of the appropriations clause . could other constitutional provisions form the basis of standing for a congressional institutional plaintiff under the burwell court's reasoning or is the appropriations clause unique ? the court described the clause as a "specific constitutional prohibition" that was "meant to safeguard" the house's particular role in the appropriations process and keep the political branches properly balanced .