still , some are skeptical of the impact of drug courts . most reported positive results for recidivism outcomes . for cost evaluations , only some programs had these data and these evaluations showed mixed results . some programs showed significant cost savings while others had insignificant findings for cost impacts . several studies have demonstrated that drug courts may lower recidivism rates and / or lower costs for processing defendants and offenders compared to traditional criminal justice processing . for example , one group of researchers examined the impact of a drug court over 10 years and concluded that treatment and other costs associated with the drug court ( investment costs ) per offender were $1,392 less than investment costs of traditional criminal justice processing . in addition , savings due to reduced recidivism ( outcome costs ) for drug court participants were more than $79 million over the 10-year period . a collaboration of researchers conducted a five - year longitudinal study of 23 drug courts from several regions of the united states and reported that drug court participants were significantly less likely than nonparticipants to relapse into drug use and participants committed fewer criminal acts than nonparticipants after completing the drug court program . the drug policy alliance has claimed that drug courts help only offenders who are expected to do well and do not truly reduce costs . this organization also has criticized drug courts for punishing addiction because drug courts dismiss those who are not able to abstain from substance use . congress has long been concerned over illicit drug use and abuse in the united states . recently , congress has given attention to opioid abuse , and especially overdose deaths involving prescription and illicit opioids . in 2015 , there were 52,404 drug overdose deaths in the united states , including 33,091 ( 63.1% ) that involved an opioid . also , in 2016 samhsa estimated that 329,000 americans age 12 and older were current users of heroin and approximately 3.8 million americans were current "misusers" of prescription pain relievers . policymakers may debate whether drug courts are an effective tool in the package of federal efforts to address the opioid epidemic . policy options include , but are not limited to , increasing federal funding for drug courts , expanding federal drug court programs , and amending the drug courts program to possibly include a broader group of offenders , among other potential changes . much of the research yields positive outcomes . over the last decade , the national institute of justice , through its crimesolutions.gov evaluation program , has evaluated 21 drug court programs and found that 19 of them had either "effective" or "promising" ratings while two had ratings of "no effects. as discussed , grant recipients of the federal drug courts program , with the exception of veterans treatment courts , must exclude violent offenders ; however , some argue that drug courts should include violent offenders . one group of researchers compared the outcomes for violent and nonviolent offenders and concluded that courts should consider the current charge rather than the offender's history of violence , and the type and seriousness of the offender's substance abuse problem when selecting individuals for drug court programs .