the constitution is silent on the number . historically , by statute congress has set the number of justices for the court . currently , that number is nine: one chief justice plus eight associate justices . but only six justices are needed for a quorum . in the event that the court is scheduled to hold a session but there is not a quorum , the justices ( or the clerk or deputy clerk ) may announce that the court will not meet until a quorum is restored . the nature of the president's prerogatives under the appointments clause is unclear . the obama administration has taken the position that the president has a constitutional obligation to nominate and appoint a supreme court justice when there is a vacancy . the constitution's appointments clause states that the president " shall nominate , and by and with the advice and consent of the senate , shall appoint ... judges of the supreme court. courts have generally construed the word "shall," in the constitution and federal statutes , to impose a mandatory obligation . for instance , when interpreting the word "shall" in article iii of the constitution , the supreme court stated that "[t]he word shall , is a sign of the future tense , and implies an imperative mandate , obligatory upon those to whom it is addressed. however , the court has not clarified when in the future the president needs to act . supreme court precedent regarding vacancies in other positions subject to presidential appointment suggests that the president has significant discretion as to when a vacancy "shall" be filled . the senate's prerogatives under the appointments clause are even less clear . the appointments clause states that the president "shall nominate , and by and with the advice and consent of the senate , shall appoint ... judges of the supreme court. unlike the duties spelled out for the president , the appointments clause does not provide that the senate "shall" give its advice and consent , nor does it expound on what the senate must do to give its advice and consent — two distinct tasks . additionally , the supreme court has not fully interpreted the specific terms "advice" and "consent" as they are used in the appointments clause , so it is not entirely clear what actions the senate must take , assuming any action were seen to be required . for instance , during a 1975 symposium on "advice and consent on supreme court nominations," then - senator james abourezk noted that , "[w]hile the 'consent' aspect of the senate's constitutional role is thus readily discernable , the same cannot be so easily said of the senate's duty to give its 'advice' on a supreme court appointment" or "to state precisely just how that duty is to be exercised institutionally. in the past , the senate has provided its advice and consent by various means , ranging from committee hearings to a vote on the senate floor . accordingly , there is disagreement in the legal community about the senate's role in presidential appointments .