appendix a . title i - a formula characteristics appendix b. esea title i - a appropriations figure b - 1 and table b - 1 detail the appropriations levels for title i - a since fy2001 . overall , after the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ; p.l . 107-110 ) reauthorized the esea , there was a steady increase in title i - a appropriations through fy2005 , and a second period of increasing appropriations from fy2007 to fy2009 . there has also been an increase in appropriations from fy2013 through fy2018 . table b - 2 provides the appropriations level and share by title i - a formula since fy2001 . as previously discussed , all post - fy2001 increases in title i - a appropriations have been divided between targeted grants and efig . thus , the share of appropriations allocated via the targeted grant and efig formulas has been steadily increasing while the share of appropriations allocated via the basic grant formula has been steadily decreasing . the essa made few changes to these formulas . one notable change is an increase in the set - aside for the bureau of indian education ( bie ) and outlying areas from 1.0% to 1.1% . this change will take effect beginning in fy2017 provided the total amount available for state grants would not be less than the amount available in fy2016 . all changes to the title i - a grant allocation process made by the essa will take effect beginning in fy2017 . this report provides a detailed discussion of the four title i - a formulas used to determine grants as modified by the essa . table a - 1 in appendix a offers an overview of the key elements included in the four formulas . appendix b provides an overview of title i - a appropriations levels in recent years . under title i - a , funds are allocated to leas via states using four different allocation formulas specified in statute: basic grants , concentration grants , targeted grants , and education finance incentive grants ( efig ) . annual appropriations bills specify that portions of each year's appropriation be allocated under each of these different formulas . in fy2018 , an estimated 41% of title i - a appropriations were allocated through the basic grant formula , 9% through the concentration grant formula , and 25% through each of the targeted grant and efig formulas . the current four formula strategy has evolved over time , beginning with the basic grant formula when the esea was originally enacted . the concentration grant formula was added in the 1970s in an attempt to focus funding more effectively on leas with relatively large numbers or high percentages of formula children ( i.e. , low - income children or children in need ) . during consideration of esea reauthorization in the early 1990s , there was an attempt to replace the two existing formulas with a new formula that would target title i - a funds better by providing more funding per formula child as the percentage or number of formula children in an lea increased .