the actions are discussed in more detail below . the obama administration submitted its fy2017 budget to congress on february 9 , 2016 . the president's budget lays out for congress the administration's views on national priorities and policy initiatives . congress has also begun its consideration of the fy2017 budget . ongoing budgetary challenges remain , which may result in congressional action . issues related to deficit reduction and the long - term budget outlook may continue to dominate the policy debate . increased spending on entitlement programs , as currently structured , will likely contribute to rising deficits and debt , placing ever - increasing focus on how to achieve fiscal sustainability over the long term . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) provides data and analysis to congress throughout the budget and appropriations process . each january , cbo issues a budget and economic outlook that contains current - law baseline estimates of outlays and revenues . in march , cbo typically issues an analysis of the president's budget submission with revised baseline estimates and projections . these documents can be delayed as a result of the legislative agenda or if the president's budget is off schedule . in late summer , cbo issues an updated b u dget and economi c outlook with new baseline projections . in these documents , cbo sets a current - law baseline as a benchmark to evaluate whether legislative proposals would increase or decrease outlays and revenue collection . baseline estimates are not intended to predict likely future outcomes , but to show what spending and revenues would be if current law remained in effect . cbo typically evaluates the budgetary consequences of legislative proposals and the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) evaluates the consequences of revenue proposals . cbo also releases other periodic publications focusing on the future fiscal health of the united states . in their publication , the long - term budget outlook , cbo makes projections on the state of the federal budget over the next 75 years . cbo discusses spending and revenue levels and the related issues that it expects will arise under different policy assumptions . in its budget options volumes , cbo provides specific policy options and the impact they will have on spending and revenues over a 10-year budget window . cbo also provides arguments for and against enacting each policy . the president's budget contains five major volumes: ( 1 ) the budget , ( 2 ) historical tables , ( 3 ) analytical perspectives , ( 4 ) appendix , and ( 5 ) supplemental materials . these documents lay out the administration's projections of the fiscal outlook for the country , along with spending levels proposed for each of the federal government's departments and programs . the historical tables volume also provides significant amounts of budget data , much of which extends back to 1962 or earlier . along with the administration's budget documents , the department of the treasury also releases its green book , which provides further detail on the revenue proposals that are contained in the budget . this combination was referred to by some as the "fiscal cliff.