for example , h.res . currently there are 44 patriotic or national observances . these include days for individuals ( eg , wright brothers , leif erikson , and stephen foster ) ; groups ( eg , mother's day , and peace officers ) ; events ( eg , patriot day [9 / 11] , korean war veterans armistice day , and signing the constitution ) ; and other recognitions ( eg , flag day , poison prevention , and heart month ) . new statutory observances can only be created by enacting a law . the other type of commemorative period recognizes a special day , week , or month . most often these are introduced as a simple resolution ( h.res . or as a concurrent resolution ( h.con.res . this report provides information on commemorative legislation that recognizes a specific time period , and then it discusses options for congress . first , the report summarizes the different types of commemorative time periods — federal holidays ; patriotic and national observances ; and commemorative days , weeks , and months . second , it discusses the current rules in the house and senate that govern this type of legislation . finally , the report discusses options for congress , including introducing legislation in the house and senate , and asking the president to issue a proclamation . permanent commemorative time periods are authorized by law to commemorate groups , individuals , and events . broadly , these permanent commemorations can be divided into two categories: federal holidays and patriotic and national observances . nonpermanent recognitions of commemorative days , weeks , and months can be authorized through the use of simple or concurrent resolutions . for the house , rules ban the introduction and consideration of date - specific commemorative legislation . in the senate , no specific chamber rules exist on either the introduction or consideration of commemorative measures . while the house prohibits the introduction and consideration of date - specific commemorative legislation , house resolutions to achieve a similar purpose continue to be introduced . these resolutions do not include a specific time period after the resolution's resolving clause . consequently , the introduction of such a measure does not appear to violate house rule xii , clause 5 . data on all measures used to propose recognition of a commemorative period were collected for the 113 th and the 114 th congresses . a total of 915 commemorative measures were identified , 437 in the 113 th congress and 478 in the 114 th congress . figure 1 shows the types of legislation used to introduce commemorative recognitions in the house , and also in the senate ( where no rules regarding the introduction of commemorative resolutions exist ) , during the 113 th and 114 th congresses . as figure 1 shows , the majority of commemorative measures were introduced as simple resolutions ( 95% ) over the two congresses . a small number are measures that would need both house and senate approval . these include concurrent resolutions ( 4% ) — which do not require presidential action — or bills and joint resolutions ( less than 1% ) .