these concerns are further discussed below . proponents of a ban on laws have raised a number of legal objections relating to the chain of accountability for the actions of these systems . because machines are not ethical actors , proponents of a ban argue laws cannot meaningfully be "held responsible" for decision - making . as a result , if an autonomous system decided to carry out an action illegal under the laws of war ( a "war crime" ) , holding someone responsible for that decision would be difficult or impossible . opponents of a ban counter that there is a long tradition of command responsibility for the actions taken by subordinates . they also point out that if the laws were intentionally designed or manufactured with the purpose of being used to commit war crimes , or with reasonable knowledge that they would be so employed , then the designers or manufacturers would have criminal liability . likewise , if laws were used by a commander with the intention to commit a war crime , then the commander could likely be held responsible for that crime . proponents of the ban argue that war crimes are most likely to occur as a result of an unintended action by the autonomous system , not as an element of deliberate design . although commanders are responsible for reasonably foreseeable actions of subordinates , these authors argue that commanders , designers , and manufacturers will be excused from such responsibility because of the fundamentally complex and unpredictable nature of autonomous decision - making . in this view , victims of war crimes committed by laws will lack redress , creating a fundamental lack of justice and responsibility associated with the weapons . for this reason alone , some argue , laws should be banned . opponents of the ban note that soldiers ordered to perform an otherwise lawful mission could commit war crimes as well . ban proponents note that this still leaves someone criminally responsible for the misconduct , but opponents counter that this analysis places an excessive focus on individual criminal liability . they point out that the law has effectively managed responsibility for a variety of circumstances involving not fully predictable outcomes , such as the law regarding pet behavior or negligence . this is essentially an operational concern: "will the functioning of the weapon systems comply with the appropriate requirements ? the second concern is less focused on function and more focused on accountability . this concern centers on whether the use of laws will make it more difficult to hold parties responsible for misconduct in the course of armed conflict . various authors have pointed to three primary areas of operational law that may affect consideration of laws . first , there is the set of legal norms covered by the concept of jus ad bellum , which is the law governing the appropriate justification for the initiation of armed conflict . second , there is the body of law classifying weapons as lawful or unlawful . finally , all parties discuss the laws governing conduct during war , or jus in bello .