there is no minimum age for congressional interns . if working with interns who are under 18 , an office may want to consider the potential concerns related to working with minors and carefully evaluate the job - related skills and maturity of the prospective intern . a volunteer cannot receive financial compensation for his or her service . the volunteer's assignments are not to replace the regular duties of paid employees . a fellow is an individual who also performs services in a congressional office on a temporary basis , but typically through participation in an established , graduate - level or mid - career education program . fellows often receive compensation from a sponsoring employer , professional association , or other organization while working in congress during the course of the fellowships . congressional offices may try to recruit fellows and work with existing programs , but a fellowship is usually not a position a congressional office creates on its own . a page is a high - school junior , at least 16 years old , who participates in a more structured program for a semester or summer . pages continue to serve in the senate , but the house program was discontinued in 2010 . although they are appointed by individual senators , the pages provide assistance as a group in the senate chamber , and receive housing , education , and a stipend from the senate . few statutes or standing rules of the house or senate make specific references to congressional interns . in many cases , the distinction between a paid internship and an unpaid internship affects which formal rules apply to interns . guidance and policies for house interns can be found in the house ethics manual , in the members' congressional handboo k , congressional c ommittee handbook , from the house committee on ethics , and from the committee on house administration . for senate interns , guidance and policies are mainly found in the senate ethics manual , from the senate select committee on ethics , and from the senate committee on rules and administration . congressional offices can choose to set additional rules for their interns to follow . house or senate rules that apply to paid congressional employees generally extend to paid interns as well . these might include , but are not limited to , the code of official conduct for the appropriate chamber , gift restrictions , ban on solicitations , and prohibition on payment for a speech , appearance , or publication . financial disclosure rules may also apply in the senate if the intern is receiving compensation from a source other than the u.s. government . paid interns are exempt from some provisions of the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) that otherwise apply to congressional staff , like minimum wage and overtime pay requirements , as well as employee benefits , like insurance and retirement . fewer house or senate rules may apply to unpaid interns than to paid interns . to enhance accountability for unpaid interns , the house or senate ethics committees or individual congressional offices can set standards for unpaid interns to abide by that mirror some of the same rules that paid interns or congressional employees follow .