peru has been a leader in the negotiations for the u.n . framework convention on climate change , including as president of the conference of the parties , which hammered out the paris agreement in december 2015 . peru and other parties signed the paris agreement on april 22 , 2016 . after ratification of the agreement by its legislature , peru will be committed to the agreement's intended nationally determined contribution , reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by 30% from the "business as usual" scenario . a major goal toward that end is to reach zero emissions from the land use , land use change , and forestry sector by 2030 . peru has also made significant strides in climate change policy . it developed a national energy policy , which supports wind and solar development ; enacted maximum permissible limits on emissions for fishmeal and fish oil ; and enacted the forestry and wildlife law and supporting regulations , creating the national forestry and wildlife service . peru is currently designing a national adaptation plan for climate change . peru reported its first case of the zika virus in late january 2016 . it was brought into the country by a man from venezuela , who contracted the infection in colombia and was treated in a lima hospital . roadblocks and violent demonstrations are common in mining areas . according to the state department's human rights report for 2015 , "[t]here were no reports that the government or its agents committed arbitrary or unlawful killings. the report noted nonetheless that police officers killed 3 people and injured 26 others during a protest at the las bambas copper mine in september ; the regional prosecutor was investigating the incidents at the end of 2015 . the peruvian national police are responsible for internal security , except in the central - southern valley of the apurimac , ene , and mantaro rivers ( vraem ) , where the military is responsible for internal security . approximately half of peru's potential pure cocaine is produced in the remote vraem , where remnants of the shining path ( sendero luminoso ) terrorist insurgency operate and rely on cocaine trafficking for funding . the shining path's strength has been greatly reduced from the late 1980s and early 1990s , when it posed a significant threat to national security . according to jane's sentinel security assessment , the shining path currently does not pose a major security threat outside the vraem . within that area , however , according to the state department's h uman r ights report for 2015 , the shining path carried out a range of human rights abuses , including killings and forced recruitment of child soldiers . in 2014 , despite insurgency attacks against them , peruvian military forces regained control of several areas of the valley that had been controlled by the shining path . nonetheless , domestic and international gas and mining firms operating in the vraem continue to face threats of extortion , sabotage , and kidnapping by the group . president - elect kuczynski has pledged to fight corruption and violent crime through judicial reform and to improve the police force through measures including increasing police salaries and the interior ministry's budget .