appendix i . title 10 authorities: humanitarian assistance and defense health programs the following represent a sample of department of defense ( dod ) humanitarian assistance programs . the humanitarian assistance and the humanitarian and civil assistance programs are funded through the dod overseas humanitarian and disaster assistance ( ohdaca ) account , which also funds programs under four other title 10 statutes . humanitarian assistance program humanitarian assistance 10 u.s.c . should the current statutory and institutional framework be modified or changed ? are agencies provided sufficient resources to carry out their institutional roles ? how might congressional oversight and public transparency be improved ? the current legal and institutional framework for assistance to foreign militaries and other security forces has its origins in congressional documents , legislation , and executive orders that , beginning in the late 1940s , established the respective roles and responsibilities of the department of state and dod . a lead oversight role for the secretary of state has been a central and enduring feature for most of the time since then , as has been dod's major role in administering many security assistance programs . nevertheless , the legal and institutional basis for state department influence and oversight has evolved over time . the state department and dod "shared responsibility" for security assistance is exercised in diverse ways . the precise arrangements depend on the statutory authority and any relevant executive directives , as well as the arrangements that have been worked out between the two departments . this section provides information on how the two departments share responsibility for state department security assistance programs and a representative sample of programs conducted under title 10 authority . the "traditional" state department programs — and more recent counternarcotics , law enforcement , and peacekeeping programs — provide assistance , in the recent lexicon , to "build partnership capacity" by training and equipping foreign military and other security forces , and to otherwise aid foreign military and other security forces . as mentioned earlier , such programs are authorized under the 1961 faa and the aeca . the dsca administers about half ( by number ) of the state department programs . ( these are fms / fmf and related sdaf and leases , imet , excess defense articles [eda] , and a portion of pko programs. ) the state department administers programs conducted under its other security assistance authorities . program descriptions and funding amounts for state department bilateral and regional programs are provided annually in the state department's congressional budget justification . the programs are funded through foreign operations appropriations . many 1961 faa and aeca programs are subject to a wide variety of conditions and exclusions . ( with certain exceptions , dod authorities are subject only to restrictions in the statute itself. ) table 1 lists state department authorities in alphabetical order . it identifies whether a program is administered by dod's dsca or otherwise supported by dod . support may include direct support through dod contributions to state department programs , or indirect support through coordination of dod programs with state department programs . appendix c provides more detail on the state department authorities. ) state department input into dod activities conducted under title 10 security cooperation authorities varies widely .