circuit . employers and manufacturers challenged the standards on the basis of the following five issues: 1. whether substantial evidence supports osha's finding that limiting workers' silica exposure to the level set by the new standards reduces a significant risk of material health impairment ; 2. whether substantial evidence supports osha's finding that the standards are technologically feasible for the foundry , hydraulic fracturing , and construction industries ; 3. whether substantial evidence supports osha's finding that the standards are economically feasible for these industries ; 4. whether osha violated the administrative procedure act in promulgating the new standards ; and 5. whether substantial evidence supports the provision that allows workers who undergo medical examinations to keep the results confidential from their employers , the provision that prohibits employers from using dry cleaning methods unless doing so is infeasible . labor groups challenged the following: 1. the requirement that medical surveillance for construction workers be provided only if the employee has to wear a respirator for 30 days for 1 employer within a 1-year period ; and 2. the absence of medical removal provisions . the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c . circuit decided the case on december 22 , 2017 , and upheld the new standards . in its decision , the court rejected all challenges brought by manufacturers and employers as well as labor groups' objections to the medical surveillance provision . on the issue of medical removal raised by labor groups , the court held that osha had acted in an "arbitrary and capricious" manner in declining to require medical removal of a worker in cases in which a medical professional recommends permanent removal of the worker , when a medical professional recommends temporary removal of the worker to alleviate symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( copd ) , or when a medical professional recommends temporary removal of a worker pending a further determination by a medical specialist . the court remanded these issues to osha for reconsideration or further explanation . annual silicosis mortality data are shown in figure 1 . in public comments in response to the nprm , the acc , the u.s. chamber of commerce , the national utility contractors association , and the national federation of independent business all argued that osha's projection of the new standards preventing 642 annual deaths from silicosis and non - malignant respiratory diseases ( nmrd ) in the nprm exceeded the number of silicosis - related deaths reported in 2010 by the cdc and cited this as evidence that osha had overstated the benefits of the proposed standards . in response to these objections , osha claims that commenters are making "apples and oranges" comparisons because the industry's objections focus on the number of deaths attributable to silicosis only , whereas osha's projections are for the number of deaths from silicosis and other nmrd prevented by the new standards .