sec . center for medicare and medicaid innovation ( cmmi ) . this funding initiative supports testing for innovative health care payment and service delivery models that have the potential to reduce spending for medicare , medicaid , and chip while maintaining or improving the quality of care for program beneficiaries . sec . 3022 medicare shared savings program . under the shared savings program , administered by cmmi , eligible accountable care organizations ( acos ) qualify for an annual incentive bonus if they achieve a threshold savings amount established for the three - year agreement period . the program seeks to facilitate coordination and cooperation among providers to improve the quality of care for medicare fee - for - service beneficiaries and reduce unnecessary costs . while telehealth systems are explicitly permitted as a tool that aco groups may use to define processes that promote evidence - based medicine , it is uncertain if any funded projects are incorporating them . is the quality of care and the outcomes associated with that care of greater , lesser or equal value when compared to traditional , brick - and - mortar care ? there will be no single , one - size fits all answer to issues of quality . but additional research is needed to answer questions about the impact of these programs on key measures of quality , particularly at a time when there are increased calls to expand the use of telehealth across a number of federal programs as well as efforts to more directly tie reimbursement to quality / performance outcomes . finally , issues of uniformity in terminology could be the subject of further exploration . specifically how the terms "telehealth" and "telemedicine" are used across federally funded health programs and if any differences in definitions result in problems associated with data collection , evaluation , and payment . appendix a. definitions of related terms appendix b. fedtel membership fedtel consists of representatives of federal agencies , or departments and programs within those agencies , with an interest or activity in telemedicine . physicians must have a face - to - face encounter ( including through telehealth ) with the patient before issuing a certification or re - certification for home health services or durable medical equipment . sec . improvement in part d medication therapy management programs ( mtm ) . part d sponsors will be required to include in their mtm programs an annual comprehensive medication review , furnished in person or using telehealth technologies , and provide follow - up interventions as warranted . appendix d. telehealth and telecommunications telehealth systems and networks rely on broadband , as well as specialized health equipment and advanced telecommunications . fcc officials state that [b]roadband is essential to 21 st century health care , saving lives , improving the quality of care , and reducing costs by providing instant remote access over high - speed networks to medical specialists , health care records and training . telemedicine applications provided over robust broadband networks can facilitate immediate diagnoses and care needed to prevent lasting damage to stroke victims , prevent premature births and deliver psychiatric treatment for patients in rural areas , to name a few examples .