yes . in 1986 , congress enacted p.l . 99-359 , which amended the uniform time act by changing the beginning of dst to the first sunday in april and having the end remain the last sunday in october . in 2005 , congress enacted p.l . 109-58 , the energy policy act of 2005 . section 110 of this act amended the uniform time act , by changing dst to begin the second sunday in march and end the first sunday in november . the act required the secretary of the department of energy ( doe ) to report to congress on the impact of extended dst on energy consumption in the united states . in october 2008 , doe sent its report to congress . after reviewing the doe report , congress retained the right under the law to revert dst to the 2005 time schedule . for more information on the legislation that changed dst , see crs report rl32860 , energy efficiency and renewable energy legislation in the 109th congress , by [author name scrubbed] . arizona ( except for the navajo nation ) , hawaii , puerto rico , american samoa , guam , the northern mariana islands , and the u.s. virgin islands do not recognize daylight saving time . dst is observed in approximately 70 countries , including most of those in north america and europe . for a complete listing of countries that observe dst , please see worldtimezone.com and webexhibits .org websites . the department of transportation , office of the general counsel , oversees and regulates dst . under the uniform time act , moving an area on or off dst is accomplished through legal action at the state level . some states require legislation , whereas others require executive action such as a governor's executive order . information on procedures required in a specific state may be obtained from that state's legislature or governor's office . if a state decides to observe dst , the dates of observance must comply with federal legislation . as of september 2015 , 12 states were considering opting out of the uniform time act of 1966 . an area's time zone can only be changed by law . under the standard time act of 1918 , as amended by the uniform time act of 1966 , moving a state or an area within a state from one time zone to another requires dot regulation . the governor or state legislature makes the request for a state or any part of the state ; the highest county - elected officials may make the request for that county . the standard for deciding whether to change the time zone is the area's convenience of commerce . the convenience of commerce is defined broadly to consider such circumstances as the shipment of goods within the community ; the origin of television and radio broadcasts ; the areas where most residents work , attend school , worship , or receive health care ; the location of airports , railways , and bus stations ; and the major elements of the community's economy .