cannon . the senate - passed version of the ndaa trimmed $11 million from the request and the enacted version of the bill followed suit . the initial house - passed defense appropriations bill would have cut $4 million from the stryker request while the senate committee - approved s. 3000 would have cut $34 million on grounds that those funds would not be needed in fy2017 . the initial house - senate defense appropriations compromise ( h.r . 1301 ) would have provided $701 million from stryker procurement , cutting $26 million from the request on grounds that it was not justified . however , the enacted appropriations bill restored $8 million of that reduction , providing a total of $709 million . the budget requested $184 million to continue development of a new tracked vehicle designated the armored multi - purpose vehicle ( ampv ) that would replace thousands of vietnam - era m - 113 vehicles as battlefield ambulances and mobile command posts , and filling other combat support roles . the new vehicle will be based on the bradley infantry fighting vehicle . the fy2017 funds would be used to complete production of 29 prototype ampvs slated for shakedown testing at government test sites . the enacted version of the ndaa authorized the full amount requested , as had both the house and senate versions of that bill . similarly , the house - passed and senate committee versions of the initial defense appropriations bill ( h.r . 5293 and s. 3000 , respectively ) would have provided the full amount requested for ampv , as does the enacted bill . the planned size of the navy , the rate of navy ship procurement , and the prospective affordability of the navy's shipbuilding plans have been matters of concern for the congressional defense committees for the past several years . concerns over the current and future size and capability of the navy have intensified with the recent shift in the international security environment to a situation featuring renewed great power competition . the navy's original fy2017 budget requested funding for the procurement of seven new ships — two virginia - class attack submarines , two ddg - 51 class destroyers , two littoral combat ships ( lcss ) , and one lha - 6 class amphibious assault ship . the navy's fy2017-fy2021 five - year shipbuilding plan includes a total of 38 new ships , compared to the five - year plan sent to congress in 2015 , which projected funding of 48 new ships during this period . see the summary of congressional action authorizing funding for selected shipbuilding programs in table a - 2 . table b - 2 provides a summary of appropriations actions related to such programs . following are selected highlights . the original budget request included $5.1 billion to continue procuring virginia class attack submarines at a rate of two per year under a ten - ship multiyear procurement ( myp ) contract for fy2014-fy2018 .