the bills were h.r . 568 , the thermal insulation efficiency improvement act , and h.r . they proposed to require doe to report to congress on the impact of thermal insulation on both energy and water use systems for potable hot and chilled water in federal buildings , and the return on investment of installing such insulation . one enacted bill , s. 535 , the energy efficiency improvement act of 2015 ( p.l . 114-11 ) in part addresses energy and water use efficiency in commercial buildings . 2177 and s. 720 included provisions directing the department of energy to work with manufacturers to identify opportunities for improved water - efficient processes in manufacturing , along with technical assistance on energy efficiency , pollution prevention , and natural resource conservation in manufacturing . 3720 proposed to build on e.o . 13693 to direct federal agencies to give purchase preference to watersense - certified products and services and femp - designated products . s. 869 , the all - of - the - above federal building energy conservation act , proposed to authorize doe to establish energy performance requirements for federal buildings that consider energy and water savings . it also proposed to require federal energy managers to perform energy and water evaluations and to implement energy and water savings measures . similar provisions were included in s. 720 / h.r . 2177 , the energy savings and industrial competitiveness act . 614 , the savings , accountability , value , and efficiency ( save ) act , similarly proposed to direct federal building energy managers to adopt identified energy and water conservation savings . two bills included provisions that addressed the energy and water savings potential of thermal insulation . among its provisions , the bill requires the general services administration ( gsa ) to develop and publish model leasing provisions to encourage building owners and tenants to use cost - effective energy efficiency and water efficiency measures in commercial buildings . it also requires gsa to develop policies and best practices to implement the measures for the realty services provided by the gsa to federal agencies and to make these policies and practices available to state , county , and municipal governments for their use in managing owned and leased buildings . the largest number of water use efficiency bills in the 114 th congress proposed to provide technical and financial assistance for adopting or demonstrating practices or measures that conserve water . a number of the bills proposed to assist owners and operators of public water systems and water utilities in adopting or installing water - efficient systems , while a few proposed to help provide incentives for consumers to purchase and install water - efficient products or services . several bills ( h.r . 3143 ) included similar provisions to establish a smart energy and water efficiency pilot program administered by doe to award grants to water systems , utilities , and water districts to demonstrate innovative technologies for energy and water efficiency . wifia is to be implemented by epa and the army corps of engineers throughout the united states ; rifia would be implemented by the bureau of reclamation solely in western states .