another vehicle has been annual appropriations legislation . the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l . 114-113 ) contains specific language pertaining to burma , continuing or adding restrictions on u.s. relations with the country , while requiring new forms of bilateral engagement ( see text box below ) . at present , no stand - alone legislation on burma has been introduced in the 114 th congress . in addition , congress could allow the obama administration to determine what adjustments , if any , are warranted in u.s. policies and activities in burma in light of the 2015 parliamentary elections , without legislative direction from congress . 110-286 ) ( see " implications for u.s. policy and congress " below ) ? under what conditions and when should the obama administration and / or congress consider relaxing or revoking remaining restrictions on relations with burma ? given aung san suu kyi's anticipated leadership role in the nld - led government , to what degree and at what stage should she be consulted in regard to u.s. policy toward burma and u.s. assistance to the country , and should any new initiatives be contingent upon her approval ? 108-61 ) and the tom lantos block burmese jade ( junta's anti - democratic efforts ) act of 2008 ( jade act ; p.l . to what degree should the u.s. government provide support for initiatives undertaken by the thein sein government during the transition period , and should aung san suu kyi and other nld leaders be consulted or informed that it may be considering any such support ? more than 90 political parties and more than 6,000 candidates contested 168 seats in the union parliament's national assembly , 323 seats in the union parliament's people's assembly , and 629 seats in the 14 state and regional parliaments . according to burma's union election commission ( uec ) , more than 23 million people voted in the election , or about 69% of the registered voters . should the u.s. government expand engagement with the burmese military given the military's continued presence in the union parliament , its nearly complete autonomy from civilian control , its ongoing assaults on various ethnic armed militias , its reportedly continued abuse of the human rights of non - combatants , and its possible opposition to further political reforms ? should any sanctions or restrictions on individuals or entities that were waived or suspended because of their official role in the thein sein government be reinstated following the formation of a nld - led government ? congress will have a number of opportunities to weigh in on u.s. policy toward burma in the weeks and months ahead . one vehicle used by past congresses to set policy has been legislation imposing sanctions on burma , such as the burmese freedom and democracy act ( p.l . in nationwide elections on november 8 , 2015 , burma ( myanmar ) elected the members of its bicameral union parliament and the country's 14 state and regional parliaments . this was a decline from the turnout for the 2010 parliamentary elections when 77% of registered voters submitted ballots .