may campaign for or against candidates in partisan elections . may campaign for or against referendum questions , constitutional amendments , or municipal ordinances . may be a candidate for public office in a nonpartisan election . may express opinions about candidates and issues . telework has raised several questions with regard to the applicability of the hatch act . in congressional testimony , osc explained that a significant number of employees work from home while using government - issued equipment . thus , application of hatch act restrictions to teleworking employees could be analyzed under several possible frameworks: ( 1 ) determination of whether the employee is on duty ; ( 2 ) clarification of whether the telework location is a federal workplace ; and ( 3 ) potential expansion of the prohibition on the use of government vehicles to include other government equipment ( eg , laptops , smartphones ) . current law does not identify which of these frameworks may be most appropriate , but osc guidance indicates that "[f]ederal employees are considered 'on duty' during telecommuting hours. osc has previously recommended that congress consider clarifying these definitions as a matter of legislative authority rather than relying on the administrative regulations and interpretation . it suggested that "extending the definition of the federal workplace to an employee's home would be inappropriate," and noted the statute's silence with regard to government resources other than vehicles . accordingly , it suggested that "[a]gencies should be encouraged to develop clear computer - usage and government equipment policies" including the use of official email addresses . however , the issue was not included in the most recent amendments to the hatch act . the office of special counsel has provided guidance , including examples , to illustrate what types of activities are permitted and prohibited for less restricted and further restricted employees . less restricted employees permissible political activities may be candidates for public office in nonpartisan elections . may register and vote as they choose . may assist in voter registration drives . may contribute money to political campaigns , political parties , or partisan political groups . may attend political fundraising functions . may attend and be active at political rallies and meetings . may join and be an active member of political clubs or parties . may hold office in political clubs or parties . in an advisory opinion , the agency examined an email sent by a federal employee entitled "who is barack obama ? ," which included a number of opinions about then - presidential candidate obama that osc found to be in violation of the hatch act . may distribute campaign literature in partisan elections . may volunteer to work on a partisan political campaign . if the expression is political activity , however — that is , activity directed at the success or failure of a political party , candidate for partisan political office , or partisan political group — then the expression is not permitted while the employee is on duty , in any federal room or building , while wearing a uniform or official insignia , or using any federally owned or leased vehicle .