the issuance of such guidance has not escaped criticism . some have argued that agencies use guidance documents to effectively change the law or expand the scope of their delegated regulatory authorities . this report examines one type of guidance document of particular recent prominence — agency policy statements . it explores judicial doctrine regarding the difference between legislative rules and statements of policy ; discusses when such statements are judicially reviewable ; analyzes when courts will grant deference to agency interpretations contained in guidance documents ; and notes the relative costs and benefits of potential judicial and statutory rules regarding their use . as mentioned above , while legislative rules must undergo notice and comment rulemaking procedures , agency statements of policy are exempt from these requirements . circuit put it , when an agency: acts as if a document issued at headquarters is controlling in the field , if it treats the document in the same manner as it treats a legislative rule ... if it leads private parties or state permitting authorities to believe that it will declare permits invalid unless they comply with the terms of the document , then the agency's document is for all practical purposes "binding. for example , in u.s. telephone association v. f.c.c . , the federal communications commission ( fcc ) issued a schedule of penalties to determine fines for violation of the communications act . the commission described the schedule as a policy statement and claimed that it retained discretion to "depart from the standards in specific applications. circuit noted that the agency had applied the schedule 300 times and claimed to have departed from the schedule in only eight situations . the court , however , largely rejected the eight departures as truly exercising any sort of discretion . the court concluded that this practice revealed the agency's intention to bind itself to a particular position and set aside the schedule because it had not undergone notice and comment rulemaking . the importance of the difference between a formal and a functional heuristic is illustrated by a case currently pending before the supreme court . in texas v. united states , a federal district court entered a nationwide preliminary injunction barring the obama administration from implementing the dapa program and its proposed expansion of the earlier daca program , initiatives which had been announced in a memorandum from the dhs secretary to high - level agency officials . the memorandum directed agency officials to establish a process whereby aliens that met certain criteria could , on a "case - by - case basis," obtain one type of relief from removal , known as deferred action . the district court found that because this memorandum constituted a legislative rule rather than a policy statement , its issuance without notice and comment violated the apa . the court rejected the agency's claim that agency employees maintained meaningful discretion when determining whether to grant deferred action to individual aliens who met the criteria set forth in the memorandum , reasoning that the memorandum "virtually extinguished" discretion for agency personnel , who would simply decide whether an application met the specified criteria .