that review is underway . in 2015 , congress authorized that the ohio replacement program , the ssbn ( x ) , which like b - 21 has a nuclear mission , be funded not from the navy budget , but through a national sea - based deterrence fund in the defense - wide budget . on march 16 , 2016 , air force secretary deborah lee james told the house armed services committee that all u.s. strategic forces should be funded outside of service budgets . two days later , secretary of defense ashton carter agreed "that a broader nuclear deterrent fund may be appropriate. those who support a separate nuclear deterrence fund argue that the nuclear deterrence mission is a joint and national effort , not distinct to a particular military service , and thus should be funded outside the services' budgets . they also note that the military services are facing a "bow wave" of deferred modernization and recapitalization following more than a decade of war , and that moving the expensive nuclear forces to a separate budget will allow the services to focus on enhancing capability for their unique missions without the competing expense of deterrence forces . others note that regardless of the budget line used , all of these funds will come under the dod topline , and that reallocating funds to a dod - wide deterrence fund will reduce the overall amounts available for all of the services . few technical details have been revealed . no mention has been made of a desired speed , although the combination of long range , large payload , and cost constraints strongly suggest b - 21 will be subsonic . details such as the b - 21's size , required stealth , structure , number and type of engines , projected weapons , and onboard sensors remain classified , which makes evaluating the proposed cost difficult . a previous crs insight noted that the b - 21's proposed funding and deployment schedule implied that considerable development had been accomplished prior to contract award . the air force later confirmed this , with senior program officials stating that both competing designs were at an unusually high level of detail and development for a system in which the prime contractor had not been selected . the low - observable characteristics of both designs were investigated in detail against current and anticipated threats , and final designs were complete down to the level of , for example , individual access panels . this high level of technical readiness may help explain why the air force anticipates ioc approximately 10 years from contract award , whereas other technically complex aircraft like f - 22 and f - 35 have taken more than 20 years . major subsystem risk reduction was also accomplished , and both competitors' designs incorporated substantial quantities of existing subsystems ( sometimes with b - 21-specific refinements ) . this effort presumably reduces technological risk and shortens the time required for the engineering and manufacturing development ( emd ) phase that precedes production .