part 761 ) . the agency has taken actions pursuant to other authorities in the statute . tsca distinguishes between chemical substances that are on the inventory and those that are not . any chemical substance listed on the inventory is considered by the agency as an "existing" chemical substance . the statute defines any chemical substance not on the inventory as a "new chemical substance. 2576 will be referred to as the "senate amendment." both the house bill and the senate amendment would amend title i of the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) . the senate amendment , but not the house bill , would also amend the mercury export ban act of 2008 and add a provision to the public health service act regarding potential cancer clusters . the first section of this report provides a brief background on title i of tsca . for a summary of tsca provisions and history , see crs report rl31905 , the toxic substances control act ( tsca ) : a summary of the act and its major requirements , by [author name scrubbed] . the second section describes differences between the house bill and the senate amendment and also presents background on selected issues that the legislation addresses . the table includes a discussion of each provision of the house bill and the senate amendment , although it does not provide comprehensive analysis of the potential effects of particular provisions in the house bill or the senate amendment . existing law in the table is presented to the extent that such law would be amended by either the house bill or the senate amendment . the table organizes the provisions of the house bill and the senate amendment under 10 subheadings selected by crs that reflect the following elements of tsca: 1 . short title , intent , and definitions ( page crs - 12 ) ; 2 . policies , procedures , and guidance ; and advisory committee ( page crs - 13 ) ; 3 . recordkeeping , reporting , chemical inventory , and development of new information ( page crs - 15 ) ; 4 . confidential treatment and public disclosure of information ( page crs - 20 ) ; 5 . addressing risks of existing chemical substances and mixtures ( page crs - 28 ) ; 6 . addressing risks of new chemical substances and significant new uses of chemical substances ( page crs - 36 ) ; 7 . judicial review and enforcement ( page crs - 39 ) ; 8 . relationship to state law ( page crs - 42 ) ; 9 . resources to implement tsca ( page crs - 47 ) ; and 10 . other provisions ( page crs - 49 ) . the senate amendment would amend the same provisions of tsca listed above , albeit with differences . additionally , the senate amendment would amend: the process by which epa reviews new chemical substances or significant new uses of chemicals under tsca section 5 ; the recordkeeping and reporting requirements under tsca section 8 ; and various other provisions . the following sections provide a brief discussion of seven issues that have received attention in the debate to amend title i of tsca .