congress declined to provide funding for this program . 115-31 requires this funding to be transferred to ojp . congress also set - aside $8 million from the cops hiring program for the police act of 2016 ( p.l . this proposed initiative would have been a new mandatory program that would have invested $5 billion — $500 million a year for 10 years — in criminal justice reform efforts . the initiative would have used federal funding to promote innovative approaches to reducing both crime and unnecessary incarceration . the obama administration requested a $42 million increase in funding for the cops hiring program . states would have been able to use this funding to focus on one or more of the following objectives for their adult and juvenile systems: ( 1 ) examining and changing state laws and policies that contribute to unnecessarily long sentences and unnecessary incarceration , without sacrificing public safety ; ( 2 ) promoting critical advancements in community - oriented policing ; and ( 3 ) providing comprehensive diversion and reentry services . in addition , this initiative would have dedicated 10% of the funding for reform efforts in the federal criminal justice system , including improving skills , education , mental health , addiction , and other recidivism - reduction programming in the bureau of prisons . as a part of its fy2017 budget request for doj , the administration requested $500 million for the 21 st century justice initiative . the program would have focused on achieving three objectives: reducing crime , reversing practices that have led to unnecessarily long sentences and unnecessary incarceration , and building community trust . the report also provides information on fy2016 appropriations for doj's grant programs . the office on violence against women ( ovw ) was established to administer programs created under the violence against women act ( vawa ) of 1994 . these programs provide financial and technical assistance to communities around the country to facilitate the creation of programs , policies , and practices designed to improve criminal justice responses related to domestic violence , dating violence , sexual assault , and stalking . the obama administration's fy2017 request for ovw was $489 million , 1.9% more than the fy2016 appropriation of $480 million . the obama administration also proposed transferring $326 million from the crime victims fund to the ovw . the obama administration's fy2017 request was mostly in line with the fy2016 appropriation , but it requested increases for grants to encourage arrests in domestic violence cases and enforce protection orders ( +$11 million ) , civil legal assistance ( +$8 million ) , grants to combat violence on college campuses ( +$6 million ) , grants to combat abuse against the elderly ( +$1 million ) , and grants to strengthen tribal justice systems' response to domestic violence on tribal lands ( +$3 million ) . congress appropriated $222 million for the cops account for fy2017 , a 4.5% increase in funding compared to the fy2016 appropriation . congress increased funding for the cops hiring program from $187 million to $195 million , but after set - asides are accounted for , actual funding for the hiring program remained unchanged ( $137 million ) .