was a mitigation plan established ? who determined the plan is adequate and is the plan fully funded ? what are the results and progress from independent audits to agency systems ? an understanding of what risks an agency faces and what strategies the agency currently uses to combat those risks is a foundational element in examining an agency's internal cybersecurity . this information will also assist understanding agency investments in cybersecurity and what next steps are necessary for that agency . the appropriate role of the federal government in ensuring a certain level of national cybersecurity is a matter of debate . among the questions congress may explore in assessing the appropriate level of investment in external cybersecurity are: what is the appropriate role of government in sharing information among victims of cyberattacks , and what might that cost to execute ? is it appropriate for the federal government to invest taxpayer dollars in protecting private sector networks that generate profits for private entities ? what is the proper role for the federal government in cyberattack remediation for non - federal victims ? are federal grants supplanting non - federal investment in cybersecurity or complementing it ? are federal investments serving the needs of nonfederal organizations ? understanding the risks organizations in the non - .gov domain face and their relationship with the federal government will inform the congress and allow them to assess further levels of investment . as noted above , some agencies bear the added responsibility of helping secure the .gov domain beyond their internal cybersecurity duties . recent congresses have altered and clarified agency responsibilities for promoting federal .gov cybersecurity . the cybersecurity protection act of 2014 ( p.l . 113-282 ) , the cybersecurity enhancement act of 2014 ( p.l . 113-274 ) and the cybersecurity act of 2015 ( division n of p.l . 114-113 ) include provisions that require agencies to report to congress on their progress in implementing their responsibilities , to include the resources allocated to these efforts . as of this writing , some of these newly required reports have yet to be provided to congress or made public ; ultimately , they may provide a more detailed context for congressional oversight efforts . the usefulness of comparing one federal agency's investment in cybersecurity to another's has its limits . agencies vary in size and complexity — in terms of number of employees , number of geographic locations and number of separate systems . depending on the missions of an agency , their risk profiles will also vary — for instance , an agency which collects and uses citizen data as a core function of its business will have a different risk profile than one that deals mostly with intellectual property as part of research and development . these variances make drawing valid conclusions from broad agency to agency comparisons difficult . this also extends to components within a department , which may serve totally different functions . keeping such factors in mind , cross - agency comparisons may yet provide useful benchmarks when examining agencies with similar risk profiles , such as those agencies in the national security arena , or those that deliver citizen benefits .