trust ? what are the consequences of any policy option on trust ( eg , trust between individuals , agencies , branches of government , public and government ) ? "the intelligence community will: provide appropriate transparency to enhance public understanding about: the ic's mission and what the ic does to accomplish it ( including its structure and effectiveness ) ; the laws , directives , authorities , and policies that govern the ic's activities ; and the compliance and oversight framework that ensures intelligence activities are conducted in accordance with applicable rules . be proactive and clear in making information publicly available through authorized channels , including taking affirmative steps to: provide timely transparency on matters of public interest ; prepare information with sufficient clarity and context , so that it is readily understandable ; make information accessible to the public through a range of communications channels , such as those enabled by new technology ; engage with stakeholders to better explain information and to understand diverse perspectives ; and in appropriate circumstances , describe why information cannot be made public . in protecting information about intelligence sources , methods , and activities from unauthorized disclosure , ensure that ic professionals consistently and diligently execute their responsibilities to: classify only that information which , if disclosed without authorization , could be expected to cause identifiable or describable damage to the national security ; never classify information to conceal violations of law , inefficiency , or administrative error , or to prevent embarrassment ; distinguish , through portion marking and similar means , classified and unclassified information ; and consider the public interest to the maximum extent feasible when making classification determinations , while continuing to protect information as necessary to maintain intelligence effectiveness , protect the safety of those who work for or with the ic , or otherwise protect national security . integration ? what agency specific processes could be better integrated to address a particular cross - cutting issue ( eg , the hiring process , budget ) ? privacy and civil liberties ? my list is long . it includes the scourge and diversification of terrorism , loosely connected and globally dispersed , to include here at home , as exemplified by the boston marathon bombing and by the sectarian war in syria , its attraction as a growing center of radical extremism and the potential threat this poses now to the homeland . … the stark consequences of this perfect storm are pretty evident . the intelligence community is going to have less capacity to protect our nation and its allies than we've had in the past . … we're thus faced collectively , and by collectively , i mean this committee , the congress at large , the executive branch , and most acutely , all of us in the intelligence community , with the inescapable imperative to accept more risk . the ic has responded to the challenge of doing more with less in a number of ways . typical of any bureaucracy , the ic begins by allocating fewer resources to lower priority challenges . the national intelligence priorities framework ( nipf ) is crucial to this process .