health ) . critics suggest that recent reductions in u.s. funding to promote democratic space and good governance — coupled with increases in u.s. support to other sectors such as security — may send a mixed message to host countries about u.s. priorities . some also point to the decline in u.s. funding for democracy and governance ( dg ) since fy2012 , particularly in countries like egypt , ethiopia or sudan that have placed restrictions on ngo activity , as being perceived as rewarding bad behavior and abandoning civil society . more could be done to institutionalize the administration's efforts to bolster civil society in u.s. foreign policy in the face of competing policy priorities , some experts suggest . for example , the sacsed position established by then - secretary of state hillary clinton created a direct line to the secretary and highlighted u.s. engagement with civil society as a key component of u.s. foreign policy and diplomacy . however , in discussions with crs , many policymakers cautioned against using special envoys alone for this issue . the trade - offs inherent in policy decisions within the interagency process on civil society issues can make it more difficult for a special envoy to engage effectively in policymaking in multiple regions , especially when security threats are also a concern . advocates suggest that enhanced institutional capacity related to this issue throughout the interagency , particularly through resourcing and staffing , might have a more sustainable impact . advocates also recommend that all u.s. officials should elevate the focus on civil society , and that officials and programs should be evaluated , in part , on the basis of their engagement with civil society issues ; some experts have also suggested the issuance of a presidential directive to this effect . some have also underlined the utility of legislation such as the brownback amendment ( see " legislative action " below ) , in protecting u.s. support for civil society , both within the interagency when faced with competing interests , and in ensuring that foreign governments ( including key security partners ) cannot undercut u.s. support for civil society in repressive environments . the multilateral tools that the administration has sought to bolster , including the cd and ogp , present new partnerships and opportunities that some experts hope will lead to concrete outcomes ; however , some suggest that multilateral efforts may struggle because they also seek to include countries with mixed or restrictive records on civil society . others question if these organizations can create good response mechanisms when members repress or restrict civil society . a test case is ongoing in the ogp with member state azerbaijan , which is under review after international csos filed a complaint in march 2015 . ogp reviewed and assessed the csos complaints to be credible . in an upcoming ministerial meeting in may 2016 , ogp will review corrective actions by azerbaijan and the status of its membership in the organization . observers suggest this could be an opportunity to assess ogp's effectiveness in helping governments and civil society work cooperatively for transparent governance . observers have also questioned the effectiveness of the administration's presentation of u.s. regulation of ngos as an example for other governments .