blake reported the episode to senior corrections officers . the internal investigative unit ( iiu ) of the maryland department of public safety and correctional services concluded , after a year - long investigation , that madigan used excessive force . blake did not submit an administrative complaint in accordance with maryland's administrative remedy procedure ( arp ) for inmate grievances . he later filed a civil - rights suit under 42 u.s.c . blake successfully appealed the district court's ruling for ross to the fourth circuit . the court framed the question before it as whether blake failed to exhaust administrative remedies as required by the plra . a majority of the fourth circuit panel concluded that "special circumstances" justified blake's failure to comply with maryland's administrative procedures . in doing so , the fourth circuit adopted the methodology established by the second circuit in an earlier case , which asks ( 1 ) whether the inmate "was justified in believing" that his participation in another investigatory proceeding procedurally exhausted his administrative remedies ; and ( 2 ) whether the inmate's participation in that other proceeding substantively exhausted his administrative remedies by giving the prison an opportunity to address the complaint internally . the fourth circuit concluded that this two - part inquiry , by having a procedural component — which "ensures that an uncounseled inmate attempting to navigate the grievance system will not be penalized for making a reasonable , albeit flawed , attempt to comply with the relevant administrative procedures" — along with a substantive component — which "safeguards a prison from unnecessary and unexpected litigation" — is consistent with the purposes behind the plra's exhaustion requirement . applying that test , the majority concluded that "blake reasonably interpreted maryland's murky grievance procedures" and that his participation in the iiu investigation "provided the department [of public safety and correctional services] with ample notice and opportunity to address internally the issues raised. judge agee dissented , asserting that "[t]he plra's exhaustion requirement may not even be amenable to any exceptions," and , even if it was , blake failed to satisfy the test that the majority announced . additionally , judge agee noted that three other circuits have ruled that an inmate does not exhaust administrative remedies by participating in an internal investigation . the supreme court , presented with the opportunity to resolve the circuit split , asked the parties to address whether the fourth circuit misapplied supreme court precedents "in holding , in conflict with several other federal courts of appeals , that there is a common law 'special circumstances' exception to the prison litigation reform act. ross argued , among other things , that the second and fourth circuits' exhaustion exception conflicts with congress's intent in enacting the plra as well as the supreme court's interpretation of the act and its goals . ross contended that in two previous cases , booth v. churner and woodford v. ngo , the supreme court refused to uphold other judicially created exceptions to the plra's exhaustion requirement . for instance , the court stated in booth that "we stress the point ... that we will not read ... exceptions into statutory exhaustion requirements where congress has provided otherwise.