additionally , p.l . 114-113 includes a national policy on oil export restrictions stating that "no official of the federal government shall impose or enforce any restriction on the export of crude oil. 114-113 essentially removes all existing crude oil export restrictions . thus , independent refiners are allowed to exclude 75% of oil transportation costs when calculating income for the purposes of determining their section 199 deduction . assuming that refiners incur oil - related transportation costs , the effect of this change is an increase in qpai and thus an increase of the deduction amount . since temporary tax provisions may or may not be extended , expiration dates on tax provisions may be associated with uncertainty . 114-113 enhanced the section 199 domestic production activities deduction for refiners that are not a major integrated oil company . the provision was designed to address concerns that some u.s. refiners would be disadvantaged should there be a change in crude export policy . domestic and international price differentials that motivated oil producers to advocate for allowing exports ( see figure 1 ) were a benefit to u.s. refiners and contributed to an increase in refinery profit margins . allowing crude oil exports will likely cap price differentials in the future , thus potentially reducing opportunities for refineries to realize these margins . refinery advocates presented two oil transportation - related concerns that would result in a competitive disadvantage should crude oil export restrictions be removed . first , the jones act cost premium associated with moving crude oil from the gulf coast to the northeast would result in east coast refineries being at a competitive disadvantage vis - a - vis european refineries . it was suggested by the american fuels and petrochemicals manufacturers ( afpm ) that the jones act might need to be modified in conjunction with any change to crude export policy . second , some refineries invested in rail transportation , one of the most expensive crude oil transportation modes . these infrastructure investments were motivated by the large price differentials observed periodically since 2010 . to the extent that a change in crude oil export policy either eliminates or limits future price differentials , this effect could potentially adversely affect the value of these rail transportation investments . broadly , the section 199 deduction serves to reduce effective tax rates on domestic manufacturing activities . section 305 of division p of p.l . 114-113 changed how independent refiners account for transportation costs when calculating the deduction , potentially allowing higher oil transportation costs to be associated with greater tax relief . the section 199 production activities deduction allows taxpayers to deduct a fixed percentage of either income derived from qualified production activities ( qualified production activity income ; qpai ) or taxable income , the lesser of the two . a taxpayer's qpai is equal to the taxpayer's domestic production gross receipts ( dpgr ) , reduced by ( 1 ) the cost of goods sold that is allocable to those receipts ; and ( 2 ) other deductions , expenses , and losses that are properly allocable to those receipts . the section 199 deduction is 6% for oil - related activities , and 9% for other domestic production activities .