consider the same hypothetical individual discussed in the previous section . since this person's income is at 150% fpl , if he or she receives this type of subsidy , the silver plan in which he or she is enrolled will have an av of 94% ( as indicated in table 6 ) , instead of the usual 70% av for silver plans . this marked change in av entails notable reductions in cost - sharing requirements . advance payments automatically reduce monthly premiums by the credit amount . therefore , the direct cost of insurance to an individual or family eligible for premium credits generally will be lower than the advertised cost for a given exchange plan . an individual who qualifies for the premium tax credit , is enrolled in a silver plan ( see text box above , "actuarial value and metal plans" ) , and has annual household income no greater than 250% fpl is eligible for cost - sharing subsidies . the purpose of these subsidies is to reduce an individual's ( or family's ) expenses when he or she receives health services covered under the silver plan . there are two types of subsidies , and both are based on income ( see descriptions below ) . individuals who are eligible for cost - sharing assistance may receive both types of subsidies , as long as they meet the applicable eligibility requirements . the aca requires the hhs secretary to provide full reimbursements to insurers that provide cost - sharing subsidies . federal outlays for such reimbursements totaled the following amounts: fy2014: $2.111 billion ; fy2015: $5.382 billion ; fy2016: $5.652 billion ; and fy2017: $7.317 billion . although the aca authorized the cost - sharing subsidies and payments to reimburse insurers , it did not address the source of funds for such payments . the obama administration made cost - sharing subsidy payments to insurers using an appropriation that finances the premium tax credits . the house of representatives filed suit , claiming that the payments violated the appropriations clause of the u.s. constitution . after holding that the house has standing to sue the obama administration , the u.s. district court for the district of columbia concluded that the payment of the cost - sharing subsidies was unconstitutional for lack of a valid appropriation enacted by congress . the court barred the obama administration from making the payments but stayed its decision pending appeal of the case . the practical effect of this reduction would occur when this individual spent up to that amount . for additional covered services received by the individual , the insurance company would pay the entire cost . therefore , by reducing the annual cost - sharing limit , eligible individuals are required to spend less before benefitting from this financial assistance . the second type of cost - sharing subsidy also applies to premium credit recipients with incomes up to and including 250% fpl . for eligible individuals , the cost - sharing requirements ( for the plans in which they have enrolled ) are reduced to ensure that the plans cover a certain percentage of allowed health care expenses , on average .