circuit . a separate report , crs report r44484 , majority , concurring , and dissenting opinions authored by judge merrick garland , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] , lists all opinions authored by judge garland during his tenure on the d.c . circuit . other crs products discuss various issues related to the vacancy on the court . in one notable case interpreting the military commission act ( mca ) of 2006 and its enumerated charge of material support for terrorism , the d.c . circuit declined to defer to congress's assertion that the charge is one that has traditionally been triable by military commission and therefore may be tried even if the underlying conduct took place prior to the mca's enactment . the court explained its role where congress's view on the subject was mistaken , stating "it is not our task to rewrite the statute to conform with the actual state of the law but rather to strike it down insofar as the congress's mistake renders the statute unconstitutional. accordingly , assuming without deciding that the ex post facto clause of the constitution applies at guantanamo , the court vacated the accused's conviction for material support of terrorism and solicitation on ex post facto grounds , but sent his conspiracy conviction back to a three - judge panel to consider his other constitutional challenges to the mca . judge garland cast his vote with the majority and did not write separately . although he did not join judge judith rogers's concurring opinion emphasizing the separation of powers implications of delegating to the executive branch an arguably judicial role , judge garland's vote with the majority might be viewed as an assertion of the judiciary's primacy in interpreting the law in this regard . on remand , the panel reversed the remaining charge for conspiracy , holding that congress had encroached upon article iii judicial power by authorizing military commissions to try the purely domestic crime of inchoate conspiracy . the full court vacated this decision and ordered rehearing en banc , possibly setting up another opportunity to consider judge garland's approach to separation of powers clashes . because the docket of the d.c . circuit tends to focus less on social issues than the dockets of the regional circuit courts of appeals do , judge garland has had few opportunities to express his views on the scope of the substantive component of the due process clauses of the fifth and fourteenth amendments , the source for various unenumerated rights that have been recognized by the supreme court over the years , including the right to privacy , the right to an abortion , and the right to marry . perhaps most significantly , judge garland wrote the opinion for a unanimous en banc court in wagner v. fec , upholding the prohibition on campaign contributions by certain federal government contractors against a challenge under the first amendment and the equal protection clause of the fifth amendment . the court's ruling in wagner was narrow in the sense that it was limited to a ban on contractors making contributions to candidates , parties , and traditional political action committees ( pacs ) during the negotiation or performance of a government contract .