rluipa's protections mirror those enacted in rfra . although a separate statute , the context of rluipa's enactment in addition to its use of the same statutory scheme makes any interpretation of the meaning of rfra's terms relevant to the interpretation of the same language in rluipa . thus , a decision defining these terms may be influential in future rluipa litigation as well . zubik and the consolidated cases involve challenges to a federal action by organizations seeking protection under the federal rfra . in addition to the implications of the court's latest interpretation of rfra in the context of the aca , likely the most prominent legislation ever passed to govern various issues in health care law and policy , there are a number of other issues in health care that involve religious objections . thus , any decision interpreting the meaning and scope of rfra's protections will apply only to federal law and would not extend directly to state actions . however , as discussed earlier , a number of states have adopted state versions of rfra , many of which include language similar to the federal rfra that is at issue in the nonprofit challenges . for any challenges asserted under state rfras , a court would not be bound to use whatever interpretation federal courts may adopt . however , it may consider federal courts' interpretation persuasive , particularly for state rfras including language identical or similar to the federal rfra . notably , a recent trend in state rfra legislation following the court's decision in hobby lobby has reflected a broader approach to religious freedom protections , though proposed laws have had mixed success . a decision that broadens the recognition of substantial burdens under the federal rfra may provide support for broad interpretation of existing state rfras or efforts to enact explicitly broad protection for religious freedom by states considering new legislation . because of the broad reach of rfra as it applies to all federal actions and because of the influence that the interpretation of the federal rfra may have on similar state protections , the potential impact of an ultimate decision may be far - reaching . though not an exhaustive list , the following discussion highlights examples of legislative issues that frequently involve religious objections and could be affected by clarification of the meaning of substantial burden . thus , current provisions in existing statutory programs protect both the religious identity of the organization and the religious freedom of beneficiaries . the balance of the rights of participating religious providers and potential program beneficiaries likely would be a matter of congressional discretion . it may be noted that the parameters of the ban on discrimination against beneficiaries based on religion are unclear . in some contexts , for example , under employment nondiscrimination statutes , courts have indicated that discrimination based on religion may include other forms of discrimination as long as the action relates to a religious tenet . under this theory of interpretation , a religious organization that receives public funds may argue that extending its services to certain beneficiaries would infringe on its religious identity in violation of rfra .