proposals for an article v convention are as old as the republic . one observer , attorney david guldenschuh , suggests that the proliferation of advocacy groups may actually dilute support for the overall concept as they compete for the limited time and attention of state legislators . the same observer notes that the more complex "multi - subject" strategies pursued by some groups may further vitiate the force of their arguments . a single - issue approach , he suggests , might enjoy a greater chance of success . for example , the balanced budget amendment task force , which advocates a convention that would consider only one issue — a balanced federal budget requirement — claims 28 applications , although 17 of these are "legacy" applications that filed more than 30 years ago and whose validity may be open to challenge . by comparison , no other article v convention advocacy group can claim more than 12 applications at this time . in addition , it is worth noting that the balanced federal budget amendment is arguably the best known and most widely supported of these proposals: survey research results show consistent public support for a federal balanced budget amendment since at least 1994 . guldenschuh also cites what he claims is an apparent lack of coordination , noting that "different advocacy groups have somewhat supported each other in states where multiple resolutions have been introduced , [but] their overall failure to work together is causing confusion among legislators and hurting the effort's overall success rate. further , it is arguable that the article v convention remains largely an internet or social media phenomenon , where it enjoys multiple websites and frequent postings among diverse elements of the advocacy community , both pro and con . by comparison , however , traditional media coverage is comparatively sparse , and , notwithstanding the aforementioned public support for a balanced federal budget amendment , the convention alternative does not appear to command widespread attention or support among the general public at this time . the number of state applications for a convention has grown in the past two years . while only the bba , with 28 applications , including its "legacy" states , is within striking distance of the constitutional threshold , the convention of states added four applications in 2017 , bringing its total to 12 states . these gains , however , have arguably been balanced by four states that rescinded earlier applications in 2017 . going forward , advocates may assert that applications by the state legislatures will continue at the same pace . conversely , it could also be argued that the movement's progress could lead to the same sort of "second thoughts" that slowed , and then stalled , the bba campaign of the 1980s . to this may be added constitutional questions concerning state applications that would likely be raised if or when a convention call seemed imminent . for instance , are state applications submitted over 30 years ago still valid , and , what is the constitutional status of state actions to rescind their earlier applications ? ultimately , it may be argued that the constitutional process is working as the founders planned .