collection of information is permitted during the period before a certification is submitted to the fisc . in 2015 , congress included an amendment to fisa in the usa freedom act ( p.l . 114-23 ) , to facilitate the continued surveillance of a target that was believed to be abroad , but is later found to be within the united states . as noted above , section 702 originally did not permit surveillance of persons reasonably believed to be in the united states at the time of acquisition . as amended by the usa freedom act , surveillance of a non - u.s. person may continue for 72 hours after the target is reasonably believed to be within the united states , if a lapse in surveillance of the target poses a threat of death or serious bodily harm . a traditional fisa order for electronic surveillance must be obtained to continue surveillance after that period . upon enactment of title vii , a number of organizations brought suit challenging the joint authorization procedure for surveillance of non - u.s. persons reasonably believed to be abroad . the suit alleged that this authority violated the fourth amendment's prohibition against unreasonable searches . in order to establish legal standing to challenge title vii , the plaintiffs had argued that the financial costs they incurred in order to avoid their reasonable fear of being subject to surveillance constituted a legally cognizable injury . however , on february 26 , 2013 , in clapper v. amnesty international , the u.s. supreme court held that the plaintiffs had not suffered a sufficiently concrete injury to have legal standing to challenge title vii . with respect to the statutory requirements , the fisc noted that the government's proposed minimization procedures were focused "almost exclusively" on information that an analyst wished to use and not on the larger set of information that had been acquired . consequently , communications that were known to be unrelated to a target , including those that were potentially wholly domestic , could be retained for up to five years so long as the government was not seeking to use that information . the court found that this had the effect of maximizing the retention of such information and was not consistent with fisa's mandate to minimize the retention of u.s. persons' information . the fisc also held that the proposed minimization procedures did not satisfy the fourth amendment . the fisc found that , under the facts before it , the balance required under the fourth amendment's reasonableness test did not favor the government , particularly in light of the statutory deficiencies . following the fisc's determination that the fourth amendment had been violated , the government presented revised minimization procedures to the fisc , and the court approved those procedures on november 30 , 2011 . the revised minimization procedures addressed the court's concerns by requiring the segregation of those communications most likely to involve unrelated or wholly domestic communications ; requiring special handling and markings for those communications which could not be segregated ; and reducing the retention period of upstream collection from five years to two .