he won with 99% of the vote . after kagame's current term expires , the presidential term is to be shortened to five years per the new constitution ; kagame could then run for two more consecutive terms , thus potentially remaining in office until 2034 . he has denied any intention to do so , stating that he is preparing rwanda for an unspecified future leadership transition . tolerance of opposition voices seems to have increased slightly since kagame's reelection in 2017 , although a significant shift in the contours of rwandan politics appears unlikely . two prominent opposition figures were released from jail in 2018 . diane rwigara , a vocal kagame critic ( and daughter of a well - known businessman and tutsi genocide survivor ) who was jailed on charges of forgery and inciting insurrection shortly after seeking to run for president in 2017 , was acquitted following international advocacy on her behalf , including from some members of congress . victoire ingabire , who had sought to run against kagame in 2010 and was serving a prison sentence for alleged genocide denial and seeking to form an armed group , received a presidential pardon . so did several other members of ingabire's fdu - inkingi party ( "united democratic forces - pillar" ) , which remains illegal . several other fdu - inkingi supporters remain in prison ; others have been killed in unclear circumstances . also in 2018 , the democratic green party , a relatively independent opposition movement ( and not affiliated with rwigara or ingabire ) , won two seats in parliament after competing for the first time in legislative elections . the green party was not granted legal registration in time to run candidates in the 2013 legislative vote ; its presidential candidate , frank habineza , won less than 1% in the 2017 presidential vote . the party's deputy leader was killed in unclear circumstances prior to the 2010 presidential election , soon after the party was founded in 2009 . the rpf's political leadership appears to have narrowed from a diverse set of actors in the 1990s to an apparently small circle around the president . over the years , various top rpf officials and military officers have faced criminal charges , some on national security grounds , or have fled the country . in 2010 , several prominent rfp defectors formed an exiled opposition movement , the rwandan national congress ( rnc ) . some members have been the target of armed attacks or apparent assassinations in foreign countries , including several in south africa . president kagame has denied state involvement , while assailing the individuals in question as traitors . the state department's 2018 human rights report on rwanda cites forced disappearances , alleged extrajudicial killings , arbitrary detention , and torture by state security forces ( "including asphyxiation , electric shocks , mock executions" ) , noting "impunity" involving civilian officials and some members of the security forces . the report also documents political prisoners , threats and violence against journalists , censorship , and "substantial interference" with freedoms of assembly and association , along with "restrictions on political participation.