prior to the enactment of p.l . 105-261 , there was no formal statutory requirement that the dod provide military honors at veterans' funerals . however , such honors were customarily provided in accordance with the statutory requirement that a u.s. flag be presented to the next of kin of eligible veterans ; military custom ; and dod directive 1300.15 , issued in 1985 , which directed the military branches to provide to deceased veterans "appropriate tribute within the constraints of available resources. active duty servicemembers and members of the selected reserve ( which generally includes members of the national guard ) who die while in service are eligible for military funeral honors . in addition , federal law provides that veterans who served on active duty and former members of the selected reserve may be eligible for military funeral honors . federal law prescribes the minimum elements required for military funeral honors . these include a funeral honors detail of at least two non - retired uniformed members of the armed forces , the folding and presentation of a u.s. flag to the family of the deceased , and the playing of taps . each branch of the armed forces is free to augment these minimum components with additional elements such as firing parties , color guards , or additional participating military personnel . the eligibility requirements for interment or inurnment at arlington national cemetery , which is administered by the department of the army and not the va , differ from , and are generally more stringent than , the requirements for eligibility at va national cemeteries and general eligibility for military funeral honors . there are different eligibility requirements for ground burial and inurnment in the columbarium and niche wall at arlington national cemetery . once eligibility for ground burial or inurnment at arlington national cemetery is determined , honors are afforded according to rank and provided by the veteran's branch of service . pursuant to legislation enacted on may 20 , 2016 ( p.l . 114-158 ) , civilians determined by law or the secretary of defense under the gi bill improvement act of 1977 ( p.l . 95-202 ) to have performed active duty military service and been granted veterans status , such as women's air force service pilots , are eligible for inurnment in the columbarium or niche wall at arlington cemetery but not ground burial . enlisted personnel at pay grades e - 8 or below are entitled to standard military honors , which consist of a casket team of body bearers , a firing party , and a bugler . senior enlisted personnel at pay grade e - 9 , warrant officers , and commissioned officers entitled to full military honors , which include standard military honors and an escort platoon with size determined by rank ; a military band ; and the use of the caisson , if available . colonels in the army and marine corps are also entitled to the caparisoned ( decorated ) riderless horse , if available . general and flag officers , other high state officials , and the president are entitled to cannon or minute gun salutes of varying sizes depending upon rank .