i vetoed both of them . this bill had broad bipartisan support and is much , much better on both counts . he also said: it includes the tough child support enforcement measures that , as far as i know , every member of congress and everybody in the administration and every thinking person in the country has supported for more than 2 years now . it's the most sweeping crackdown on deadbeat parents in history . we have succeeded in increasing child support collection 40 percent , but over a third of the cases where there's delinquencies involve people who cross state lines . for a lot of women and children , the only reason they're on welfare today — the only reason — is that the father up and walked away when he could have made a contribution to the welfare of the children . that is wrong . if every parent paid the child support that he or she owes legally today , we could move 800,000 women and children off welfare immediately . with this bill we say , if you don't pay the child support you owe , we'll garnish your wages , take away your driver's license , track you across state lines , if necessary , make you work off what you pay — what you owe . it is a good thing , and it will help dramatically to reduce welfare , increase independence , and reinforce parental responsibility . in 1998 , president clinton signed the deadbeat parents punishment act of 1998 ( p.l . 105-187 ) into law . he stated: this bill today is a gift to our children and the future . the quiet crisis of unpaid child support is something that our country and our families shouldn't tolerate . our first responsibility , all of us , is to our children . and today we all know that too many parents still walk away from that obligation . that threatens the education , the health of our children , and the future of our country... . the deadbeat parents punishment act of 1998 deals with child support evaders in the most serious cases . from now on if you flee across state lines and refuse to pay child support you may be charged with a federal offense , a felony offense , and may land in jail for up to 2 years . one way or the other people who don't support their children will pay what they must . less than one month later , president clinton signed the child support performance and incentive act of 1998 ( p.l . 105-200 ) into law . he stated: h.r . 3130 will build on this progress and help ensure that parents give their children all the support they need and deserve . first , the new law puts in place additional tough penalties for states that fail to automate their child support computer systems on time . under this new law , states that fail to establish these state - wide systems face automatic and escalating penalties , ranging from 4 percent of federal child support enforcement funds for the first year to 30 percent for the fifth year in which a state fails to meet national certification standards .