source: highlights compiled by crs from the reports . note: page counts are documents ; other cited resources are web pages . critical infrastructure is defined in the usa patriot act ( p.l . 107-56 , ยง1016 ( e ) ) , signed october 26 , 2001 , as "systems and assets , physical or virtual , so vital to the united states that the incapacity or d estruction of such systems and assets would have a debilitating impact on security , national economic security , national public health and safety , or any combination of those matters. presidential decision directive 63 ( or pdd - 63 ) , signed may 22 , 1998 , identified activities whose critical infrastructures should be protected: information and communications ; banking and finance ; water supply ; aviation , highways , mass transit , pipelines , rail , and waterborne commerce ; emergency and law enforcement services ; emergency , fire , and continuity of government services ; public health services ; electric power , oil and gas production ; and storage . in addition , pdd - 63 identified four activities in which the federal government controls the critical infrastructure: ( 1 ) internal security and federal law enforcement ; ( 2 ) foreign intelligence ; ( 3 ) foreign affairs ; and ( 4 ) national defense . in february 2013 , the obama administration issued ppd - 21 , critical infrastructure security and resilience , which superseded hspd - 7 issued during the george w. bush administration . ppd - 21 made no major changes in policy , roles and responsibilities , or programs , but did order an evaluation of the existing public - private partnership model , the identification of baseline data and system requirements for efficient information exchange , and the development of a situational awareness capability . ppd - 21 also called for an update of the national infrastructure protection plan and a new research and development plan for critical infrastructure , to be updated every four years . this report serves as a starting point for congressional staff assigned to cover cybersecurity issues as they relate to critical infrastructure . much is written about protecting u.s. critical infrastructure , and this crs report directs the reader to authoritative sources that address many of the most prominent issues . the annotated descriptions of these sources are listed in reverse chronological order with an emphasis on material published in the last several years .