this remains true today as well . efforts to transition away from the rd - 180 to a domestic u.s. alternative engine or launch vehicle are not without technical , program , or schedule risks . a combination of factors over the next several years , as a worst - case scenario , could leave the united states in a situation where some of its national security space payloads will not have a certified launcher available . these factors could include some or all of the following: no more available rd - 180s ; ula discontinues the delta launch vehicle ; ula has trouble certifying the vulcan launch vehicle ; spacex has trouble certifying the falcon heavy ; the ar - 1 has developmental trouble ; or the be - 4 has developmental trouble . even with a smooth , on - schedule transition away from the rd - 180 to an alternative engine or launch vehicle , the performance and reliability record achieved with the rd - 180 to date would likely not be replicated until well beyond 2030 because the rd - 180 has had 68 consecutive successful civil , commercial , and nss launches since 2000 . but others in congress and elsewhere have argued that the program remains far too costly and not nearly as competitive as it should be . the eelv program currently consists of two families of launch vehicles , atlas v and delta iv ( both provided by united launch alliance [ula] of denver , co ) , with 14 different configurations to accommodate the launch of all nss ( and other spacecraft types ) to a variety of orbits . eelv nss launches have supported the air force , navy , and national reconnaissance office ( nro ) . efforts by the obama administration and the air force to work with congress on changing the eelv strategy have been deemed insufficient by those in congress eager to proceed more quickly and definitively . the delta iv has launched commercial and military communications and weather satellites , and missile warning and nro satellites . the atlas v and delta iv launch vehicles are produced by ula , which was formed in 2006 as a joint venture of the boeing company ( of chicago , il ) and lockheed martin ( of bethesda , md ) . in addition to the launch vehicles themselves , the eelv system consists of an extensive array of support capabilities and infrastructure to permit safe operations of u.s. launch ranges . the eelv program was initiated by the air force in 1994 after years of concerns within the service and space launch community over increasing cost and decreasing confidence in the continued reliability of national access to space . eelv was developed to provide the united states affordable , reliable , and assured access to space with two families of space launch vehicles . the eelv program is managed by the launch and range systems directorate of the space and missile systems center ( air force space command ) , los angeles air force base ( el segundo , ca ) . spacex ( of hawthorne , ca ) , the primary new entrant in the nss launch community , is now certified to provide some nss space launches .