this is the tradeoff . policymakers may debate which is more advantageous for the nation on the whole: increased security coupled with potentially fewer data breaches and possibly greater impediments to law enforcement investigations , or increased access to data paired with potentially greater vulnerability to malicious actors . much of the ongoing discussion has pitted the notions of encryption and personal privacy against security , and this is largely the debate reinvigorated after the terrorist attacks in paris and san bernardino . in this dichotomy , security is framed as that provided by intelligence and law enforcement if able to access encrypted communications . how might this impact companies operating internationally ? would they need to stop selling certain products in certain countries , develop country - specific products to comply with the relevant encryption - related laws , or produce only products with back doors for government access ? none of the resulting options for technology companies , however , would necessarily stop individuals from crossing jurisdictional boundaries and obtaining products and services with the desired privacy capabilities . because crypto has no borders , this challenges crypto - related legislation that does not span jurisdictional boundaries . individuals could readily obtain products from other jurisdictions , they could download applications with the desired capabilities , and they could modify software after purchase . in considering future legislation on or regulation of encrypted systems and communications , the issue of exceptional access has been raised: is it possible to create a system with sufficiently narrow and protected access points that these points can only be entered by authorized entities and not exploited by others ? experts have generally responded , no . for instance , one group of computer scientists and security experts contends that requiring exceptional access "will open doors through which criminals and malicious nation - states can attack the very individuals law enforcement seeks to defend. as was the case during the crypto wars of the 1990s , new technology ( the clipper chip ) was introduced that was intended to only allow access to certain communications under specified conditions . researchers were soon able to expose vulnerabilities in the proposed system , thus halting the implementation of the clipper chip . one concern is that if new technology were introduced to provide exceptional access to officials , malicious actors may find a way to obtain and exploit this technology more quickly than companies could detect and secure vulnerabilities . these malicious actors could range from criminals looking to profit from the sale of intellectual property to business competitors or nation states seeking proprietary information . in addition , the insider threat has been cited as the largest cybersecurity issue — an employee with access and knowledge of the company could potentially do greater harm than someone from the outside . for example , apple employees and others with access to software apple may create to reduce the security of the iphone could leverage their position and knowledge for malicious purposes . this security , however , does not have a clearly defined metric .