appropriations are complex . budget justifications for requests for some agencies are large , generally several hundred pages long and containing numerous funding , programmatic , and legislative changes for congressional consideration . further , appropriations laws provide funds for numerous accounts , activities , and sub - activities , and the accompanying explanatory statements provide additional directives and other important information . this report does not provide information at the account and sub - account levels , nor does it detail budgetary reorganizations or legislative changes enacted in law or proposed by the president . for information on a particular agency or individual accounts , programs , or activities administered by a particular agency , contact the key policy staff listed at the end of this report . in addition , for selected reports related to appropriations for interior , environment , and related agencies , such as individual agencies ( eg , national park service ) or cross - cutting programs ( eg , wildland fire management ) , see the "interior & environment appropriations" subissue under the "appropriations" issue area page on the congressional research service ( crs ) website . the annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill includes funding for agencies and programs in three separate federal departments as well as for numerous related agencies . the interior bill typically contains three primary titles . title i provides funding for most department of the interior ( doi ) agencies , many of which manage land and other natural resource or regulatory programs . title ii contains appropriations for the environmental protection agency ( epa ) . title iii agencies would have received an overall decrease of $620.2 million ( 4.9% ) for fy2017 under h.r . the largest dollar reduction — of $926.6 million ( 14.6% ) — was to go to the forest service , largely from lower funding for wildland fire management . for example , the requested appropriations for three agencies — epa , forest service , and indian health service — were nearly three - fifths ( 57.9% ) of the total request . further , more than three - quarters ( 76.0% ) of the request was for these three agencies and two others , national park service and indian affairs . for doi agencies , the fy2017 requests ranged from $80.2 million for the bureau of ocean energy management to $3.10 billion for the national park service . the requests for 6 of the 10 agencies exceeded $1 billion . nearly half ( 49.3% ) of the $12.24 billion requested for doi agencies was for two agencies — indian affairs ( $2.93 billion ) and the national park service . for related agencies in title iii , the requested funding levels exhibited even more variation . this report first presents a brief overview of the agencies in the bill . of the total proposed adjustment for fy2017 , $290.0 million was for doi wildland fire management and $864.1 million was for forest service wildland fire management . appropriations for agencies vary widely for reasons relating to the number , breadth , and complexity of agency responsibilities ; alternative sources of funding ( eg , mandatory appropriations ) ; and administration and congressional priorities , among other factors .