the house report ( h.rept . 115-697 ) had specifically raised concerns that nnsa was "undercutting the investments needed to address the entirety of its aging infrastructure problems and to build a nuclear weapons workforce that possesses the skills and knowledge needed to design , develop , test , and manufacture warheads" to "pay for the projected costs of its major nuclear modernization programs. specific programs under i&o include the following . weapons activities has several smaller programs , including the following . this program provides for safe and secure transport of nuclear weapons , components , and materials . it includes special vehicles for this purpose , communications and other supporting infrastructure , and threat response . nnsa requested $282.7 million for this program area in fy2017 . nnsa noted that this budget request was 19% greater than the fy2016 enacted level , but stated that this funding was necessary to continue to modernize the program's transportation assets and to improve its workforce capabilities . this included increasing the number of federal agents working on the program , a number that was 20% below full staffing levels ; maintaining and replacing critical vehicles ; and resuming candidate training classes that had been cancelled for several years due to budget shortfalls . in the consolidated appropriations act for 2017 , congress provided $249 million for this program area . nnsa requested $325 million for fy2018 ; congress approved $291.1 million . nnsa noted that the significant increase over fy2017 levels was needed to develop specialized vehicles , maintain a force of well - trained agents , and sustain a robust communication system . specifically , the funding will support the development and testing of a new vehicle , the mobile guardian transporter ( mgt ) . nnsa requested $278.6 million for this program area in fy2019 , a reduction of 14% from the fy2018 request . nevertheless , in its budget documents , nnsa indicates that this funding level will allow it to continue to support improvements in its specialize vehicles and staffing needs . congress approved $278.6 million in the energy and water , legislative branch , and military construction and veterans affairs appropriations act , 2019 ( p.l . according to nnsa's budget documents , this program "provides protection for nnsa personnel , facilities , and nuclear weapons and materials from a full spectrum of threats , ranging from local security incidents to terrorism. it provides operations , maintenance , and construction funds for protective forces , physical security systems , and personnel security . nnsa requested $670.1 million for defense nuclear security in fy2017 . the request noted that funding would help fill vacant positions in key security programs at nnsa sites . congress provided $685.5 million for this program area in the consolidated appropriations act of 2017 . nnsa requested $687 million for defense nuclear security in fy2018 ; congress approved $770.5 million . as was the case in fy2017 , the budget documents indicate that the funding will allow nnsa to fill positions in key security program areas at the sites , and will provide planning and conceptual design funds for projects to sustain and recapitalize the perimeter intrusion detection and assessment systems ( pidas ) at the pantex plant and y - 12 site .