title i . prevention and education section 101 . development of best practices for the use of prescription opioids section 101 would require the hhs secretary , in cooperation with the veterans affairs ( va ) and defense secretaries and the administrator of the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) , to convene an interagency task force to review , modify , and update best practices for prescribing pain medication and managing chronic and acute pain . section 101 would specify the membership , duties , limitations , and reporting requirements for the task force . section 102 . awareness campaigns section 102 would require the hhs secretary , in coordination with the attorney general , to "advance the education and awareness of the public , providers , patients , consumers , and other appropriate entities" regarding the risk of prescription drug abuse . title vi . open act title vi , open act , would evaluate how effective federal grant programs have been in addressing problems relating to opioid abuse — the bill appears to be referring to a doj grant program ( the comprehensive opioid abuse grant program ) that would be enacted were h.r . 5046 to be enacted . it also refers to any program at hhs that provides grants for the primary purpose of providing assistance to address opioid abuse . the opioid program evaluation act ( open act ; h.r . 5052 ) , as amended , passed the house by a vote of 410-1 on may 10 , 2016 . cbo estimates that implementing the bill as ordered to be reported would cost about $4 million over the 2016-2021 period , assuming enactment of separate legislation establishing the grant program . title vii . infant plan of safe care improvement act title vii , infant plan of safe care improvement act , aims to strengthen state processes and compliance related to the development of a safe plan of care for newborns affected by illegal substance abuse , withdrawal symptoms , or a fetal alcohol spectrum disorder . the bill would amend the child abuse prevention and treatment act ( capta ) to clarify that such plans are to address the infant's safety and well - being , including by addressing the substance abuse treatment needs of the infant and his / her parent ( s ) or caregiver ( s ) . among other things , the bill would additionally require the hhs secretary to conduct specific monitoring of state compliance with this requirement and to maintain and disseminate ( via the national clearinghouse on child abuse and neglect ) information about best practices in developing such plans of safe care . the infant plan of safe care improvement act ( h.r . 4843 ) , as amended , passed the house by a vote of 421-0 on may 11 , 2016 . cbo estimates that implementing the bill as ordered to be reported would cost less than $500,000 annually , subject to the availability of funds . title viii . nas healthy babies act title viii , nas healthy babies act , would require a gao report on neonatal abstinence syndrome ( nas ) .