attorneys . like fy2016 , congress will supplement appropriated funding for the office on violence against women with a transfer from the crime victims fund . a total of $481.5 million in new budget authority will be available for the office on violence against women for fy2017 , but $326 million of that will come via a transfer from the crime victims fund . table 1 provides data on the fy2016 appropriations , the president's fy2017 budget request , the senate and the house committee - reported , and the fy2017-enacted amounts for these accounts . the obama administration's fy2017 request for doj included proposals to either increase funding for existing programs or fund new programs that seek to address several issues that have risen to national prominence recently , such as concerns about reported increases in violent crime ( especially homicides ) in cities across the country , the relationship between law enforcement and the communities they serve , violent extremism and "home - grown" terrorism , preparing inmates to return to society after a period of incarceration , cybersecurity , and an increase in heroin abuse and overdose - related deaths . for fy2017 , the obama administration requested an additional $89 million and 230 positions to support the president's gun safety initiatives . according to the obama administration , the request would have provided "significant investments that focus on combatting violent crime in the u.s. and support the president's initiatives on reducing gun violence. the majority of the requested funding for the president obama's gun safety initiatives would have gone to the atf . the obama administration requested an increase of $36 million for the atf to hire 80 additional special agents and 120 industry operations investigators . according to the obama administration , the additional special agents would work to enforce existing federal firearms laws , arrest violent criminals , prevent firearms from being transferred to people who cannot legally own them , and enhance atf's ability to perform its regulatory duties . the additional industry operations investigators would carry out investigations and regulatory enforcement on federal firearms licensees . the obama administration requested an increase of $4 million to enhance the operation of the national integrated ballistics information network ( nibin ) . the requested funding would have been used to hire additional personnel ( eight positions ) and upgrade the atf's ballistic imaging hardware and software . the obama administration proposed an increase of $6 million to fill 22 positions to help process federal firearms licenses ( ffl ) and federal explosives licenses ( fel ) , support processing of national firearms act ( nfa ) applications , and support the expansion of gun trace data by the atf and other federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies . the obama administration requested $9 million for the atf's next generation case management system , which would integrate and streamline the agency's disparate case management systems . the joint explanatory statement to accompany p.l . 115-31 is largely silent as to whether congress supported any of the obama administration's proposals . the statement notes that fy2017 funding for the atf is to "be used for inflationary cost adjustments , to maintain current staffing levels , and to improve services.