in january 2016 , the house passed h.r . the plaintiffs had sought certification under four theories of antitrust impact . the u.s. district court for the eastern district of pennsylvania ( district court ) , however , certified a class on only one of these theories: that "clustering" limited competition by reducing the number of "overbuilders," that is , cable companies competing in the market where comcast operates . the district court held that an antitrust impact could be shown on a classwide basis based on a proffered economic model , even though this model did not isolate damages resulting from the "overbuilders" theory from the three other theories . the district court held that the exact calculation of such injury should be addressed during the merits of the case , and the third circuit affirmed . the supreme court reversed , determining that a "plaintiff's damages case must be consistent with its liability case , particularly with respect to the alleged anticompetitive effect of the violation," and that the economic model proposed by the plaintiffs could not analyze the individual impact on class members of the economic damages that were the subject of the class certification . while the district court and the third circuit had not considered a damage analysis to be relevant for purposes of class certification , the supreme court stated that the district court's holding "flatly contradicts our cases requiring a determination that rule 23 is satisfied , even when that requires inquiry into the merits of the claim. in the 2015 supreme court term , the court agreed to consider three cases which involved class action lawsuits: campbell - ewald co. v. gome z , tyson foods , inc. v. bouaphakeo , and spokeo , inc. v. robins . "what matters ... [is] the capacity of a classwide proceeding to generate common answers apt to drive the resolution of the litigation. the class members' claims "must depend upon a common contention ... of such a nature that it is capable of classwide resolution — which means that determination of its truth or falsity will resolve an issue that is central to the validity of each one of the claims in one stroke. although such a rigorous analysis will frequently overlap with an inquiry into the merits , the court stated "[t]hat cannot be helped. the plaintiffs offered statistical evidence to establish gender discrimination by comparing the number of women promoted to management positions nationwide with the number of women in the available pool of hourly workers . the court rejected the sufficiency of such evidence to establish the required proof of commonality , finding that the plaintiffs were additionally required to establish that there was a challenged employment practice common to each claim . the court also rejected anecdotal evidence of discrimination , noting that the 120 affidavits filed addressing discrimination claims represented a small percentage of the thousands of class members participating in the case . the court concluded that the commonality requirement needed for class certification was not met where wal - mart did not have a uniform classwide discriminatory employment practice , but instead allowed employment decisions to be made by low - level employees .