this is a misconception . a spokesman for then - majority leader eric cantor put it thusly: one of the reasons house republicans insisted on reforming the disaster funding process , which we did as part of the budget control act , was so that we would have a separate dedicated pot of money available based on historical disaster needs.... we also provided that should a disaster exceed that capacity , congress and the president could provide additional emergency funds . the allowable adjustment is a constraint on the amount congress can adjust the discretionary spending limits to accommodate designated disaster relief . while the bca states that designated disaster relief is not eligible for designation as emergency funding , the definition of emergency under the bca encompasses a range of eventualities that includes disasters: designated new budget authority and outlays are "for the prevention or mitigation of , or response to , loss of life or property , or a threat to national security ; and ... is unanticipated. in the wake of hurricane sandy , the allowable adjustment was exhausted , and supplemental appropriations were covered largely by emergency designations , as explained above . during the 114 th congress legislation addressing the allowable adjustment for disasters under the bca took two different approaches . several pieces of legislation proposed directly amending the bca to permit additional forms of disaster spending ( eg , wildfire suppression activities ) . legislation passed by the house during the 1 st session of the 114 th congress ( h.r . 2467 ) used a "work - around" to avoid directly amending the bca . the measure passed by the house ( h.r . 2647 ) would instead amend the stafford act , which is the main disaster relief legislation administered by fema following a major disaster declaration . the measure would create new definitions and spending authorities under the stafford act . these changes would allow federal agencies to request declarations for disaster impacts on federal lands — currently not within the stafford act's jurisdiction — and therefore fund a new set of disaster response activities through drf . as this report has noted , it appears that the allowable adjustment for disaster relief may settle around $7.5-$9.5 billion as more expensive incidents drop out of the current calculation method . the projected allowable adjustment could change , however , if there are future high - expense incidents . arguably , the inclusion of an additional category of incidents approved by the president as disasters could eventually increase the rolling average over time , although in initial years , it would reduce the impact of carryover . 2647 addresses issues related to funding for disaster - related costs incurred in federal efforts to fight wildfires . it could be argued that modifying the stafford act addresses a known disaster risk and provides a funding avenue to meet unanticipated needs that is preferable to intra - agency borrowing . however , modifying the stafford act could also be viewed as placing wildfire funding for federal agencies in competition with requests from governors for supplemental disaster relief from the drf .