the bridge is owned by the national park service . a related issue is one of efficiency . s tructurally deficient bridges are not unsafe bridges , and an effort to eliminate all structurally deficient bridges could quickly lead to spending on relatively low - priority projects that do not present major safety problems . fhwa data do not substantiate this assertion . the number of bridges classified as structurally deficient has fallen consistently since 1990 , and the proportion of all highway bridges identified as structurally deficient is the lowest in decades . the condition of roads , in particular urban roads , has not experienced the same degree of improvement as the condition of bridges . map - 21 required that the national bridge inventory classify bridges according to serviceability , safety , and essentiality for public use , and based on this classification assign each bridge a risk - based priority for systematic preventive maintenance , replacement , or rehabilitation . this risk - based approach is still under development by fhwa . two issues have arisen during the process of developing the classification and prioritization metrics . first , the law does not explain how the prioritized list of projects is to be used . according to this penalty threshold , any state whose structurally deficient bridge deck area on the national highway system exceeds 10% of its total national highway system bridge deck area for three years in a row must devote nhpp funds equal to 50% of the state's fy2009 highway bridge program apportionment to improve bridge conditions during the following fiscal year and each year thereafter until the deck area of structurally deficient bridges falls to 10% or below . even if a state were required to spend more of its federal highway funding on bridges ( and therefore less on roadway projects ) due to this penalty , its mandated spending on deficient bridges would be less than was required prior to expiration of the highway bridge program in fy2012 . the passage of the fast act , which funds the federal - aid highway program through fy2020 , provided for an increase of 2.4% above the amount authorized under previous legislation , adjusted for expected inflation . this increased funding is the most important aspect of the fast act in regard to bridges . once the national classification and risk - based prioritization metric is developed , congress could consider making its use by the states an eligibility requirement for bridge project funding under nhpp and stp . a major oversight question is whether or not the state asset management plans align with the national level prioritization . fhwa could be directed to take a more active role in ensuring that inspections performed by the states or their contractors are done in conformance with the nbis . this step might involve a requirement for more on - site field reviews of state inspections or increased review or inspection paperwork . as it conducts oversight of the implementation of the fast act , congress may want to monitor states' patterns of bridge spending .