yes . there are some differences in the program for those living on tribal lands . tribal lands are defined as any federally recognized indian tribe's reservation , pueblo , or colony , including former reservations in oklahoma , alaska , native regions , hawaiian home lands , or indian allotments . for those providing lifeline service to eligible consumers living on tribal lands the lifeline program subsidy is $34.25 ( $9.25 in general support plus additional support of up to $25 per month ) . in addition assistance programs unique to those living on tribal lands ( eg , bureau of indian affairs general assistance [bia general assistance] ) may also be used to certify subscriber eligibility . subscribers living on tribal lands are also eligible for additional assistance under the fcc's link up program . this program , while established by the fcc in 1987 for the general eligible population , was restricted in 2012 solely to those residing on tribal lands . the link up program assists eligible subscribers to pay the costs associated with the initiation of service and provides a one - time discount of up to $100 on the initial installation / activation of the service for the primary residence . under the program , subscribers may pay any remaining amount on a deferred schedule interest free . a subscriber may be eligible for link up for a second or subsequent time only when moving to a new primary residence . link up support is not available to all providers offering service , but only to those who are building out infrastructure on tribal lands . therefore , eligible subscribers residing on tribal lands may receive a monthly subsidy of up to $34.25 in lifeline support plus a one - time initiation of service discount of up to $100 for link up support . to participate in the program , a consumer must either have an income that is at or below 135% of the federal poverty guidelines or be enrolled in certain qualifying needs - based programs ( eg , medicaid ) . usac has an eligibility pre - screening tool available which may assist consumers in determining eligibility . once enrolled in the program , participants are required to verify their eligibility on a yearly basis . if a program recipient becomes ineligible for the program ( eg , due to an increase in income or de - enrollment in a qualifying program ) the recipient is required to contact the provider and de - enroll from the program . failure to de - enroll can lead to penalties and / or permanent disbarment from the program . consumers can apply for lifeline by contacting a lifeline program provider in his or her state or through the state - designated public service commission . to locate a state - designated provider the consumer may call usac's toll free number ( 1-888-641-8722 ) or access usac's website . the national association of regulatory utility commissioners ( naruc ) provides a listing of contact information for state public utility commissions . the provider , selected by the enrollee , will provide a lifeline application form , upon request , to complete .