this understanding need not be verbally explicit . the jury may consider both direct and circumstantial evidence , including the context in which a conversation took place , to determine if there was a meeting of the minds on a quid pro quo . ...[t]he explicitness requirement is satisfied so long as the terms of the quid pro quo are clear and unambiguous . the u.s. court of appeals for the seventh circuit , upholding certain extortion convictions of former illinois governor rod blagojevich under the hobbs act , noted that the quid pro quo required for an extortion with regard to payments or contributions to a politician does not have to be "demanded explicitly" because the "statute does not have a magic words requirement. the court noted that "[f]ew politicians say , on or off the record , 'i will exchange official act x or payment y'" and that non - verbal understandings "can amount to extortion under the hobbs act. corruption in the political process is also subject to prohibitions under the federal wire and mail fraud statutes . these statutes proscribe schemes to defraud that are carried out using wire communications or the mail . after a 1987 supreme court decision limited the wire and mail fraud laws only to schemes to deprive someone of tangible benefits , congress amended the law in 1988 to add specifically that a "scheme or artifice to defraud" may include a scheme to deprive another of the "intangible right of honest services. this provision has been commonly referred to as the prohibition on honest services fraud . the honest services fraud provision was initially unclear in scope , however . generally , it might have been applied to public officials who participate in any scheme or activity which could be seen as depriving the public of the honest , unbiased services that the public should receive from their government officials . as such , it became a common charge in a wide range of public corruption cases by federal prosecutors , particularly as these federal prosecutors targeted alleged corruption at the state and local level . in 2010 , though , the supreme court clarified application of the provision while narrowing its scope in skilling v. united states . the court upheld the statute , finding that it was not unconstitutionally vague , by narrowing its application to schemes in which there is shown to involve either bribery or kickbacks . more recent consideration of honest services fraud in courts has clarified its application related to bribery cases . for example , a federal court has held that the government does not have to prove an "explicit" quid pro quo bribery scheme ( when the thing of value transferred or offered is not a campaign contribution ) , but rather may prove such intent as "inferred" from the evidence . in 2016 , the supreme court reaffirmed the required link between bribery and honest services fraud in the case of former virginia governor robert mcdonnell ( discussed earlier in this report ) — who had been charged , in part , under the honest services fraud statute .