united states . but it does arouse the reader's ire , and the reader's desire to put an end to this horrible message . thus , ironically , justice alito's argument highlights the precise danger posed by the california act: that the ideas expressed by speech — whether it be violence , or gore , or racism — and not its objective effects , may be the real reason for governmental proscription . nonetheless , justice scalia was not a first amendment absolutist and did recognize the existence of limits to first amendment protections . for example , justice scalia would have held , in contrast to the majority of the court , that the first amendment does not protect commercial internet pornography ; public displays of nudity ; or adult television channels that are "primarily dedicated to sexually - oriented programming. justice scalia also recognized the government's authority to regulate commercial speech more easily than other categories of speech . moreover , while justice scalia was skeptical of government efforts to restrict speech by private individuals , he broadly defended the government's ability to speak through its power to decide what speech to fund . in addition , justice scalia argued for the government having broad powers to control speech within public institutions , including speech by public employees and speech by prisoners . in this sense , justice scalia's views on freedom of speech clause were not only influential on the court , but also quite complex . justice scalia was a vociferous critic of the use of contemporary foreign law and practice — including practices so prevalent as to arguably reflect a customary international legal norm — to inform understanding of the constitution . he characterized this attitude as consistent with his originalist philosophy . while justice scalia believed that english common law sources could shed light on the meaning of constitutional provisions "written against the backdrop of 18 th - century english law and legal thought," he considered the contemporary practice of foreign states to be irrelevant to understanding the constitution's meaning at the time it was adopted . using contemporary foreign practice as an interpretative aid in applying the constitution should be "rejected out of hand," according to justice scalia , not only because the u.s. system is sufficiently distinct from foreign systems to make such comparative analysis unhelpful , but also because it would be inappropriate for a u.s. court to set aside practices and traditions rooted in the american experience for those favored by foreign states . justice scalia took a somewhat different view toward the relevance of foreign law and international custom when interpreting u.s. statutes and treaties . in the case of treaty interpretation , justice scalia opined that u.s. courts "can , and should , look to decisions of other signatories when we interpret treaty provisions," in part because these judgments may serve as evidence of the treaty parties' shared understanding of the agreement's meaning . on matters of statutory interpretation , justice scalia also indicated a belief that federal statutes should be construed in a manner consistent with the law of nations whenever possible .