sba will not decline a loan for lack of collateral . the loan amount cannot exceed $2 million . interest rate ceilings are statutorily set at 4% per annum or less and loans can have maturities up to 30 years . collateral requirements vary by declaration type . business physical disaster loans can have maturities up to 30 years . eidls provide up to $2 million to help meet financial obligations and operating expenses that could have been met had the disaster not occurred . in presidential declarations , business physical disaster loans over $25,000 must be secured to the extent possible . for agency declarations , business physical disaster loans over $25,000 must be secured to the extent possible . the sba administrator is prohibited from requiring businesses to use their personal residence as collateral for loans under $200,000 if the applicant has other collateral , including assets related to the operation of the business that is sufficient to cover the value of the loan . sba will not require collateral to secure an eidl of $25,000 or less . all eidl loans over $25,000 must be secured to the extent possible . sba takes real estate as collateral when it is available . however , the applicant is required to pledge by what they have available as collateral . loan amounts for eidls are based on actual economic injury and financial needs , regardless of whether the business suffered any property damage . eidls are available only to businesses that are located in a declared disaster area , have suffered substantial economic injury , are unable to obtain credit elsewhere , and are defined as small by sba size regulations . size standards vary according to a variety of factors including industry type , average firm size , and start - up costs and entry barriers . small agricultural cooperatives and most private and nonprofit organizations that have suffered substantial economic injury as the result of a declared disaster are also eligible for eidls . businesses can secure both an eidl and a business physical disaster loan to rebuild , repair , and recover from economic loss . borrowers generally pay equal monthly installments of principal and interest starting five months from the date of the loan . loan proceeds can only be used for working capital necessary to enable the business or organization to alleviate the specific economic injury and to resume normal operations . the sba disaster loan program is also designed to help small agricultural cooperatives recover from economic injury resulting from a disaster . sba disaster loans include ( 1 ) home and personal property disaster loans , ( 2 ) business physical disaster loans , and ( 3 ) economic injury disaster loans ( eidl ) . as demonstrated in figure 1 and figure 2 , most direct disaster loans ( approximately 83% ) are awarded to individuals and households rather than small businesses . the program generally offers low - interest disaster loans at a fixed rate that have loan maturities of up to 30 years . sba offers loans to help businesses repair and replace damaged property and financial assistance to businesses that have suffered economic loss as a result of a disaster .