nctir was previously funded under weapons activities . the fy2021 budget justification requests funds related to the u.s. plutonium disposition program in the m3 material disposition subprogram and nonproliferation construction surplus plutonium disposition subprogram . the united states pledged to dispose of 34 metric tons of u.s. surplus weapons plutonium , which was originally to be converted into fuel for commercial power reactors . the u.s. facility for this purpose was to be the mixed oxide fuel fabrication facility ( mfff ) , which had been under construction at the doe savannah river site in south carolina . the mfff faced sharply escalating construction and operation cost estimates , and the obama administration proposed to terminate it in fy2017 . after congressional approval , in 2018 doe ended mfff construction and began pursuing a replacement disposal method , dilute and dispose ( d&d ) , for this material . the d&d method consists of "blending plutonium with an inert mixture , packaging it for safe storage and transport , and disposing of it in a geologic repository," according to the fy2021 request . the nonproliferation construction account's proposed decrease of $150 million in fy2021 is due to the final steps in ending construction of the mfff . in her testimony before the house appropriations committee , nnsa administrator lisa gordon - hagerty said that decrease reflects the completion of the mox contractual termination settlement . she said that the requested $148.6 million would be used for the surplus plutonium disposition ( spd ) project , in support of the d&d method . fy2021 activities would include "execution of early site preparation and long lead procurements activities , as well as continuing the maturation of the design for all major systems supporting the plutonium processing gloveboxes. according to the fy2016 budget justification , "these transfers align all nnsa funding to prevent , counter , and respond to nuclear proliferation and terrorism in one appropriation. the program includes a field response capability to assist the interagency in the event of a nuclear or radiological incident . defense nuclear nonproliferation research and development ( dnn r&d ) advances u.s. capabilities to detect and characterize global nuclear security threats such as foreign nuclear material and weapons production , diversion of special nuclear material , and nuclear detonations . the dnn program is now divided into six functional areas: materials management and minimization ( m3 ) conducts activities to reduce and , where possible , eliminate stockpiles of weapons - useable material around the world . major activities include conversion of reactors that use highly enriched uranium ( useable for weapons ) to low enriched uranium , removal and consolidation of nuclear material stockpiles , and disposition of excess nuclear materials . global material security has three major program elements: international nuclear security , radiological security , and nuclear smuggling detection and deterrence . activities toward achieving those goals include the provision of equipment and training , workshops and exercises , and collaboration with international organizations . nonproliferation and arms control implements programs that aim to strengthen international nuclear safeguards , control the spread of dual - use technologies and expertise , and verify nuclear reductions and compliance with treaties and agreements . this program conducts reviews of nuclear export applications and technology transfer authorizations .