or dissent ! ) judge garland was appointed to the d.c . district court cases database on lexis for judges ( garland ) . not all results from these searches ultimately proved to be relevant , such as when the d.c . circuit declined a petition for en banc rehearing in a one - sentence decision joined by all of the reviewing judges . that decision and similar rulings are not discussed in this report . ultimately , this methodology resulted in the identification of 355 instances in which judge garland is credited as an author of a judicial opinion in cases either before the d.c . circuit ( 354 cases ) or the u.s. district court for the district of columbia ( a single case ) . district court opinions in which judge garland is credited as an author were found by searching the district of columbia circuit — u.s . the opinions listed in this report are categorized into two tables: one table identifying opinions authored by judge garland on behalf of the reviewing court , and the other table identifying opinions authored by judge garland separate from the majority opinion . cases are listed in reverse chronological order by date of decision . in each case , the key ruling or rulings of the case are succinctly described . judicial opinions discussed in this report are categorized using the following 19 legal subject areas: administrative law civil liability ( eg , tort preemption , arbitration , class actions , statutory right to sue ) civil rights criminal law / procedure d.c. local government election law environmental law energy federalism federal courts ( eg , standing to sue , civil procedure ) first amendment ( eg , freedom of speech , freedom of the press ) government information ( eg , claims concerning the freedom of information act ) health care ( eg , medicare or medicaid reimbursement ) international law labor law national security separation of powers tax law transportation where appropriate , multiple subject areas are identified as relevant to a particular case . the list above is not an exhaustive accounting of all possible subject areas addressed by the cases below , but focuses on those legal topics that have most frequently arisen in cases adjudicated by judge garland . moreover , the fact that a case is categorized under a particular legal subject area does not necessarily mean that some observers might not deem other categories to be pertinent . for example , several cases concerning the disposition of challenges brought by wartime detainees held at the u.s . naval station at guantanamo bay , cuba , are categorized solely under the legal subject area of "national security," though some observers may believe that such cases also could be deemed to fall under the "separation of powers" category ( because they arguably concern judicial review of executive discretion in wartime matters ) or the "administrative law" category ( because such cases often involve review of determinations made through an administrative process employed by the u.s. military to assess whether a person is properly detained as an enemy belligerent ) .