the television industry comprises many players . while the terms describing the roles of the players are not standardized , the following framework offers a way to understand the relationships among industry participants . individual corporations may operate in one or more of the following categories: co ntent o wners hold the copyrights to television programs , movies , and sporting events . content owners may create the content themselves , or pay producers to create the content for them . some of those potentially prohibited practices are those raised by mediacom communications corporation ( mediacom ) in a petition for an fcc rulemaking , and other mvpds and broadcasters who responded to mediacom's petition . these include the following: broadcast stations' and / or networks' blocking online access to their programing during retransmission consent disputes . in its committee report , the senate commerce committee also directed the fcc to examine the role "digital rights and online video programming have begun to play in retransmission consent negotiations. broadcast stations' relinquishing to third parties , including broadcast networks and stations located in separate geographic television markets , their right to grant retransmission consent . broadcast stations' bundling of their signals with those of other broadcast stations or cable networks , including networks that have not yet launched . the fcc stated that if a broadcast station requires an mvpd to purchase less popular programming in order to purchase more desired programming , the mvpds may be forced to pay for programming they do not want and may in turn pass those costs onto consumers . the fcc sought comment on 25 additional practices identified that might be inconsistent with the obligation to negotiate in good faith . in december 2014 , the fcc proposed new rules that would expand its definition of an "mvpd" to include ovds that offer linear programming . in singling out these types of ovds for inclusion , the fcc cites the definition of "video programming" in the 1934 communications act . the fcc stated that "such an approach will ensure that both incumbent providers will continue to be subject to ... regulations that apply to mvpds as they transition [the delivery of] their services to the internet , and that nascent , internet - based video programming service will have access to the tools they need to compete with established providers. among the questions on which the fcc sought comment are the following: whether the fcc should consider the exemption or waiver of certain fcc regulations , if allowed under the statute ; how expanding the definition of "mvpd" would affect the retransmission consent negotiation process , including requirements to negotiate in good faith ; how network affiliation agreements affect the carriage of broadcast stations on internet - based mvpds ; how the fcc's expansion of its mvpd definition would interrelate with copyright law . the fcc noted that even if an ovd qualified as an mvpd under the fcc's rules , it would not be subject to a number of regulations and statutory requirements specifically applicable to cable and satellite operators unless it also qualified as one of those services . among those requirements are the network non - duplication rules and must - carry requirements .