appendix a . changes to definitions under p.l . 114-144 table a - 1 compares prior law definitions under title i of the older americans act ( as amended through p.l . 109-365 ) and changes to definitions under the older americans act reauthorization act of 2016 ( p.l . changes under p.l . 114-144 are indicated in italics . appendix b . older americans act: authorizations of appropriations table b - 1 compares the authorizations of appropriations for each title of the act as stipulated under prior law of the older americans act , as amended by the older americans act amendments of 2006 ( p.l . 109-365 ) , and the older americans act reauthorization act of 2016 ( p.l . the oaa as introduced in 1965 paralleled the 1963 proposal . sponsors emphasized how it would provide resources necessary for public and private social service providers to meet the social service needs of the elderly . the act received bipartisan support and was signed into law by president lyndon johnson on july 14 , 1965 ( p.l . in addition to creating aoa , the act authorized grants to states for community planning and services programs , as well as for research , demonstration , and training projects in the field of aging . in his remarks upon signing the bill , the president indicated that the legislation would provide "an orderly , intelligent , and constructive program to help us meet the new dimensions of responsibilities which lie ahead in the remaining years of this century . under this program every state and every community can now move toward a coordinated program of services and opportunities for our older citizens. the following provides a section - by - section summary of key provisions in the older americans act reauthorization act of 2016 ( p.l . for a comparison of prior law ( as amended through the older americans act amendments of 2006 , p.l . 109-365 ) and changes to certain definitions under p.l . 114-144 , see appendix a , table a - 1 . for a comparison of prior law authorizations of appropriations ( as amended by p.l . 109-365 ) with changes under p.l . 114-144 , see appendix b , table b - 1 . originally enacted in 1965 , the older americans act ( oaa ) supports a wide range of social services and programs for individuals aged 60 years or older . these services and programs include supportive services , congregate nutrition services ( i.e. , meals served at group sites such as senior centers , community centers , schools , churches , or senior housing complexes ) , home - delivered nutrition services , family caregiver support , community service employment , the long - term care ombudsman program , and services to prevent the abuse , neglect , and exploitation of older persons . except for title v , community service employment for older americans ( cseoa ) , all programs are administered by the administration on aging ( aoa ) in the administration for community living ( acl ) within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) . title v is administered by the department of labor's ( dol's ) employment and training administration .