the study by petri , et al . even estimates by these studies can vary substantially . in contrast , some models may use non - standard approaches and assumptions that may be difficult to justify and seem to have been chosen in order to generate pre - determined results . consequently , estimates of the impact of the tpp on the u.s. economy can vary from positive to negative , reflecting the importance of the assumptions that are used to derive the results . given the current state of economic modeling and data availability , the models that are deemed to offer the most accurate representation of the effects of changes in trade policy likely can provide only rough estimates of the magnitude of the potential changes in employment in certain sectors , but cannot offer estimates of the precise size of the shifts in employment . as this report indicates , the most important assumption involved in generating estimates of the impact of tpp on employment appears to be the expected level of labor utilization in the u.s. economy over the phase - in period . in addition , policymakers likely would benefit from more reliable data on the potential magnitude of the effects that such agreements might be expected to have on specific sectors , allowing them to craft programs to assist those most directly affected by the agreements . as a result , policymakers may benefit from a number of initiatives to improve information and data on the impact of international trade on the economy . these might include increased information and data on services in the economy , including the shifting of in - house services from the manufacturing sector to the services sector and the formal and informal barriers to u.s. services posed by major trading partners ; better data on worker dislocations , including the reasons for business closings ; and better understanding of the development of global supply chains and the role they are playing in the u.s. economy . standard models are well known and incorporate standard assumptions and approaches that generally are well explained . many experts agree that the mark of a good economic model is one that uses assumptions and methodologies that seem reasonable and are not geared toward generating any particular result . model simulations based on an assumption of full employment likely track closer to the current situation than would data following the 2008-2009 financial crisis when rates of labor unemployment were above historical levels . it seems reasonable to assume , however , that the u.s. economy will perform at or close to its long - term trend approaching full employment during the period following the adoption of tpp . another major qualification for the estimates may be that they do not account for changes in exchange rates , which may have a wide - ranging effect on the prices of internationally traded goods and may overwhelm changes in prices of goods that arise from changes in tariff rates . estimates of employment effects of new ftas can be subjective and misleading because they represent a partial accounting of the total economic effects of new ftas . u.s. ftas typically include comprehensive provisions for goods , services , and investment .