he was reelected in 2011 and 2016 . as opposition leader in the national assembly from 1990 to 2006 and during his two subsequent terms as president , ortega slowly consolidated sandinista — and his own — control over the country's institutions . the united states and other observers cite municipal and regional elections over this period , and the 2011 presidential elections , as having been flawed and used to strengthen ortega's control of national institutions . nonetheless , ortega and the fsln have raised the standard of living for much of nicaragua's poor population , thereby increasing the sandinistas' popularity and public support . although numerous observers questioned the legitimacy of the 2011 national elections and the official tally giving ortega almost 63% of the vote , many also conceded that ortega most likely would have won even without carrying out fraud . by 2012 , the fsln had achieved "near complete dominance over most of the country's institutions," according to freedom house . in summer 2016 , the government removed some of the last checks on ortega's power by removing members of the opposition from the legislature , easing ortega's way to winning a third consecutive presidential term that november . ortega's popularity may be diminishing , however . although the official electoral authority reported voter turnout was almost 70% , opponents estimated a much lower turnout of only 30% . ortega was inaugurated to his third consecutive , and fourth overall , five - year term as president on january 10 , 2017 . in early september 2016 , nicaragua granted asylum to former el salvadoran president mauricio funes , who is being investigated for alleged corruption . funes , of the leftist farabundo marti national liberation front ( fmln ) , said he is fleeing political persecution from rightist elements and is afraid for his safety . nicaragua's establishment of a framework for economic development since the signing of the 1990 central american peace accords , which ended years of armed civil war in nicaragua , has followed a more consistent path than has its democratic development . the world bank says nicaragua stands out for maintaining growth levels above the average for latin america and the caribbean . nicaragua's economic growth reached a high of 6.2% in 2011 ; the world bank estimates a drop in growth of 3.9% for 2015 and predicts growth of 4.2% for 2016 . president ortega's stated goal has been to implement socialism in nicaragua , which he defines as a mixed economy . nonetheless , he has maintained many elements of a market - based economy , including participation in the u.s. - central america - dominican republic free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) . nicaragua's economy faces two significant challenges . high electricity costs appear to hinder the business community's ability to compete and stifle foreign investment in new businesses . the future of the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) agreement could also have a negative impact on nicaragua's textile production , a major export commodity for nicaragua . the united states has sought to strengthen democratic institutions and practices in nicaragua since nicaragua initiated a transition to democracy in 1990 .