semiconductors are the enabling technology of the information age . semiconductors allow computers to run software applications , such as email , internet browsers , and word processing and spreadsheet programs and to store documents , photographs , videos , music , and other data . they also provide the "brains," memory , and data communication capabilities of countless other products , from cell phones and gaming systems to aircraft and industrial machinery to military equipment and weapons . even many products with roots in mechanical systems are now heavily dependent on chip - based electronics: one car manufacturer asserts that some of its models incorporate as many as 6,000 semiconductors . and one expert on software in cars estimates that premium - class automobiles can contain close to 100 million lines of software code ( instructions ) that the chips use to control the vehicle . the semiconductor industry is generally characterized by large fluctuations in product supply and demand , depending heavily on the strength of the global economy . u.s. - headquartered firms have the largest share of the global market , measured by sales , at close to 50% . half of the 20 largest semiconductor firms by revenue in 2015 are headquartered in the united states: intel , qualcomm , micron , texas instruments , broadcom , apple , sandisk , nvidia , advanced micro devices , and on semiconductor . other leading firms are based in south korea , japan , taiwan , and europe . there are no china - based semiconductor firms on the top 20 list . only a handful of companies have the sales volume to operate as integrated device manufacturers ( idms ) operating their own fabrication facilities ( known as fabs ) . other chip firms are "fabless," meaning that they design and market semiconductors but contract production to "foundries" that manufacture semiconductors to order . taiwan semiconductor manufacturing company ( tsmc ) , a taiwanese - headquartered company , operates the world's largest foundry . fabless semiconductor firms generally enjoy higher and less volatile profit margins than semiconductor manufacturers with integrated operations . more recently , the federal role has focused on support for research to extend the life of current semiconductor technologies and to develop the scientific and technological underpinnings for revolutionary successor technologies . for decades , many have argued that maintaining a domestic manufacturing capability for the most advanced semiconductor products is necessary for national security . proponents of this view claim dependence by the u.s. military on foreign suppliers of semiconductors , especially those that are hostile or may become hostile to u.s. interests , is not acceptable due to the military's reliance on semiconductors as a vital and ubiquitous component in u.s. weapons and defense systems . however , the high costs of maintaining a domestic semiconductor production capability for critical military inputs may result in more expensive weapons systems . in 2003 , then - deputy secretary of defense paul wolfowitz wrote in an unclassified memo the "country needs a defense industrial base that includes leading edge , trusted commercial suppliers for critical integrated circuits used in sensitive defense weapons , intelligence , and communications systems.