enacted legislation h.r . international megan's law to prevent child exploitation and other sexual crimes through advanced notification of traveling sex offenders — became p.l . trade facilitation and trade enforcement act of 2015 — became p.l . see in particular provisions amending the bipartisan congressional trade priorities and accountability act of 2015 and the tariff act of 1930 and the conference report ( h.rept . north korea sanctions and policy enhancement act of 2016 — became p.l . see in particular provisions on forced labor and trafficking of north korean citizens and house foreign affairs committee report ( h.rept . consolidated appropriations act , 2016 — became p.l . see division k , the department of state , foreign operations , and related appropriations act , 2016 ; see also s. 1725 and h.r . 2772 , both entitled department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2016 , and respectively reported out of committee ( s.rept . defending public safety employees' retirement act — became p.l . see title i , the bipartisan congressional trade priorities and accountability act of 2015 ; see also s. 995 , the bipartisan congressional trade priorities and accountability act of 2015 , which was reported out of the senate committee on finance ( s.rept . passed either the house or senate h.r . human trafficking prevention , intervention , and recovery act of 2015 — passed the house ; pertaining to the activities of the president's interagency task force to monitor and combat trafficking as they relate to child trafficking in the united states . human trafficking prevention act — passed the house ; pertaining to federal government training on human trafficking . trafficking prevention in foreign affairs contracting act — passed the house ; pertaining to anti - human trafficking requirements for federal contractors . human trafficking prioritization act — passed the house ; pertaining to the bureaucratic status of the j / tip office within the state department . strategy to oppose predatory organ trafficking act — passed the house ; pertaining to u.s. policy responses to the trafficking in human organs . department of state operations authorization and embassy security act , fiscal year 2016 — passed the senate ; pertaining to state department responsibilities to combat human trafficking . national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017 — passed the senate ; pertaining to , among other provisions , authority for the secretary of state to award grants seeking to reduce the prevalence of human trafficking in foreign countries . other pending bills h.r . equal rights and access for the women of south sudan act — pertaining to the scope of foreign assistance provided to south sudan , including trafficking prevention and trafficker prosecution . repeal executive amnesty act of 2015 — pertaining to , among other issues , unaccompanied alien children ( with bearing on the william wilberforce trafficking victims protection reauthorization act of 2008 ) . survivors of human trafficking empowerment act — pertaining to the establishment of a u.s . advisory council on human trafficking . sex trafficking demand reduction act — pertaining to the minimum standards for the elimination of severe forms of trafficking in persons and government policies on the purchase of commercial sex .