appendix a . supporting documentation appendix b. online resources on zika viru . f unding for pandemic preparedness . the united states committed to support 30 countries ( including haiti and peru ) and the caribbean community ( caricom ) in bolstering their ability to respond to disease outbreaks through the global health security agenda ( ghsa ) . congress included almost $600 million in emergency ebola appropriations to the cdc in support of ghsa and $50 million in fy2016 appropriations to usaid for pandemic preparedness activities . congress might consider funding levels for those programs and where those funds are allotted . investments in research and development of neglected diseases . in addition , 13 zika - affected countries have recorded an increased incidence of gbs . congress is considering a range of domestic and international responses to the zika outbreak . in the global context , as summarized above ( see " congressional action on the budget request " ) , members are debating the appropriate response to the outbreak . in the international context , congress may consider how to balance support for u.s. bilateral and multilateral zika responses . u.s. foreign assistance to latin america and the caribbean has been declining since fy2011 , and usaid has been phasing out many global health programs in the region . the zika outbreak may prompt broader discussions about whether to bolster u.s. global health investments in the western hemisphere , including in reproductive health . discussions about controlling the zika outbreak may also focus on u.s. support for global pandemic preparedness efforts , as well as research and development for diagnostics , treatments , and prevention measures for certain neglected diseases . in recent years , aedes mosquitoes have caused three disease outbreaks ( dengue , chikungunya , and zika ) in latin america and the caribbean , all of which have been imported into the united states , with the latter being only travel - associated at the time of this report . these and other diseases lack vaccines to prevent transmission , treatment regimens , and effective vector control tools . congress might evaluate options to address threats from new and reemerging diseases , including those that are mosquito - borne . this report provides background information on the zika virus , discusses challenges faced by governments and implementing partners in the latin america and caribbean region that are attempting to control the ongoing outbreak , and analyzes the above issues in the context of the u.s. zika response . zika was discovered in the zika forest of uganda in 1947 . from that time until 2007 , when the first large zika outbreak was recorded , zika virus infection primarily caused mild symptoms ( fever , skin rash , conjunctivitis , muscle and joint pain ) that resolved within one week . in 2007 , the first large zika outbreak was recorded on the micronesian island of yap . household surveys detected 185 cases . scientists are studying the virulence of the zika virus and the extent to which human activity affects global spread . retrospective studies of a 2013-2014 outbreak in french polynesia linked zika infection with gbs for the first time .