it is up to ratifying nations to enforce these standards . the united states is a party to these conventions , and the u.s. coast guard enforces them when it boards and inspects ships and crews arriving at u.s. ports and the very few ships engaged in international trade that sail under the u.s. flag . flag registration like the united states , most of the other major maritime trading nations lack the ability to enforce imo regulations as a "flag state" because much of the world's merchant fleet is registered under so - called "flags of convenience" or "open - registry" countries . how reliable and resilient is e - navigation ? should e - navigation replace physical aids or merely supplement them ? are e - navigation aids as accessible to recreational craft ? are there cybersecurity concerns associated with e - navigation ? the coast guard's aton budgetary needs in coming years will depend on the answers to these questions . congress has expressed specific interest in the feasibility and advisability of using e - navigation in u.s. areas of the arctic ocean . in fy2016 , congress provided an additional $12 million above the president's request for the use of uas ( drones ) aboard national security cutters . congress has also expressed interest in receiving a more detailed plan showing how the coast guard could take advantage of this technology . like e - navigation , greater use of uas potentially offers significant efficiencies in the vessels , aircraft , and crews needed to perform various coast guard missions . the coast guard has tested both smaller , hand - held uas and larger uas to extend the surveillance range of its patrol vessels . in april 2015 , the coast guard announced that it would be testing uas in the arctic for missions such as surveying ice conditions , marine environmental monitoring , marine safety , and search and rescue . the unmanned aircraft being tested can be launched from land or a coast guard cutter . 2518 , as reported by the house transportation and infrastructure committee , requests a study by the national academy of sciences as to how drone aircraft could be used to enhance the coast guard's maritime domain awareness . the bill also places restrictions on the coast guard's pursuit of uas , making it dependent on a lack of funding for offshore patrol cutters and uas procurement by the departments of defense and homeland security . the united states has established a perimeter up to 200 miles from its coastlines within which maritime vessels must reduce their emissions . to meet a stricter requirement that was triggered on january 1 , 2015 , ships are switching to cleaner - burning ( lower - sulfur ) fuel when they reach this zone . the coast guard is responsible for enforcing correct fuel use . given the additional costs associated with cleaner - burning fuels , ocean carriers are concerned that the level of enforcement be uniform to ensure a level playing field .