caution should be exercised when making generalizations about these systems . however , while each workers' compensation system is different and operates under its own set of laws , regulations , and legal precedents , there are some common elements to these systems . the direct costs associated with workers' compensation benefits are generally the responsibility of the employers and not the workers or the general revenue stream of the government . workers never directly pay for their own benefits , which are provided without any coinsurance costs or deductibles that must be met by the workers . employers may have deductibles that must be met before their insurer will pay benefits . the federal government has no formal oversight of state workers' compensation programs . there is no federal mandate that states have workers' compensation laws and no federal standards for workers' compensation systems . compulsory workers' compensation that covers all employers and workers was one of the key goals of the national commission . today , while workers' compensation systems continue to exclude certain groups of workers , such as casual and household workers in certain states , coverage is generally compulsory for employers in all states except texas . noncompulsory workers' compensation should not be confused with self - insurance for workers' compensation . self - insurance is part of all but two states' workers' compensation systems ( north dakota and wyoming ) and although employers approved to self - insure do not have to purchase workers' compensation insurance , they are required to comply with all other provisions of the workers' compensation law and must pay benefits to covered workers . for more than a century workers and employers in the united states have been protected and served by the workers' compensation system . the grand bargain of guaranteed no - fault benefits that replaced the tort system has , with only limited federal intervention and no federal mandate , largely stood the test of time and today covers nearly all workers in every state . workers' compensation policy has not been without its challenges , however . the competing interests of employers looking to control costs and workers looking to maximize benefits and coverage have long been at odds . recently , some in congress have expressed concern that the lack of federal oversight of workers' compensation has led to changes in state policies that have negatively affected workers . compulsory coverage is one of the key tenets of the workers' compensation system and traditionally each state , with the exception of texas , has required employers to participate in the workers' compensation system by purchasing insurance or self - insuring . in 2013 , however , oklahoma began to permit employers to opt out of workers' compensation by providing approved alternative benefit plans to their employers . advocates have argued allowing employers to opt - out of workers' compensation will bring needed flexibility to the workers' compensation system , allow workers to have a say in their own benefits , and reduce employer and taxpayer costs . concerns have been raised , however , that the plans offered by employers opting out of workers' compensation do not sufficiently protect workers and may compromise their ability to appeal benefit denials .