the senate passed s. 2012 on april 20 , 2016 . on may 25 , 2016 , the house passed an amended version of s. 2012 which contains the text of h.r . 8 , as well as the text of several other energy and natural resources - related bills . two of these provisions — on critical electric infrastructure security and a strategic transformer reserve — were included in the fixing america's surface transportation ( fast ) act ( p.l . the following day , the house moved to insist upon its amendment , and to appoint conferees to resolve the differences in s. 2012 . on july 12 , the senate agreed to the request for a conference , and appointed conferees . in addition to energy policy provisions , both versions of s. 2012 contain many natural resources and environmental provisions including provisions on fish and wildlife recreation and federal land conveyances . the senate version includes permanent reauthorization of the land and water conservation fund and reauthorization of epa's brownfields program , while the house version includes provisions on national forest management and drought relief . the house - passed bill would have eliminated restrictions on the export of u.s. - produced crude oil . however , this provision was included in the fy2016 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l . the house - passed bill also includes provisions on the physical security of the electric grid . this report provides a side - by - side table identifying comparable and non - comparable provisions in the house and senate - passed versions of s. 2012 , provisions that may be addressed in conference . the first part of the table lists the provisions in the senate version of s. 2012 in section order in the left column , with any comparable house provisions in the right column . the second part of the table ( beginning on page 16 ) lists the provisions from the house version in section order in the right column , with any comparable senate provisions in the left column . for a discussion of key energy and natural resources topics in the two bills , see crs report r44291 , energy legislation: comparison of selected provisions in h.r . on september 9 , 2015 , the senate committee on energy and natural resources reported s. 2012 , the energy policy modernization act , a major energy bill with provisions addressing energy efficiency , critical infrastructure , energy supplies ( fossil , renewable , and nuclear ) , energy financing and markets , and critical minerals , among other topics .