additionally , both bills have provisions that could be viewed as controversial . in particular , those provisions pertaining to mandatory conditioning authority and the new hydropower licensing schedule have invited debate . where applicable , it also discusses comparable provisions in the house version . the senate and house versions of s. 2012 contain provisions that would significantly impact nonfederal hydropower . chief among these provisions is the one that would make ferc the lead agency for federal authorizations — and the lead agency for issuing a hydropower license . with this provision , congress would be signaling that it wants ferc to play a more prominent role and to be the gatekeeper for the licensing process . seven of the 11 sections focus on the construction timeline for specific projects or stipulate certain license criteria . two sections under title iii , sections 3001 and 3002 , focus on hydropower licensing improvements and incentives . one section under title x , section 10345 , centers on termination of authority for the secretary of the interior . another section under title x , section 10351 , focuses on compensation for pumped storage hydropower projects . this portion of the report summarizes the contents of each of the 11 sections in the senate version of s. 2012 that address hydropower . it could be argued that ferc could misuse this leadership authority if the commission does not fully cooperate with the other involved agencies . on the other hand , having ferc as the lead agency could shorten the licensing process by facilitating cooperation among the stakeholders . further , both bills set timeframes for steps within the licensing process , perhaps as an attempt to make issuing a license timelier . for instance , some states and environmental groups are concerned that the bills provide ferc with a unique authority to set the schedule for issuing a hydropower license . some contend that a schedule set by ferc could make the other involved parties unable to contribute to the hydropower licensing process as they have in the past and could potentially weaken their contribution to the environmental review process of such projects . however , the national hydropower association argues that the bills would make the licensing process more coherent and collaborative and would require regulators to make more timely decisions "without narrowing the authorities of federal and state resources agencies and indian tribes under existing federal environmental laws. another controversial provision could be section 3001 ( b ) ( 2 ) of s. 2012 , as engrossed in the senate , which significantly broadens the statutory definition for renewable energy for the federal purchase requirement to include all hydropower . some could argue that there should be limits to what type of hydropower qualifies for the purchase requirement . the report briefly describes some of the current statutory requirements related to certain provisions . it does not provide a comprehensive examination of each hydropower provision , nor does it provide a comprehensive examination of how proponents or opponents regard individual provisions . both the senate and the house versions of s. 2012 generally seek to modify regulation and development processes for nonfederal hydropower .