part 112 . the regulations require certain facilities ( discussed below ) to prepare and implement , but not submit , spcc plans . ( a subset of higher - risk facilities must submit facility response plans to epa. ) among other obligations , spcc regulations require secondary containment ( eg , dikes or berms ) for certain oil - storage units . in addition , spcc plans must be certified by a licensed professional engineer unless a facility owner / operator meets the conditions that allow for self - certification . in general , facilities with no reportable discharge history that store 10,000 gallons or less , in aggregate , can self - certify their spcc plans . for farms , this particular threshold is 20,000 gallons . epa estimated that approximately 99% of all farms have an oil storage capacity less than or equal to 20,000 gallons and would thus be able to self - certify their plans if they were subject to spcc requirements . epa issued its first spcc regulations in 1973 , which became effective january 10 , 1974 . epa made changes and clarifications to the spcc regulations in 2002 . over the next eight years , epa extended the 2002 rule's compliance date on multiple occasions and made further amendments to the 2002 rule . for most types of facilities subject to spcc requirements , the deadline for complying with the changes made in 2002 was november 10 , 2011 . however , a subsequent epa rulemaking extended this compliance date for farms to may 10 , 2013 . on march 26 , 2013 , congress enacted p.l . 113-6 , which prohibited epa from using appropriations to enforce spcc provisions at farms for 180 days after enactment ( i.e. , through september 22 , 2013 ) . notwithstanding these recent deadlines , the 2002 final rule and subsequent revisions did not alter the requirement for owners or operators of facilities , including farms , to maintain and continue implementing their spcc plans in accordance with the spcc regulations that have been in effect since 1974 . the epa spcc plan requirements apply to non - transportation - related facilities that produce , store , use , or consume oil or oil products and could reasonably be expected to discharge oil into or upon navigable waters of the united states or adjoining shorelines . the definition of "navigable waters" has been a long - standing controversial topic and subject of litigation in recent years . on may 27 , 2015 , the army corps of engineers and epa finalized revised regulations that define the scope of waters protected under the cwa . the definition of oil has also garnered attention from policymakers and stakeholders in recent years . the cwa section 311 definition states: "oil" means oil of any kind or in any form , including , but not limited to , petroleum , fuel oil , sludge , oil refuse , and oil mixed with wastes other than dredged spoil . since the inception of the spcc regulations , epa has interpreted this definition to apply to both petroleum - based and non - petroleum - based oil .