the delay would affect children with special needs who are less than four years of age when their adoption assistance agreement is finalized . specifically , those special needs children who are between two and four years of age at the time their adoption assistance agreement is finalized would be eligible for title iv - e adoption assistance without meeting an income test as of april 1 , 2019 ( instead of current law october 1 , 2016 ) ; a child with special needs whose adoption assistance agreement was entered into at any age ( including those under two years of age ) would be eligible for title iv - e adoption assistance , without an income test , as of april 1 , 2020 ( instead of current law october 1 , 2017 ) . the gao study would need to look at whether states are complying with the requirement that they spend , for child welfare purposes , an amount equal to the amount of savings ( if any ) resulting from phasing out the income eligibility requirements for federal adoption assistance and the requirement that not less than 30% of any such savings be used for post - adoption or post - guardianship services and services to support and sustain positive outcomes , and permanency , for children who might otherwise enter foster care . the family first prevention services act of 2016 would amend the child welfare programs included in title iv - b and title iv - e of the social security act . the bill would authorize states to receive federal support under the title iv - e foster care and permanency program for services and programs provided to children and their families that are intended to prevent the need for children to enter foster care , by allowing them to remain safely at home with parents , or with kin . at the same time , the bill would restrict the ability of states to claim support for children in foster care who are placed in group settings rather than in foster family homes . additionally , the bill would extend funding authority for the child and family services programs authorized in title iv - b of the social security act and it would revise the purposes of , including eligibility for , the chafee foster care independence program ( cfcip ) to make them more consistent with the goal of helping all youth who experience foster care at an older age make a successful transition to adulthood . programs authorized in title iv - b and title iv - e of the social security act are administered by the children's bureau , which is an agency within the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , administration for children and families ( acf ) , administration on children , youth , and families ( acyf ) . this report begins with a brief overview of the title iv - b and title iv - e programs that would be amended by the family first prevention services act , follows with a short summary of the bill , and its cbo cost estimate , and then provides a section - by - section description of its provisions .