usaid . across the three countries , usaid has supported the construction of temporary isolation units at health care facilities to integrate ebola care into existing health infrastructure , building and strengthening rapid response capacity , and institutionalizing infection prevention and control ( ipc ) protocols and ebola screening at government hospitals . in sierra leone , usaid supported the construction of 90 semipermanent isolation units to address ebola cases and treat other communicable diseases . across the three countries , usaid funded efforts to strengthen the government supply chain system . in liberia , for example , usaid provided technical assistance to quantify ipc commodities and improve warehouse management , while in sierra leone , usaid provided technical assistance to monitor and track supplies and essential medicines . usaid also led interagency transition planning in each country to determine how u.s. government - supported activities would be transferred to host governments or other implementing partners . in liberia , usaid provided technical assistance to reopen primary health care facilities that provide routine maternal and child health services , completed baseline facility assessments at 61 health facilities , provided essential medicines to community clinics , and supported immunization campaigns . the usaid disaster assistance response team ( dart ) , which coordinated all u.s. ebola responses in west africa , disbanded on january 4 , 2016 . since then , country program offices in guinea , liberia , and sierra leone have led ebola responses in the respective countries . cdc . in liberia , cdc has supported the development of a national training curriculum that promotes health care worker safety and quality of health care services that reached more than 1,000 health care workers , and provided technical assistance to the liberian ministry of health for the development of a new ipc quality management unit . in sierra leone , cdc funded training on the country's national ipc guidelines for 50 hospital and district workers in october 2015 . cdc also led u.s. efforts to enhance ebola surveillance by facilitating the procurement and appropriate use of alternative ebola diagnostic tools and providing mobile laboratories . in sierra leone , cdc sponsored the strive trial to assess the safety and efficacy of the rvsv - zebov candidate . the trial , conducted in december 2015 and jointly conducted by the college of medicine and allied health sciences ( comahs ) , university of sierra leone , the sierra leone ministry of health and sanitation ( mohs ) , and cdc enrolled and vaccinated more than 8,000 participants . in liberia , cdc supported health officials to conduct voluntary semen screening and counselling programs for male survivors to educate male survivors about transmission risks and provide them with the necessary tools to reduce the risk of transmission . according to who , 405 male survivors had their semen screened as of january 3 , 2016 . cdc also supported semen testing programs in sierra leone , which reportedly enrolled more than 650 male ebola survivors as of december 14 , 2015 . the program , entitled project shield , was led by britain and implemented in partnership with the government of sierra leone and also trained health care workers and peer networks to provide sexual risk reduction counseling . other hhs agencies .