or , congress might prefer that the program be funded through the gf . for all of these options , the time interval for which the funding source is established also affects the extent to which the funding mechanism for a program promotes either funding predictability for the program that it funds , or regular congressional review . in summary , some of the many factors that congress may take into consideration when it is assessing potential funding mechanisms for a new or existing program include the nature of the government program or service to be provided ; whether funding stability or a guarantee of budgetary resources to meet whatever needs arise is important for the purposes or operation of the program ; whether the program could adapt and still fulfill its mission if year - to - year funding levels are variable ; how accurately the future funding needs of the program can be forecast ; how often , and by what types of legislative vehicles , the parameters of the program ( including its funding ) should be reevaluated by congress ; what funding sources besides the gf could be used for the program ; whether a program's dedicated funding source and spending from that source should be evaluated on the same or different schedules , and in the same or different legislative vehicles ; and whether congressional control over various aspects of the funding itself , including the source of the funding , should be vested in one or more authorization committees , vested in the appropriations committees , or split between both types of committees . both types of funding sources may be used to fund either mandatory or discretionary spending . in the case of dedicated collections , the authority to make the collections and the authority to expend them may be controlled by the same law or by different laws . this section explains the two types of funding sources and how they fit within the framework of discretionary and mandatory spending . the purpose of this report is to discuss these approaches and illustrate them with examples of how they have been applied in practice . the first part of the report describes the two general funding types — discretionary and mandatory — based on the contrasting roles that authorizations and appropriations play for each type . it also discusses how both approaches might be used to fund a single purpose ( "mixed approaches" ) . the second part of the report explains the various budget process options that exist for the source of funds . the report concludes by summarizing the general issues for congress when it evaluates a funding mechanism , both those that are proposed and those that already exist . the funding source within a funding mechanism may be established through either authorization or appropriations laws . whether congress prefers that control over spending be vested in one , the other , or both processes depends on a number of factors . the first is the general fund of the treasury ( gf ) , which is the default place where federal government collections are deposited and thereafter are available to be used by the treasury to meet spending obligations .