what is the acquisition workforce ? what is the current size of the acquisition workforce ? what , if any , gaps in dau's ability to keep its staff and curriculum current with , and adaptive to , ever changing subject specialties could be remedied by amendments to the university's authorizing statute ? does the acquisition workforce have the right mix of military , civilian , and contractor personnel ? what is the proper role of contractors in supporting program management offices ? what is the proper role and use of hiring and pay flexibilities to recruit and retain qualified acquisition professionals ? the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fiscal year 2016 included more than 10 provisions specifically geared to the acquisition workforce . given the current focus on acquisition reform and the role of the workforce in the success of the acquisition system , it is useful to explore exactly who is in ( and who is not in ) this workforce , and recent efforts by congress to improve its performance . despite recent efforts , many observers believe that dod still faces significant challenges in improving the performance of the workforce responsible for defense acquisitions . the extent to which dod is successful in improving the workforce may depend , in part , on congressional action . potential oversight questions for congress may include the following: 1 . answering the following questions could help congress determine what , if any , further actions it deems necessary to try to improve the performance of the workforce responsible for acquisitions . just as the total force of the department of defense consists of active and reserve military , civilian personnel , and contractor support , so too the acquisition workforce relies on active and reserve military , civilian , and contractor personnel to manage acquisitions . dod instruction 1100.22 , policy and procedures for determining workforce mix , lays out the policies and procedures for determining the appropriate mix of military , civilian , and contractor personnel ( including inherently governmental activities ) . guidance generally requires the use of cost as a deciding factor in determining the workforce mix and mandates the default use of dod civilian personnel , when consistent with statute and dod regulations . developing an appropriate workforce mix can be difficult due to budgetary , statutory , and regulatory constraints . what is the appropriate size of the acquisition workforce ? are the flexibilities achieving the desired results ? in what ways is dau fulfilling , or not fulfilling , the mission and functions that congress established with its creation ? are dawia certifications creating a well - qualified , appropriately balanced , and professional workforce ? a number of the activities critical to successful acquisitions — such as requirements development and budgeting — are beyond the authority or control of the acquisition workforce . potential oversight questions for congress may include the following: 1 . to what extent should efforts to improve acquisitions focus on the training and development of non - acquisition personnel who play critical roles in the acquisition process ? to what extent are the incentives of the acquisition workforce and the broader workforce responsible for successful acquisitions sufficiently aligned ?