each bill is described separately . under federal student aid need analysis procedures , a student's calculated ability to pay for higher education is known as the "expected family contribution" ( efc ) . the efc is determined by a formula that considers the income and assets of the student and , if applicable , the student's parents or spouse . information to calculate the efc is collected via the free application for federal student aid ( fafsa ) . if applicable , family members who have submitted their income tax returns for the applicable tax year prior to completing the fafsa may be able to import tax information to the fafsa using the internal revenue service data retrieval tool ( irs - drt ) . 5528 would make several changes to the fafsa completion and submission process with the intent of reducing respondent burden in completing the form . finally , the bill would make technical changes to the calculation of the annual adjustment percentage for federal pell grants . the hea was amended by the heoa to establish a number of provisions that require the reporting and publication of detailed information about institutions of higher education and their offerings , the students who attend them , and college costs and prices . current requirements include the reporting and publication of this information on the college navigator website , the development of net price calculators and multi - year tuition calculators , and the publication of college affordability and transparency lists and state higher education spending charts . 3178 would establish a college dashboard as the successor to the college navigator website , and would revise the information required to be reported on it . the bill would also repeal the requirement to publicize college affordability and transparency lists and state higher education spending charts , revise the requirements applicable to net price calculators , and repeal the requirement for multi - year tuition calculators . the hea requires that title iv - participating ihes make available loan entrance and loan exit counseling to certain direct loan ( dl ) borrowers , which generally provides borrowers with information relating to their direct loan terms and conditions , and with debt management strategies in the case of exit counseling . the provision of this loan counseling is intended to provide borrowers with information about the federal student aid debt they may incur and the consequences of doing so . 3179 would make numerous amendments to the current loan counseling requirements , with the intent of enhancing the timing , frequency , and content of the counseling to enable borrowers to make sound borrowing decisions . title v - a of the hea authorizes the developing hispanic serving institutions ( hsis ) program , which provides grants to institutions of higher education with large undergraduate hispanic enrollments ( hispanic - serving institutions ; hsis ) to support and expand educational opportunities for hispanic students and to enhance the academic offerings and institutional stability at hsis . 5529 would make changes to the authorized uses of grant monies awarded to hsis under the program with the intent of potentially increasing the number of hispanic physicians in the workforce and expanding the types of educational offerings at hsis , while achieving a zero budget score .