appendix a . detailed definitions and ay2018-2019 levels a number of terms and formula factors are defined similarly across efc formulas . this appendix provides detailed definitions of each of these terms and factors . the definitions in this report are a combination of statute and subsequent agency guidance . in cases where a factor is quantitative and revised annually , this report provides the most recent level from ay2018-2019 . total income total income consists of three factors: ( 1 ) adjusted gross income ( agi ) and ( 2 ) untaxed income , both of which contribute to the total income ; and ( 3 ) excludable income , which reduces it . total income = adjusted gross income + untaxed income – excludable income agi comes from the applicant's prior - year tax return . agi is the sum of income that is considered for the purposes of federal taxation . if the applicant did not have to file a tax return in the prior year , the applicant declares any earnings from the prior year and these earnings substitute for the agi . untaxed income the efc formulas consider some forms of income that are excluded from federal taxation . untaxed income that is considered by the efc formulas includes the following: child support received for any of a parent's children , but not including foster care or adoption payments ; payments to tax - deferred pension and retirement savings plans ; ira deductions and payments to self - employed sep , simple , keogh , and other qualified plans ; tax - exempt interest income ; untaxed portions of ira distributions , excluding rollovers ; untaxed portions of pensions , excluding rollovers ; housing , food , and other living allowances paid to members of the military , clergy , and others ( including cash payments and cash value of benefits ) , not including the value of on - base military housing or the value of a basic military allowance for housing ; veterans noneducation benefits , such as disability , death pension , or dependency and indemnity compensation and / or va educational work - study allowances ; money received , or paid on the student's behalf , not reported elsewhere on the fafsa , including money received from a parent whose financial information is not reported on the fafsa and that is not part of a legal child support agreement , but excluding money paid on a dependent student's behalf by parents whose information is included on the fafsa ; and other untaxed income not otherwise reported , such as workers' compensation , disability , etc. , but not including extended foster care benefits , student aid , earned income credit , additional child tax credit , welfare payments , untaxed social security benefits , supplemental security income , workforce innovation and opportunity act educational benefits , on - base military housing or a military housing allowance , combat pay , benefits from flexible spending arrangements ( eg , cafeteria plans ) , foreign income exclusion , or credit for federal tax on special fuels . excludable income excludable income is income not considered for the purposes of federal student aid . excludable income is subtracted from the sum of agi and untaxed income .