appendix a . foreign terrorist organizations in africa appendix b . terrorist group profile . he reiterated that message in 2016 . u.s. officials warn of growing fragmentation within the "terrorism landscape," made up of an increasingly diverse array of groups in africa , asia , and the middle east . africa , described by clapper in 2014 as "a hothouse for the emergence of extremist and rebel groups," has drawn increasing attention as groups in nigeria and somalia have expanded their reach and lethality , and as new north african groups have emerged . some africa - based extremists have affiliated with al qaeda or the islamic state ( is , aka isis or isil ) , but many appear to operate autonomously . transnational groups appear to see opportunity in africa — the cover of dabiq , the islamic state's english - language magazine , proclaimed in 2015: "shari'a will rule africa. in the 2015 assessment of the dni , most sunni violent extremist groups "place a higher priority on local concerns than on attacking the so - called far enemy — the united states and the west. nevertheless , some african groups have attacked western interests in africa , and u.s. officials view some groups , like al shabaab , as potentially capable of inspiring or carrying out attacks in the united states , despite a primarily regional focus . there has been comparatively greater international focus on violent islamist extremism occurring in , and emanating from , the middle east , south asia , and north africa , but in recent years the death toll from violent islamist terrorist attacks in sub - saharan africa has rivaled that of other regions . this report seeks to provide some context for current terrorism trends in sub - saharan africa and a discussion of some key issues for congress . in addition to various country - specific responses to terrorist threats on the continent , african countries have established several multinational mechanisms to address certain regional extremist threats , including amisom , the regional cooperation initiative for the elimination of the lord's resistance army ( rci - lra ) , an au - led military intervention in mali in late 2012 ( subsequently re - hatted as a u.n. operation ) , a multinational joint operations center in southern algeria known as the cemoc , the lake chad basin commission's multinational joint task force ( mnjtf ) to counter boko haram , and a separate , nascent effort to create a joint military force among five west african countries known as the "g - 5 sahel. eleven countries participate in the au - backed nouakchott process on the enhancement of security cooperation and the operationalization of the african peace and security architecture ( apsa ) in the sahelo - saharan region . the au's african center for the study and research on terrorism ( acsrt ) in algiers , which is led by an au special representative for counterterrorism coordination , provides a forum for centralizing information on terrorist activity and supporting african counterterrorism strategies . these initiatives reflect recognition of the need for greater cooperation among affected states , although participating countries' capacities vary , sometimes significantly , as does the degree of political will for increased coordination .