notably , some states have passed legislation that clarifies the effect of a state pardon . colorado , for example , provides the following: "a pardon issued by the governor shall waive all collateral consequences associated with each conviction for which the person received a pardon unless the pardon limits the scope of the pardon regarding collateral consequences. the benign prerogative of mercy reposed in him cannot be fettered by any legislative restrictions. in united states v. klein , the court found unconstitutional a congressional provision that purported to limit the use and effect of the president's pardon . in finding that the congressional provision infringed on the president's pardon power , the court stated: "[t] he legislature cannot change the effect of such a pardon any more than the executive can change a law. likewise , the court in schick declared that the president's pardon power "flows from the constitution alone , not any legislative enactments," and it "cannot be modified , abridged , or diminished by congress. these judicial pronouncements appear to indicate that congress can take no action that would limit the effect or use of a presidential pardon , nor can congress direct how or when the president may exercise his pardon authority . generally , members of congress have turned to introducing resolutions expressing the sense of congress that the president either should or should not grant pardons to certain individuals or groups of individuals . it is unclear , however , whether a reviewing court would reach the same conclusion were congress to pass a measure that expanded the effect of a presidential pardon . "collateral consequences" are defined as "a penalty , prohibition , bar , disadvantage , or disqualification , however denominated , imposed on an individual as a result of the individual's conviction of an offense , which penalty , prohibition , bar , or disadvantage applies by operation of law regardless of whether the penalty , prohibition , bar , or disadvantage is included in the judgment or sentence. similarly , congress could enact a provision that reaffirms the existing principle that a presidential pardon restores civil rights and removes collateral consequences imposed under federal or state law as a result of a federal conviction , unless otherwise provided for by the pardon or by the state ( with respect to state - imposed legal disabilities ) . however , if a congressional measure specified collateral consequences to be restored , this could be construed as limiting the effect of the pardon . by expressly reinstating some rights over others , a reviewing court could view such a measure as modifying or abridging the effect of a presidential pardon . moreover , it may be possible for congress to change the current judicial interpretation by providing that a presidential pardon erases both the underlying guilt and the existence of the federal offense itself . although the issuance of a pardon does not automatically grant an expungement of criminal records , at least one federal court has noted: "the president's power , if any , to issue an order of expunction of a criminal record must stem from an act of congress or from the constitution itself.