, failure ) . lending is inherently risky . banks face default risk because their assets consist primarily of loans made to borrowers who may not always repay all of the principal and interest owed . in addition , banks face funding risk if they choose to fund their longer - term assets ( i.e. , customer loans ) via a continuous series of shorter - term borrowings ( eg , recurring deposits ) . in other words , banks typically provide longer - term ( illiquid ) customer loans by borrowing the funds via sequences of shorter - term ( liquid ) loans at relatively lower rates . profits are generated from the spread between the long - term rates lenders charge their customers and the successive sequences of shorter - term rates they pay for liquidity until the longer - term loans are repaid in full . banking firms constantly monitor and manage the default and funding risks retained on their balance sheets that could lead to financial distress . if borrowers default on their loans , then banks might be unable to repay their shorter - term loan obligations ( i.e. , liabilities ) to depositors and other creditors ( eg , financial institutions ) . some periods of uncertainty may even require banks to quickly sell longer - term assets for cash to avoid defaulting on their existing shorter - term borrowing obligations , particularly if they are unable to secure new sources of short - term funds . in addition , because bank portfolios typically consist of longer - term assets funded by shorter - term borrowings , sudden increases in shorter - term borrowing rates relative to longer - term rates can translate into diminished cash flows ( i.e. , the difference between long - and short - term interest rates ) . lenders also face systemic risk . although economists have not arrived at a consensus definition , systemic risk may be viewed as an increase in correlation among individual default and funding risks , largely due to a sudden loss of confidence ( panic ) of financial market participants following a liquidity disruption or decline in asset prices . systemic risk , therefore , is typically a contagion event ; liquidity and payment problems affecting one or a few financial firms may lead to growing pessimism that suddenly manifests itself in the form of a widespread run or asset market collapse by creditors or investors who attempt to recover all or some of their initial principal before their anticipated losses grow . financial panics have historically been rooted in the uncertainty pertaining to the repayment of obligations or the sudden collapse of asset values ( eg , real estate , stocks , financial securities ) used to collateralize loan obligations . for example , if a substantial amount of lending activity becomes dependent upon the expected future value of assets used to secure the loans — and the market values of such assets suddenly decline ( i.e. , an asset bubble bursts ) , then an escalation of actual and anticipated loan defaults can generate runs in an array of financial markets , debilitate subsequent lending activity , and translate into severe recessions and slower recoveries .