as noted by the u.s . copyright office , courts that have considered copyright issues involving software to date "have not generally distinguished between software installed on general purpose computers and that embedded in everyday products. thus , it remains to be seen whether , in the future , courts will view copyright protection for software - enabled consumer products any differently than they have for "traditional" software that runs on computers , video game consoles , servers , and communication devices . end user license agreements that apply to copyrighted software may prohibit the owner of an electronic device from reselling the product , or from modifying or repairing the installed software , unless such activities are performed by a service provider that has been authorized by the equipment manufacturer to do so . this section discusses how software licenses and the provisions of copyright law discussed herein may affect consumers' rights and expectations regarding the software - enabled devices and products that they purchase . two federal agencies that have responsibility for administering intellectual property laws have examined , or are in the process of reviewing , copyright issues relating to software - enabled consumer products or devices . legislation has been proposed , but not passed into law , at both the federal and state levels , that would modify the rights of consumers with respect to software - embedded consumer electronic devices and products . software installed on modern electronic devices and products help to shape the consumer's ownership experience by adding convenient features that enhance the product's operation ( such as automation , connectivity to social media platforms , or operability with smartphone apps ) . however , such software may restrict ( either by technological ( drm ) or legal ( licensing ) means ) the product's functions , accessories , or repair options to only those that have been authorized by the original equipment manufacturer . as described in this report , copyright protection of the software embedded in consumer devices affords certain benefits to the equipment manufacturer , while at the same time potentially creating uncertainty about the rights of users to resell , modify , or repair everyday products that they have purchased . the difficulty in analyzing software - enabled consumer electronic products from a copyright law perspective arises from the fact that software within the device is subject to copyright protection , and yet the physical hardware of the device is not copyrightable matter . in addition , the courts have not yet directly considered how fair use , the first sale doctrine , or the dmca applies to consumers owning software - embedded products . the extent to which copyright law applies , or should apply , to such products thus remains open to debate . some lawmakers and consumers may be satisfied with the status quo regarding the resale , modification , or repair of software - enabled products and , thus , may not see a need to make any changes to the law unless new circumstances warrant them . in addition , narrower , targeted legislation or market solutions could address the repair or modification of particular types of products , such as the examples of automobile repair and cellphone unlocking have demonstrated .