such an outcome depends on a number of factors . the united states and the eu , like all economies , have offensive and defensive interests . these include recognition that some sectors are import - sensitive , including certain agricultural products , which may constrain the level of ambition in the t - tip negotiations . for more information on the overall status of the negotiations , see crs report r43387 , transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) negotiations . addressing agricultural market access and other non - tariff barriers is an important goal for many on both sides of the negotiation . a study by a european organization identified agri - business and multinational food companies as the leading constituency lobbying european leadership on aspects of the t - tip negotiation in terms of the number of contacts with government officials . given a number of sensitive agricultural products — such as beef , pork , poultry , dairy , rice , and fruits and vegetables — along with regulatory differences between the united states and the eu , particularly regarding sps matters , some have questioned whether the agreement might exclude agricultural products altogether . officials on both sides have suggested that an agreement that does not include agriculture would not be acceptable . senate leadership has expressed its expectation that any final t - tip agreement should have "a strong framework for agriculture. u.s. food and agriculture organizations have also indicated their expectation that a t - tip deal address agriculture , including eu non - tariff trade barriers . in addition , ustr is urging completion of the negotiation given that the eu has negotiated agreements with a number of u.s. trading partners — including canada , vietnam , and singapore — and is actively negotiating bilateral agreements with other countries , including japan , mexico , brazil , argentina , india , and others . the impact of brexit on the t - tip negotiation remains unclear . the uk is a close ally of the united states and has been one of the strongest advocates of t - tip among the eu bloc . also , in general , the regulatory framework of the uk's food industries and actions taken by its food standards agency is often more aligned with those in the united states . were the uk to break with the eu , it could lose its preferential market access under a t - tip agreement . previously , ustr had indicated that the united states is "not particularly in the market for free trade agreements with individual countries" when addressing the possibility that the uk might separate from the eu . however , since the brexit vote , some in congress have indicated the possibility of the united states negotiating a separate bilateral fta with the uk . as the uk begins the process of exiting the eu , it will likely remain subject to the same tariffs and trade - related measures as countries outside of the network of u.s. ftas .