ranching[,]" and other activities . in contrast to the agencies' attempt to align jurisdictional waters with what they interpreted to be the outer reaches of the commerce clause in the 1980s , a series of court cases beginning in the late 1990s caused the corps and epa to modify their interpretation of "waters of the united states. disputes over the meaning of that phrase have been ongoing ever since the change . some courts and commentators disagree on how the scope of federal jurisdictional waters changed over time as a result of interpretative approaches taken by the agencies responsible for administering the clean water act — the environmental protection agency ( epa ) and the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) . this debate resurfaced during the obama administration when the corps and epa issued a rule , known as the clean water rule , which substantially redefined "waters of the united states" in the agencies' regulations for the first time in more than two decades . while some argued that the clean water rule constituted a major expansion of federal jurisdiction , others asserted that the agencies construed the term in a narrower fashion than in prior regulations . a vocal critic of the clean water rule , president trump shifted the executive branch's policy toward the meaning of "waters of the united states. in february 2017 , president trump issued an executive order directing epa and the corps to review and revise or rescind the clean water rule . the agencies currently are in the process of carrying out the executive order , and they unveiled proposed regulations redefining "waters of the united states" in december 2018 . as in nearly all prior attempts to define this phrase , however , observers disagree on whether the latest proposed definition correctly calibrates the scope of federal water pollution regulation . this report provides context for this debate by examining the history of major changes to the meaning of "waters of the united states" as expressed in federal regulations , legislation , agency guidance , and case law . the clean water act is the principal law governing pollution of the nation's surface waters . among other requirements , the act prohibits the unauthorized discharge of pollutants into "navigable waters," and requires persons wishing to discharge dredged or fill material into "navigable waters" to obtain a permit from the corps . in its definition section , the act defines the term "navigable waters" to mean "waters of the united states , including its territorial seas. this single , jurisdiction - defining phrase applies to the entire law , including the national pollutant discharge elimination system ( npdes ) permit program ; permit requirements for disposal of dredged or fill material , known as the section 404 program ; water quality standards and measures to attain them ; oil spill liability and prevention ; and enforcement . the clean water act itself does not expand further on the meaning of "waters of the united states. instead , the corps and epa have expounded on this phrase through agency guidance and regulations , which federal courts have struck down on various occasions as failing to satisfy statutory or constitutional requirements .