appendix a . this provision was not adopted . finally , section 631 of the senate bill was adopted and amends 10 u.s.c . ยง1409 to allow cadets , midshipmen , and reservists who are in inactive duty status prior to january 1 , 2018 , a 30-day election period for the new retirement system following commissioning or transfer to active duty or active status . reference ( s ) : crs report rl34751 , military retirement: background and recent developments , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl34397 , traditional and roth individual retirement accounts ( iras ) : a primer , by [author name scrubbed] . previously discussed in crs report r44120 , fy2016 national defense authorization act: selected military personnel issues , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] and similar reports from earlier years . crs point of contact : [author name scrubbed] , x[phone number scrubbed] . background: military servicemembers are eligible to receive retired pay after 20 qualifying years of service . in 1982 , congress enacted the uniformed services former spouses' protection act ( usfspa ) which allowed state courts to treat disposable military retired pay as divisible property in divorce cases . in addition , the law allows certain former spouses to remain eligible to receive certain military benefits or privileges . the usfspa has since been modified on a number of occasions . discussion : the amount of retired pay due to a servicemember is calculated based on the member's pay grade and years of service at the time of retirement . currently up to 50% of a servicemember's disposable military retired pay may be divisible by the court in a single divorce case . both the house and senate proposed similar provisions that would change the definition of disposable retired pay to use the pay grade and years of service at time of a divorce court order rather than at the time of retirement . the enacted bill ( ยง641 ) authorizes this change in the definition of disposable retired pay and also includes cost - of - living adjustments in the determination of spousal payments . this provision will not affect any divorce settlements that occurred prior to the date of enactment . reference ( s ) : crs report r40589 , concurrent receipt: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] , crs report rl34751 , military retirement: background and recent developments , by [author name scrubbed] , and crs report rl31663 , military benefits for former spouses: legislation and policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] . crs point of contact : [author name scrubbed] , x[phone number scrubbed] . background : a military retiree may have a portion of his or her monthly retired pay withheld in order to provide , after his or her death , a monthly survivor benefit to a surviving spouse or other eligible recipients . this is known as the survivor benefit plan ( sbp ) . when a servicemember dies , their survivor's payment through the sbp is usually 55% of the retired basic pay that the member would otherwise have been eligible to receive . previously , for those servicemembers who died while on active duty , the base amount was calculated at 75% of their basic pay .