each has a different schedule . poland has separate rate scales for trucks weighing between 3.5 and 12 metric tons , trucks weighing over 12 metric tons , and buses , with different per - kilometer rates within each vehicle class depending upon engine emissions . rates per kilometer on national highways are 20% less than those on expressways . the czech republic uses a microwave system similar to austria's . road user charges are based on the number of axles rather than vehicle rate , but engines are divided into three emissions classes rather than four , as in poland . user charges on express roads are more than twice those on other highways , and charges on friday afternoon are significantly higher than on other days of the week . slovakia uses a gps - based system similar to germany's . for the moment , it is the most extensive anywhere , covering 17,770 kilometers of expressways , highways , and local roads . hungary implemented a gps - based charging system in 2013 , but the european commission concluded that its charges were disproportionate to the cost of the infrastructure . the government has reportedly agreed to review the charges every six months and adjust them as required . the european commission , the governing body of the eu , adopted a directive in 2004 requiring that all future electronic tolling systems within the eu be interoperable . this directive applies to road user charging systems as well as systems with more traditional toll structures . it does not require any changes in toll systems that were in place at the time the directive took effect . an eu directive adopted in 2011 requires that road user charges for motorways reflect the environmental burdens caused by trucks . new zealand first imposed road user charges on all diesel vehicles and on all vehicles over 3.5 metric tons in 1977 . the charges were based on distance driven and a nominal vehicle weight , as opposed to the actual weight of a vehicle on each trip . the charges were applied to diesel passenger cars as well as heavy goods vehicles . the policy decision to include diesel cars was taken because new zealand does not assess a road tax on diesel fuel , as more than one - third of all diesel fuel sold in the country is used for off - road purposes . drivers of vehicles powered by gasoline , compressed natural gas , and liquid petroleum gas pay a road tax collected at the wholesale level and are not subject to road user charge . revenue from both the road user charge and the road tax , as well as from an annual registration fee on all vehicles , is expended on surface transportation . the actual charges assessed on individual vehicles are based on a cost - allocation model that aims at forcing individual users to pay the long - run marginal social cost of their use of new zealand's road network . the most significant of these costs is road wear .