from the production of goods for current consumption . for example , an individual can spend four years obtaining a bachelor's degree after high school , accumulating further human capital , or she could begin working immediately after high school and producing goods for consumption . therefore , the accumulation of human capital is also a form of investment which dictates the need to make a trade - off between lower current consumption and greater future production potential . also , like physical capital , the accumulation of human capital is subject to diminishing returns — the degree to which individuals' productive abilities increase with each additional year of school becomes smaller as the amount of schooling or training is increased . not only is the stock of human capital an important determinant of economic growth , so too is the size of the workforce — more workers can produce more goods and services . productivity multifactor productivity refers to the ability of economic agents to combine capital and labor to produce goods and services . improvements in productivity are an indication that the economy is more efficiently employing its resources in the production process . productivity increases result from a number of sources including the generation of new technologies , production processes , and ideas , but also from improvements in the institutional and regulatory environment within which the economy operates . if , as some have argued , we should not expect steady idea discovery , then the prospects for growth are diminished . used in this sense , productivity serves as a catch - all for the factors that affect growth but that do not fit neatly into the category of items that augment the nation's physical and labor inputs . while numerous factors may affect productivity , it is often advances in technological knowledge that receive the most attention . technological knowledge has a special property that makes it distinct from the other physical inputs in the production process . specifically , knowledge and ideas , unlike the physical inputs of capital and labor , are non - rivalrous — one person's use of a new idea does not result in any less of that idea being available for others to use . for example , an engineer in chicago who is building a bridge using the pythagorean theorem does not prevent engineers in new york city from simultaneously using the theorem to build a sky scraper . non - rivaly is an innate property of knowledge and ideas . this is not to say that they cannot be granted excludability . these terms are defined in the following text box . figure 1 shows the average annual growth rate of u.s. gdp , gdp per capita , and output per hour over each five - year period spanning 1948 to 2015 ( the average is shown for the midpoints of these periods , which cover 1950 to 2013 ) . while the recent lower - than - average economic performance is partly attributable to the financial crisis , it has persisted into the current expansion . as shown in figure 1 , growth has declined by all three measures since the five - year period centered on 1998 and troughed during the financial crisis .