additionally , h.r . lebanon does not currently consume any natural gas . in may 2016 , the state department's u.s. special envoy and coordinator for international energy affairs , amos hochstein , delivered the keynote address at lebanon's third forum on oil and gas . repeated attacks on the arab gas pipeline from egypt , which has supplied lebanon with gas in the past , have made it infeasible for lebanon to import natural gas . ( see figure 1 . ) the tamar field off the israeli coast was the first of a series of large - scale natural gas discoveries in the region . significant subsequent discoveries have been made in israel ( leviathan ) , cyprus ( aphrodite ) , and egypt ( zohr ) , while lebanon has been actively trying to assess its resources . in 2010 , the united states geological survey ( usgs ) estimated that there could be up to an additional 122 trillion cubic feet of undiscovered natural gas resources in the levant basin , which underlays a large portion of the eastern mediterranean sea . the usgs report also indicated that there could be up to 1.7 billion barrels of recoverable oil in the levant basin , making future oil discovery possible . however , the downturn in global oil and natural gas prices , starting in mid - 2014 , has constrained the development of resources and made markets more competitive . projects that are deemed costly , difficult , or problematic have been put on hold in many circumstances . many companies no longer have the financial resources or motivation to develop resources in challenging environments . for the eastern mediterranean , this has meant a slowdown in developing some of the natural gas that has been discovered , delaying the exploration for new discoveries , and requiring greater effort to find markets for the region's natural gas . europe , given its proximity to the eastern mediterranean , is the most logical market for eastern mediterranean natural gas production . in the aggregate , though , european natural gas consumption has generally been in decline since 2010 , offsetting some of the decline in european production . imports to europe rose by more than 10% in 2015 , negating the drop in imports from 2011 to 2014 . should eastern mediterranean natural gas enter the european natural gas market , it will face strong competition from europe's traditional suppliers — russia , norway , and algeria — as well as from u.s. liquefied natural gas ( lng ) exports , which started in 2016 . for the most part , the eastern mediterranean countries either do not use natural gas as a fuel ( i.e. israeli officials routinely express optimism that the economic promise of israel's energy resources can attract the industrial help it needs to be realized , and this optimism may prove justified . rivalries in the wider middle east region have exacerbated recurring challenges for lebanon , which have contributed to a divided government and a weakened business environment . a politically and communally diverse cabinet , led by prime minister tammam salam since early 2014 , has not made major steps toward development of lebanon's energy resources .