this report will be updated as needed to reflect any subsequent developments . 1381 ) , and the eyes on the courts act ( h.r . 3723 ) ; and complementary policy measures that might accomplish similar objectives . this section describes the current policies that the u.s. supreme court and the federal circuit and district courts have adopted regarding video cameras in their courtrooms , along with the attitudes supreme court justices and other federal judges have expressed toward expanding video use . video broadcasting can be treated as one of several means by which the courts provide information about their proceedings to the public and the press . the public generally tends to support televising u.s. supreme court proceedings . in this context , members of congress have introduced measures to enable , or expand , the use of video cameras in the federal courts . typically , since the mid - 1990s , a handful of bills have been introduced each session . several bills reflecting four distinct proposals have been introduced in the 114 th congress addressing cameras in the federal courts . at the supreme court level , for example , other measures could improve the court's communications with journalists . the court could revise its press credentialing requirements to include more internet - based news outlets , use email or social media to announce decisions , distribute email copies of opinions to members of the press corps , allow reporters to use tablets or smartphones for note - taking , or provide wireless internet in the courthouse ( if not the courtroom ) . these initiatives may help fulfill the goal of improved media access to the supreme court and other federal courts , without the possible downsides associated with introducing cameras to the chambers . the public still learns about major events from the media , but the internet has fostered a growing expectation that more complete information about a story or an event will be readily available online . primary source documents and raw video footage of political proceedings or newsworthy events are commonly available on the internet , contributing to the sense that information about today's current events does not have to be mediated by the press . thus , the contemporary cameras - in - the - courtroom debate today may be framed in part as a means to improve direct public access to information about court proceedings . this objective could be fulfilled by improvements to existing forms of public information , like introducing same - day audio recording releases or live - streamed audio from the supreme court . other suggested measures , like providing closed - circuit cameras to broadcast exclusively to a larger venue outside the courtroom , could still face some of the potential challenges that policies to televise or broadcast proceedings more broadly face . because records of proceedings are available and the courtrooms are not closed to the public or the press , it can be argued that the courts may already meet a sufficient standard of transparency and access , and legislative action may not be necessary . lack of congressional action would not preclude the federal judiciary from setting its own policies that could expand the use of cameras in the courtroom .