the most recent strategy was released in 2016 . the 2016 strategy prioritizes seven approaches to reduce both illicit drug use and its consequences: preventing drug use in u.s. communities ; seeking early intervention opportunities in health care ; increasing access to treatment and supporting recovery ; reforming the criminal justice system to better address substance use disorders ; disrupting domestic drug trafficking and production ; bolstering international partnerships ; and improving information systems for analysis , assessment , and management . each of these approaches is based on several principles and fosters certain federal drug control activities . while these approaches and principles are not necessarily directed at countering heroin trafficking , they focus on confronting the top drug threats , which have in recent years involved heroin trafficking and its role in the opioid epidemic . notably , the 2016 strategy identified the greatest drug threat to the united states as "the continuing opioid epidemic , which began with the overprescribing of powerful long - acting , time - released opioid medications … [and] was further complicated by a sharp increase in the supply and subsequent use of high purity , low cost heroin produced in mexico and colombia and the trafficking of illicitly produced fentanyl. it is unclear whether the trump administration will release a strategy or how prominently countering heroin trafficking as it contributes to the opioid epidemic may feature in that strategy . the national southwest border counternarcotics strategy ( nsbcs ) was first launched in 2009 , and it outlines domestic and transnational efforts to reduce the flow of illegal drugs , money , and contraband across the southwest border . it has a number of strategic objectives: enhance intelligence and information sharing capabilities and processes ; reduce the flow of drugs , drug proceeds , and associated instruments of crime that cross the southwest border ; develop strong , resilient communities that resist criminal activity and promote healthy lifestyles ; disrupt and dismantle tcos operating along the southwest border ; stem the flow of illicit proceeds across the southwest border ; and enhance u.s. - mexican - central american cooperation on joint counterdrug efforts . the 2016 nsbcs focuses on drug trafficking broadly , noting that the southwest border is the primary entry point for many illegal drugs arriving in the united states . nonetheless , it mentions that "the threat posed by heroin in the united states is serious and continues to intensify. the objectives and action items , however , target the broader array of drug and criminal threats at the border . it is unclear whether the trump administration will use the nsbcs , modify it , or develop other measures and strategies to counter the threats — including those posed by heroin trafficking — at the southwest border . in july 2011 , the obama administration released the strategy to combat transnational organized crime: addressing converging threats to national security . the strategy provided the federal government's first broad conceptualization of "transnational organized crime," highlighting it as a national security concern . this is 38% higher than the estimated production in 2016 . in the past , officials have noted that crop yield data are unreliable , and it is unclear whether the newer data are more reliable .