carriers. the selectee list includes individuals who must undergo additional security screening before being allowed to board a commercial aircraft . the minimum derogatory information requirements that form the basis for including an identity in the no fly list and the selectee list are "more stringent than the tsdb's known or reasonably suspected standard. this makes these lists much smaller than the tsdb . in 2014 , there were approximately 800,000 identities in the tsdb according to the fbi , double the figure in 2008 . in 2014 , about 8% of the tsdb identities — around 64,000 — were on the no fly list and about 3% — roughly 24,000 — were on the selectee list . as an extra security measure developed in response to a failed attempt to trigger an explosive by a foreign terrorist on board a u.s. - bound flight on december 25 , 2009 , the expanded selectee list was created . it screens against all tsdb records that include a person's first and last name and date of birth that are not already on the no fly or selectee lists . customs and border protection ( cbp ) owns and uses tecs ( not an acronym ) , the main system that cbp officers employ at the border and elsewhere to screen arriving travelers and determine their admissibility . tecs accepts "nearly all" records from the tsdb . cbp also uses the automated targeting system ( ats ) , which is "a decision support tool that compares traveler , cargo , and conveyance information against law enforcement , intelligence , and other enforcement data using risk - based targeting scenarios and assessments. as one of its functions , ats "compares information about travelers and cargo arriving in , transiting through , or exiting the country , against law enforcement and intelligence databases" including information from the tsdb . as its name suggests , automated targeting system - passenger ( ats - p ) is the portion of ats focused on passengers , "for the identification of potential terrorists , transnational criminals , and , in some cases , other persons who pose a higher risk of violating u.s. law" and is used by cbp personnel at the border and ports of entry as well as elsewhere . the fbi runs the national crime information center's ( ncic ) database , which has been described by the bureau as "an electronic clearinghouse of crime data that can be tapped into by virtually every criminal justice agency nationwide , 24 hours a day , 365 days a year. the ncic includes 21 files . one of them , the "known or appropriately suspected terrorist file" includes tsdb records . the ncic database is used for domestic law enforcement screening . the department of defense uses tsdb information to help screen people trying to enter military bases . employees from u.s. federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies who perform screening activities ( screeners ) check the identities of individuals they encounter in their daily work against specific subsets of the tsdb . such queries happen either in - person or via submitted official ( electronic or paper ) forms .