115-31 provides the full request . the commission promulgates sentencing policies , practices , and guidelines for the federal criminal justice system . the status is summarized in table 1 . this overview is followed by a section on prior - year actions and funding . the report then provides an overview of judiciary accounts . appropriations for the judiciary comprise approximately 0.2% of total budget authority . two accounts that fund the supreme court ( the salaries and expenses of the court and the expenditures for the care of its building and grounds , which are the responsibility of the architect of the capitol ) together total approximately 1% of the total judiciary budget . the rest of the judiciary's budget provides funding for the lower federal courts and related judicial services . the largest account , approximately 72% of the total fy2017 enacted level , is the salaries and expenses account for the u.s. courts of appeals , district courts , and other judicial services . this covers the "salaries of circuit and district judges ( including judges of the territorial courts of the united states ) , justices and judges retired from office or from regular active service , judges of the u.s. court of federal claims , bankruptcy judges , magistrate judges , and all other officers and employees of the federal judiciary not otherwise specifically provided for," and "necessary expenses of the courts. two other large accounts provide funds for defender services ( 13.9% ) and court security ( 7.5% ) . the remaining judiciary budget is divided among the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit ( 0.4% of fy2016 enacted ) , u.s. court of international trade ( 0.3% ) , fees of jurors and commissioners ( 0.5% ) , administrative office of the u.s. courts ( 1.2% ) , federal judicial center ( 0.4% ) , u.s . sentencing commission ( 0.2% ) , and judicial retirement funds ( 2.1% ) . three specialized courts within the federal court system are not funded under the judiciary budget: the u.s. court of appeals for the armed forces ( funded in the department of defense appropriations bill ) , the u.s. court of appeals for veterans claims ( funded in the military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies appropriations bill ) , and the u.s. tax court ( funded under independent agencies , title v , of the fsgg bill ) . federal courthouse construction is funded within the general services administration account under independent agencies , title v , of the fsgg bill . the judiciary uses non - appropriated funds to help offset its funding requirements . the majority of these non - appropriated funds are from fee collections , primarily court filing fees . these monies are used to offset expenses within the salaries and expenses accounts of courts of appeals , district courts , and other judicial services . some of these funds may be carried forward from one year to the next . these funds are considered "unencumbered" because they result from savings from the judiciary's financial plan in areas where budgeted costs did not materialize .