besides p.l . 112-78 , no guarantee fee increases have been approved by congress . the presence of the gses as a potential offset , some argue , provides congress with a disincentive to reform the gses because doing so may make it more politically difficult to draw on them as potential revenue sources . what will the mbs look like once issued ? fhfa argues that the actions it is taking in answering these three questions do not lock the system into following a single track but "support various future paths under housing finance reform. some in congress , however , have raised concerns about whether fhfa's steps would sufficiently move the system beyond "the duopolistic tendencies of the past. the financial regulatory improvement act ( s. 1484 ) , which was reported by the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs , would codify the actions taken by fhfa in some cases and alter fhfa's actions in others . this report explains how fhfa has answered each of the three questions that are currently shaping the policy debate and analyzes issues that are of interest to congress for each of the three topics . but , first , this report explains the gses' conservatorship and their role in the housing finance system . as gses , fannie mae and freddie mac are private corporations with federal charters that contain special privileges , such as being exempt from certain state and local taxes , and special responsibilities to support affo rdable housing for low - and moderate - income households . the gses do not originate mortgages . instead they have two main lines of business . first , through their credit guarantee businesses , the gses purchase conforming mortgages — mortgages that meet certain eligibility criteria based on size and creditworthiness — and pool the mortgages into mbs . the mbs are sold to investors , with the gses guaranteeing that investors will receive timely payment of principal and interest on their mbs even if a borrower with a mortgage that is part of the mbs becomes delinquent . the gse guarantee transfers the credit risk — the risk that a borrower would not repay the loan on time — from the investors to the gse . to compensate the gses for their guarantee , the gses receive a guarantee fee from the lender ( who may pass the cost on to the borrower ) . in the second main line of business , their portfolio investment business , the gses hold mortgages and mbs ( including gse mbs , ginnie mae mbs , and mbs sold by other private entities ) as investments in their portfolios . the gses profit from the difference between the low rates at which they can borrow money to buy mortgage - related assets ( their close relationship to the government allows the gses to borrow at lower rates than other market participants ) and the higher rates at which they receive revenues from those assets . in september 2008 , the gses agreed to be placed into conservatorship with fhfa because of extensive financial losses and concerns about their ability to provide support to the housing finance system during the economic downturn .