multiple invoicing of g oods and s ervices . by providing multiple invoices for the same transaction , a money launderer or terrorist financier can justify multiple payments for the same goods or services . in addition , by using a number of financial institutions to make these multiple payments , a money launderer or terrorist financier can increase the level of complexity of the transaction and complicate efforts at detection . if the transaction is detected , a launderer can offer a number of plausible explanations that compound efforts by officials to detect the activities . over - and u nder - shipments of g oods and s ervices . in addition to manipulating the prices of goods and services , a money launderer can misstate the quantity of goods and services that are exported or imported . in the extreme , exporters and importers can collude in not shipping any goods at all but proceed with processing the necessary shipping and customs documents . banks and other financial institutions may be unaware that these "phantom" transactions are occurring . falsely d escribed g oods and s ervices . money launderers also can misstate the quality or the type of a good or service that is being traded . such a misstatement creates a discrepancy between the value of a good that is stated on the shipment or customs forms and what is actually shipped . combining several of these common tbml techniques is a classic scheme involving the laundering of drug proceeds from latin america , called the black market peso exchange ( bmpe ) . bmpe emerged as a major money - laundering method when colombian drug traffickers used sophisticated trade - based schemes to disguise as much as $4 billion in annual narcotics profits in the 1980s . for further illustration , see text box below . tbml is widely recognized as one of the most common manifestations of international money laundering as well as a known value transfer and reconciliation method used by terrorist organizations . nevertheless , tbml appears to be less understood among academics and policymakers than traditional forms of money laundering through the international banking system and bulk cash smuggling . considering the volume of global trade and the value of such transactions , however , tbml's effects can result in substantial consequences for international commerce and government revenue . the national money laundering risk assessment concludes that tbml can have a more destructive impact on legitimate commerce than other money laundering schemes . according to ice hsi [homeland security investigations] , transnational criminal organizations may dump imported goods purchased with illicit proceeds at a discount into a market just to expedite the money laundering process . the below - market pricing is a cost of doing business for the money launderer , but it puts legitimate businesses at a competitive disadvantage . this activity can create a barrier to entrepreneurship , crowding out legitimate economic activity . tbml also robs governments of tax revenue due to the sale of underpriced goods , and reduced duties collected on undervalued imports and fraudulent cargo manifests .