interventions . the task force will work with cve stakeholders to develop multidisciplinary intervention programs . examples of interagency efforts at cve afoot prior to the task force's creation include the following: the national security council has coordinated an interagency "effort to work with boston , los angeles , and minneapolis / st . paul to facilitate and support the development of locally based , and driven , violent extremism prevention and intervention pilot frameworks. the community resilience exercise , developed and presented by dhs and nctc , brings together local law enforcement and community leaders in a specific locale to work through "a hypothetical violent extremist or foreign fighter - related scenario , including a hypothetical attack . the goal of the exercise is to build capacity within municipalities to mitigate the terrorist threat. the community awareness briefing , developed by dhs and nctc , is "a key tool [the agencies] use to convey information to local communities and authorities on the terrorist recruitment threat . communications . the task force will manage cve communications , including media inquiries , and leverage digital technologies to engage , empower , and connect cve stakeholders . the cab now also includes information on the recruitment efforts of violent extremist groups based in syria and iraq. as of june 2015 , the cab had been presented in 15 u.s. cities . community engagement efforts pursued by the office of civil rights and civil liberties in dhs , including june 2014 meetings in los angeles that covered topics concerning syria and world refugee day . some have sought adventure . others have appeared to crave escape , camaraderie , even marriage . the islamic state entices supporters via the internet and social media . according to crs analysis of publicly available information , is supporters have accounted for 67 homegrown violent jihadist plots between 2014 and early june 2016 . in the same time period , is - linked plots have dominated the homegrown violent jihadist landscape , accounting for 67 of 76 total plots . in november 2015 , the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) reportedly had more than 900 investigations of is suspects in the united states . coping with the comparative size of this threat is one of the challenges domestic law enforcement agencies face . this is complicated by the varied courses of action chosen by is supporters as they engage with the terrorist group . in the broadest of senses , confronting the threats posed by is acolytes categorized as the departed , returned , inspired , lost , and others requires u.s. law enforcement to identify individuals who present a danger as terrorists and preempt their efforts to do harm . all of this draws on resources , strategies , and programs developed largely in response to 9 / 11 . beyond these established programs , additional law enforcement efforts specifically targeting the islamic state have been made . the following discussion is not intended as an exhaustive analysis of federal law enforcement counterterrorism efforts in the homeland . it is meant to broadly inform policy makers on such activity . for the united states , systematically identifying potential terrorists involves the country's watchlisting regimen .