both provisions in h.r . part 24 ) . regarding clinical data , the regulations direct the applicant to submit , in addition to descriptions and analysis of controlled and uncontrolled clinical studies , ( iv ) a description and analysis of any other data or information relevant to an evaluation of the safety and effectiveness of the drug product obtained or otherwise received by the applicant from any source , foreign or domestic , including information derived from clinical investigations , including controlled and uncontrolled studies of uses of the drug other than those proposed in the application , commercial marketing experience , reports in the scientific literature , and unpublished scientific papers . 314.50 ( d ) ( 5 ) ( iv ) ) the clinical data submission must also include an "integrated summary of the data demonstrating substantial evidence of effectiveness for the claimed indications. this provision would amend ffdca section 505 ( c ) to permit the secretary , in reviewing a supplemental nda submitted by the sponsor of an approved drug when seeking to add to the approval a new indication that is "qualified," to rely upon "qualified data summaries" to support the approval of the supplemental nda . this provision adds that such supplemental application is eligible only if data demonstrating the safety of the drug are available and acceptable to the secretary , and all data used to develop the qualified data summaries are submitted as part of the supplemental drug application . this section defines qualified data summary as a "summary of clinical data that demonstrates the safety and effectiveness of a drug with respect to a qualified indication. 6 contains a comparable provision ( title ii , subtitle d , section 2063 , "streamlined data review program" ) . the house provision would add a new section 505h to the ffdca , which , like the senate bill , would address the data requirements in a supplemental nda that a sponsor of an approved drug would submit when seeking to add to the approval a new indication that is "qualified" ( defined in this section as treating cancer or other indications as determined by the secretary ) . note that the senate provision does not include treating cancer in its definition of "qualified indication. the approach for authorizing the secretary to rely upon qualified data summaries is a bit different in the house bill . new ffdca section 505h would require the secretary to "establish a streamlined data review program" through which a sponsor could submit a "qualified data summary" when "there is an existing database acceptable to the secretary regarding the safety of the drug developed for one or more indications" of the approved drug . the definition of "qualified data summary" in the house provision is similar to the senate bill: "a summary of clinical data intended to demonstrate safety and effectiveness with respect to a qualified indication for use of a drug. 6 express the sense of congress that participation in or sponsorship of scientific conferences and meetings is essential to the mission of nih and fda . ffdca section 770 , as added by the food and drug administration amendments act of 2007 ( fdaaa , p.l .