central banks have been muted in their response to brexit . the bank of england ( boe ) followed up promises to financial markets to provide liquidity by injecting £3.1 billion ( about $4.1 billion ) into uk banks . bank of england governor carney said a downturn for the british economy was on its way and that britain was already suffering from "economic post - traumatic stress disorder. some analysts expect the uncertainties created by brexit to have a negative impact on global markets beyond the immediate turmoil . a protracted political leadership struggle could add to uncertainties over the uk's ability to take the necessary economic and financial measures to restore stability . the simultaneous depreciation of the pound and appreciation of the dollar could add to economic pressures on both developed and emerging market economies . various central banks , including the swiss national bank and the bank of japan , for instance , have intervened in foreign exchange markets to stall further appreciation in their respective currencies . in addition , capital flight from emerging economies to safe - haven assets could further add to the economic challenges facing developed and emerging economies and potentially add negatively to global growth prospects . whether the uk will experience an actual increase is questionable . french president francois hollande told eu leaders that london should be stripped of its ability to clear derivatives and equities operations for eurozone countries . despite the immediate reaction by financial markets , brexit is not expected to create a financial meltdown similar to the turmoil that followed the collapse of lehman brothers in 2008 . by early july 2016 , most equity markets had recovered their losses and exchange rates had stabilized , albeit with the pound remaining below its pre - brexit levels . the ftse 250 ( financial times stock exchange index of 250 small - to - medium - sized uk firms ) remained about 9.0% below its pre - brexit level . markets may well remain volatile over the near term , however , reflecting lingering concerns including ( 1 ) the evolving political leadership crisis ; ( 2 ) uncertainties about the process for uk disengagement from the eu ; and ( 3 ) the short - and long - term economic effects . these concerns are not necessarily discrete , but are potentially reinforcing . for instance , a continuing political leadership crisis can affect short - run economic conditions to the extent the markets are uncertain about the ability of the uk government to conduct economic policy . financial markets likely will be volatile over the near term as the uk and the eu sort through these issues . much uncertainty also looms over the uk's trade and economic arrangements and the corresponding legal and regulatory frameworks . trade is equivalent to about 60% of the uk economy , largely due to reduced trade barriers with the eu through the eu's single market . the uk is the second largest eu economy after germany . brexit is creating uncertainty in international financial markets , which is affecting the value of the british pound and uk business investment .