federal unemployment taxes are deposited into the utf . the treasury invests all receipts in federal securities that bear interest . nonprofit employers are subject to coverage requirements if the organization employs at least four workers for one day in each of 20 different weeks in the current or prior year . state or local governments and indian tribes are subject to coverage requirements without regard to the number of employees . agricultural employers are subject to coverage requirement if the employer paid cash wages of at least $20,000 for agricultural labor in any calendar quarter or employed 10 or more workers for at least one day in each of 20 different weeks in the current or prior year . domestic service employers are subject to the coverage requirement if the employer paid cash wages of $1,000 or more for domestic service during any calendar quarter in the current or prior year . contingent on state laws , certain nonprofit , state or local government organizations , and federally recognized indian tribes may opt to be a reimbursable employer in which the employing agency has the option to reimburse the uc program for benefits paid to their laid - off employees rather than pay state and federal unemployment taxes . futa provides basic guidelines for state unemployment taxes . states may opt to experience rate employers , tax employers that generate the most claimants at a rate of at least 5.4% , and have a taxable wage base of at least the first $7,000 of each employee's annual earnings . if a state meets these minimum tax requirements , futa allows a state tax credit of up to 5.4% to be applied against federal unemployment taxes . in addition , if a state experience rates its employers ( where employers who minimize uc claims have a lower state unemployment tax ) , futa provides an additional tax credit for state employers . this credit ensures the employer who paid less than 5.4% in state taxes receives a full 5.4% state tax credit ( when combined with the state tax credit ) . federal law allows states to experience rate their employers within their state unemployment tax schedule . experience rating requires that states set up their tax systems such that employers generating the fewest claimants have the lowest tax rates . the state unemployment tax rate of an employer is based on the amount of uc paid to its former employees . in general , the more uc benefits paid to its former employees , the higher the tax rate of the employer — up to a cap established by state law . the experience rating is intended to ensure an equitable distribution of uc program taxes among employers and to encourage a stable workforce . all states use experience rating when determining an employer's state unemployment tax rate . federal law remains silent on the lowest state unemployment tax rate that may be applied to employers . indeed , federal law only sets a floor of 5.4% on the state's maximum unemployment tax rate to be applied to employers with proportionately the highest claims from former workers . as a result of these few requirements , state unemployment tax rates have wide variation .