during consideration of h.r . 5325 in the house , two amendments affecting aoc were agreed to by voice vote , although they did not alter its overall funding level . one amendment ( h.amdt . 1166 ) transferred $500,000 from the aoc's capital construction and operations account to the aoc's capitol building and house office buildings accounts , providing $250,000 to each to bring the capitol and house office buildings into compliance with general services administration requirements for federal buildings regarding lactation stations for breastfeeding mothers . another amendment provided that funding in the capital construction and operations account be used to conduct a feasibility study regarding the installation and operation of capital bikeshare stations on capitol grounds ( h.amdt . the senate - reported bill would have provided $419.6 million , not including funding for the house office buildings , a decrease of $8.7 million ( - 2.0% ) from the fy2016 enacted level . the fy2017 act provides $617.9 million ( +0.8% ) . additional funding information on the individual aoc accounts is presented in table 9 . the aoc also requested a number of administrative provisions: 1. a provision prohibiting the use of funds for bonuses for contractors behind schedule or over budget , first included in fy2015 ; 2. a provision prohibiting scrims containing photographs of building facades during restoration or construction projects performed by the architect of the capitol , first included in fy2015 ; 3. a new provision establishing a working capital fund ; 4. a new provision providing authority for a house office building shuttle ; and 5. a new provision allowing the use of expired funds for unemployment compensation payments . the house appropriations committee included these provisions , with the exception of that relating to the shuttle . it also included a new provision establishing a flag office revolving fund . the senate appropriations committee included provisions related to contractors , scrims , and unemployment compensation payments . it also included a new provision establishing a flag office revolving fund and a new provision directing the aoc to "establish , document , and follow policies and procedures for suspension and debarment of firms or individuals the architect has determined should be excluded from future contracts. the provisions related to bonuses for contractors , scrims , flag office revolving fund , unemployment compensation payments , contracting , and the house office building shuttle were included in the fy2017 act . the library of congress serves simultaneously as congress's parliamentary library and the de facto national library of the united states . its broader services to the nation include the acquisition , maintenance , and preservation of a collection of more than 160.7 million analog items ; service to the general public and scholarly and library communities ; administration of u.s. copyright laws by its copyright office ; and administration of a national program to provide reading material to the blind and physically handicapped .