appendix a . medical device user fees appendix b. mdufa iii performance goals appendix c. acronyms used in this repor . the user fee law provides revenue for fda . 94-295 ) was the first major legislation passed to address the premarket review of medical devices . congress first authorized user fees to support the fda's medical device premarket review program in 2002 , 10 years after congress had provided the authority for prescription drug user fees via pdufa . for prescription drugs , the manufacturer must pay a fee for each new drug application ( nda ) that is submitted to fda for premarket review . fda reviewers frequently need to ask for additional information — called an ai letter — from pma device sponsors due to the incomplete or poor quality of the original pma application . in fy2010 , 86% of pma sponsors received an ai letter on the first fda review cycle . in contrast , most medical devices listed with fda are exempt from premarket review and do not pay a user fee ( see figure 1 ) . ffdca section 738a directs the fda to develop a reauthorization proposal for the following five fiscal years in consultation with specified congressional committees , scientific and academic experts , health care professionals , patient and consumer advocacy groups , and the regulated industry . prior to negotiations with industry , fda is required to request public input , hold a public meeting , provide a 30-day comment period , and publish public comments on the agency's website . during negotiations with industry , fda must hold monthly discussions with patient and consumer advocacy groups to receive their suggestions and discuss their views on the reauthorization . the medical device amendments of 1976 ( p.l . of the unique devices that are listed by manufacturers with fda in fy2016 , about 63% were exempt from premarket review ; the remainder entered the market via the 510 ( k ) process ( 35% ) , the premarket approval ( pma ) process ( 1% ) , or via other means , such as the humanitarian device exemption ( see " fda premarket review of medical devices " and " exemptions and discounted fees " ) . premarket review and payment of the associated fee is required for about a third of the medical devices listed with fda . the amount of time it takes fda to reach a review decision to clear a 510 ( k ) notification or approve a pma application is a measure of how well the agency is meeting the goals defined in the mdufa agreement between fda and the medical device industry . the time it takes to review a medical device — total review time — is composed of the time fda handles the application — fda time — plus the amount of time the device sponsor or submitter takes to respond to requests by fda for additional information about the device . figure 2 shows that the total amount of time a device is in the 510 ( k ) review process has decreased from a peak in fy2010 .