retaliating ( i.e. , coercing , intimidating , threatening , or interfering ) against anyone attempting to exercise rights under the fair housing act . hud , together with state and local fair housing agencies and private fair housing organizations , investigates fair housing complaints . hud receives complaints from individuals who believe they have been subject to discrimination or are about to experience discrimination . if the discrimination takes place in a state or locality with its own similar fair housing enforcement agency , sometimes referred to as a fair housing assistance program ( fhap ) agency , hud must refer the complaint to that agency . ( see the " fair housing assistance program ( fhap ) " section of this report for more information about state and local agencies. ) in addition , if a complaint involves a challenge to zoning or land use laws , then hud must refer the case to the department of justice ( doj ) . hud also refers complaints with possible criminal violations or patterns or practices of discrimination to doj . once an individual has filed a complaint with hud , or hud has filed a complaint on its own initiative , a notice is served on the party alleged to have discriminated . the law also allows an administrative law judge to impose a civil penalty "to vindicate the public interest" ( amounts vary based on whether there have been previous infractions ) and to order injunctive relief . if an individual withdraws a complaint , no longer cooperates , or cannot be reached for follow - up , then hud closes the complaint as an administrative closure . in fy2016 , there were 1,366 complaints filed with hud . of those , 2.5% led to hud issuing a charge , 35.8% were settled through conciliation , and 37.7% resulted in a finding of no reasonable cause . the remainder of complaints either had an administrative closure ( where complainants did not continue to pursue their complaints ) , were withdrawn with a resolution , or were referred to doj . for more information on complaints , see " hud and fhap agency complaint and enforcement data . hud oversees two programs that promote fair housing at the state and local level: the fair housing assistance program ( fhap ) and the fair housing initiatives program ( fhip ) . fhap funds state and local fair housing agencies , and fhip funds eligible entities that largely include private nonprofit organizations . these recipients in turn supplement hud's efforts to promote fair housing , detect discrimination , investigate complaints , and enforce the fair housing law . the following subsections describe fhap and fhip and provide funding levels for the programs . hud reports the number of fair housing complaints it receives as well as those received by fhap agencies . in recent years , the number of complaints filed with both hud and fhap agencies has declined , from a high of 10,552 in fy2008 to 8,385 in fy2016 , the most recent year in which data are available .