the fcs program was cancelled in 2009 . it was decided , however , to continue work on both developing an aps for use on combat vehicles as well testing existing aps systems that could be mounted on combat vehicles to meet urgent operational needs until an aps could be developed and fielded . although the united states has been exploring aps technologies since the 1950s , other nations have developed and successfully fielded aps to their forces . the first operational aps — the drozd — was developed by the soviet union between 1977 and 1982 . designed to protect against rpgs and atgms , it used primitive millimeter - wave radar sensors mounted on each side of the tank's turret to detect incoming rounds . the drozd covered only the forward 60 degrees of the turret , but the tank crew could rotate the turret to change the tank's protective profile . the drozd was reported 80% successful against rpgs in afghanistan . in the late 1990s , france mounted the galix countermeasures system on its leclerc main battle tanks . the turret - mounted galix provided 360-degree coverage and could automatically fire 80 mm smoke rounds , anti - personnel rounds , or decoy rounds . israel has employed aps operationally on selected vehicles since the late 1990s and , as previously discussed , has recently employed its trophy aps extensively in combat in 2014 , with plans underway to expand its use with israeli forces . currently , russia's newest tank , the t - 14 armata , has separate hard kill and soft kill apss . although these systems reportedly have multiple sensors and launch tubes , the armata's aps supposedly covers only against threats lateral to the turret , meaning that there is no protection against guided missiles that are air - launched or have a top - attack mode . in march 2006 , a contract potentially worth $70 million was awarded to raytheon to develop an aps for fcs - manned ground vehicles as well as the army's fleet of combat vehicles . the aps program came under public criticism in september 2006 when a press report alleged that the army rejected the israeli - developed trophy aps for use in the fcs program , despite the system being successfully tested on u.s. combat vehicles . the report further contended the army was favoring the aps system in development by raytheon over the trophy system because of "money and politics" and that u.s. forces in the field were suffering casualties because of this decision . a gao report , however , maintains there was no conflict of interest , concluding: no officials from the offering companies participated in the evaluation and all offers were evaluated based on the same criteria . four proposals were evaluated and three were determined to be comparable in terms of cost and schedule . the winner — raytheon — was chosen on technical merit , as being more likely to meet aps requirements although its design had less mature technology . among the army's concerns was that the trophy system had a single - shot capability . the army also believed the raytheon system would result in less collateral damage than the trophy system .