how might other u.s. partners and adversaries view such assistance and respond ? how might various types of u.s. military and political support for specific kurdish or kurdish - led groups affect ( 1 ) prospects for political cooperation or resolution among kurds and between different ethnic , sectarian , and ideological groups in iraq and syria , ( 2 ) regional security , and ( 3 ) long - term u.s. commitments ? what alternatives exist to continued cooperation with kurdish forces to achieve stated u.s. objectives in the conflict ? how should u.s. assistance to kurdish forces evolve as u.s. objectives for defeating the islamic state group are achieved ? as anti - is operations continue , u.s. officials appear inclined to embrace the capabilities of various kurdish ground forces in iraq and syria . at the same time , u.s. officials seem to focus on addressing and resolving limitations or complications that may arise from u.s. - kurdish partnerships . for example , officials may be seeking to leverage and augment the kurds' military successes by empowering non - kurdish forces that may be more able to command political legitimacy among local populations in predominantly sunni arab areas such as mosul and raqqah . their effectiveness may partly stem from a measure of kurdish political and military cohesion — relative to other groups — that predates the ongoing conflicts in both countries . the future of the u.s. - kurdish partnership beyond current anti - is cooperation is unclear and could largely depend on how the current cooperation and its outcomes unfold . yet , kurdish military success in both states has complicated u.s. efforts to partner with the iraqi and turkish governments , largely because of the boost such success apparently has given to the political ambitions and regional profiles of various kurdish groups . efforts by the united states to address its state partners' concerns could fuel uncertainty among kurdish groups about the terms and durability of u.s. support . in iraq , the u.s. military has worked with fighters who come under the official authority of the kurdistan regional government ( krg ) ( see figure 1 ) . some members of congress have considered the following issues in assessing policy options related to u.s. support for kurdish groups fighting the islamic state organization in iraq and syria: risks that that u.s. equipment provided to kurdish groups could fall under the control of the islamic state or other actors actively working against u.s. regional goals . means for better providing u.s. and international humanitarian assistance to support the needs of displaced persons in the kurdish - controlled areas of iraq and syria . the extent to which the united states can influence the decisions of various kurdish groups and the extent to which kurdish decisions may reshape the strategic context in which the united states is pursuing its own goals . in syria , u.s. forces have partnered with fighters from or allied with the democratic union party ( pyd ) / people's protection units ( ypg ) ( see figure 2 ) . as of december 2016 , u.s. partnering with these forces is focusing on and around the key is - controlled cities of mosul ( iraq ) and raqqah ( syria ) .