we're not afraid of scrutiny . we believe that if we are going along the right path , all sanctions should be lifted in good time.… i understand and i accept and i believe that united states is a friend , and are not keeping the sanctions to hurt us.… i'm sure that the time will come soon where the united states will rule that this is not the time for sanctions . ambiguity over the nld - led government's position on u.s. restrictions on relations with burma arose during aung san suu kyi's visit to washington , dc , in september 2016 . if not , what are the appropriate new or revised goals ? are the existing restrictions on relations with burma consistent with u.s. goals in burma ? if not , how should they be changed or altered to make them consistent ? to what extent did the formation of the nld - led government advance the goals of u.s. policy ? did the sanctions on burma contribute to the political changes that occurred between 2008 and 2015 ? are the previously stipulated goals of u.s. policy toward burma still suitable given the current situation in burma and in the region ? will the continuation or renewal of restrictions on relations with burma lead to the achievement of u.s. goals in burma ? following president obama's release of e.o . 13472 on october 7 , 2016 , and presidential determination 2017-04 on december 2 , 2016 , the restrictions on relations with burma that remain in place consist of restrictions on the issuance of visas to certain burmese nationals , limits on u.s. assistance to burma contained in the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l . 115-141 ) , and various restrictions on u.s. relations with burma's military . in addition , the trump administration has utilized the global magnitsky act ( 22 u.s.c . 2656 ) to apply visa and economic sanctions to five burmese military officers and two military units . as noted above , some of the laws imposing sanctions on burma also include provisions whereby the president could waive , temporarily or permanently , the sanctions under certain conditions . in addition , some of the laws also contain provisions by which the president can terminate the sanctions . president obama waived several restrictions , but also stated that waivers could be reversed , and the restrictions reimposed , if conditions in burma so warrant . on december 2 , he issued presidential determination 2017-04 , terminating the restrictions on bilateral assistance to burma contained in section 570 ( a ) of the foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations act , 1997 ( p.l . in addition , congress has permitted certain trade restrictions contained in sections 3 and 3a of the bfda ( as amended ) to lapse by not passing the necessary annual renewal resolution . the nld - led government and aung san suu kyi have given mixed and sometimes contradictory statements on u.s. restrictions on relations with burma .