prior to p.l . 114-315 , the va did not have authority to require that educational institutions or training establishments report on academic progress or outcome data on gi bill participants . because reporting was voluntary and existing databases of postsecondary education were not designed specifically to collect data on veterans or gi bill participants , the data available on participant educational and employment outcomes were limited . this led to concerns regarding the return on the federal gi bill investment , especially given the increased spending on gi bills with the passage of the post - 9 / 11 gi bill . congress and other stakeholders have shown interest in ensuring that the government is an effective steward of taxpayer dollars and that gi bill participants are achieving the education and workforce integration expected . it then describes the amendments . one amendment terminates the reserve educational assistance program ( reap ) . several enacted provisions enhance gi bill benefits . several other provisions are designed to improve the processes and standards for approving and reviewing programs of education at which gi bill benefits may be used by making the standards more rigorous and giving some participants more time before their programs are disapproved . finally , one of the provisions enacted reduces benefit costs in order to help pay for the provisions that would increase other benefit costs . for more detailed information on the gi bills referenced and additional background on current law , see crs report r42755 , the post - 9 / 11 veterans' educational assistance act of 2008 ( post - 9 / 11 gi bill ) : a primer , by cassandria dortch ; and crs report r42785 , gi bills enacted prior to 2008 and related veterans' educational assistance programs: a primer , by cassandria dortch . the fy2016 national defense authorization act ( ndaa ; p.l . 114-92 ) was enacted on november 25 , 2015 . the bill authorizes the department of defense ( dod ) base budget , including such items as procurement , research and development , operation and maintenance , military personnel , and other activities such as atomic energy defense activities and overseas contingency operations . the ndaa often includes gi bill - related provisions . the department of veterans affairs expiring authorities act of 2016 ( p.l . 114-228 ) was enacted on september 29 , 2016 . it primarily extends certain provisions of law which are related to health care , homeless veterans , and provisions related to gi bill and other benefits administered by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) . the jeff miller and richard blumenthal veterans health care and benefits improvement act of 2016 ( p.l . 114-315 ) was enacted on december 16 , 2016 . the law represents a compilation of original and revised versions of proposals included in several bills introduced throughout the 114 th congress under the jurisdiction of the veterans' affairs committees . among the law's provisions are those intending to improve veterans' disability compensation procedures , expand veterans' burial benefits , improve veterans' health care administration , expand and improve benefits for homeless veterans , and enhance gi bill benefits .