we have to change our way of thinking . we have to consider every single cent in the fight against these evils not as an expense but as an investment in the future of olympic sport . we have to realize that catching the cheats is extremely important but only a means to an end — the protection of the clean athletes . since changing the olympic charter , the ioc has taken , or proposed , several steps to enhance the protection of clean athletes . at its october 2015 olympic summit , the ioc proposed that the testing of athletes should be independent from sports organizations and requested that wada lead a working group to study the proposal that it ( wada ) take responsibility for testing . in december 2015 , the ioc's executive board unanimously adopted a declaration that included proposals for wada and cas . the executive board proposed that wada establish an independent entity for testing and results management , that the new entity include a unit dedicated to intelligence collection , and that "sports oganisations should transfer their doping control operations to this new organisation. figure 2 below shows all six cities . for the first time , the 2016 rio games will feature a team consisting of athletes who are refugees . created by the ioc's executive board , the refugee olympic team ( rot ) for the 2016 summer games has 10 members who were selected from a pool of 43 athletes . the origin countries of the rot athletes are the democratic republic of the congo ( 2 ) , ethiopia ( 1 ) , south sudan ( 5 ) , and syria ( 2 ) . the ioc will ensure that the rot receives uniforms , housing , and technical assistance ( eg , coaches and support staff ) . the olympic flag and the olympic anthem will be used for any official representations , such as possible medal ceremonies , involving rot . over the years , host countries and cities have had to deal with a variety of concerns , problems , or criticisms , and rio de janeiro is no exception . separately or collectively , a variety of issues might pose risks to the health , safety , and general well - being of athletes and their families , team personnel , and spectators participating in or attending the 2016 games . safety is also a concern as criminal activity directed at the athletes and visitors could have negative implications for the games and the brazilian economy and tourism . in 2009 , when the international olympic committee ( ioc ) announced that brazil would host the 2016 summer games , then - president of brazil luiz inácio lula da silva hailed the decision as recognition of brazil's arrival as a "first - class country," stating , "today we received the respect that people are already starting to show to brazil. as the fifth - largest and fifth most populous country in the world , brazil has long sought recognition as a global power , and at the time it was awarded the olympics , it appeared to be on the verge of finally realizing its ambitions .