those transition costs are largely ignored in this report . they focus on the long - term benefit of lower tariffs in other countries and cheap imports coming into the united states , failing to capture the impact – which they may call short term – which can have a dramatic impact on jobs in america . most economists also argue that macroeconomic forces within an economy are the dominant factors that shape trade and foreign investment relationships . in particular , the prominent role of these macroeconomic forces complicates efforts to disentangle the distinct impact that trade has on the economy . according to standard economic theory , macroeconomic conditions within an economy determine capital flows , which in turn affect exchange rates and the overall size of the trade deficit . in addition , economic theory holds that trade agreements between countries alter trade relationships and thus the composition of the trade deficit , but have little impact on the trade deficit's overall size . changes at the microeconomic level of the economy , such as new technologies , also can affect particular industries or sectors of the economy in ways that are unrelated to international trade . various groups have used trade models to offer their predictions about the employment effects of the agreements with differing and , at times , conflicting results , arising primarily from the number and kinds of assumptions they make . the different estimates of the employment effects of trade agreements highlight the limitations of the models themselves and the data they use . congress may decide to try to improve the predictive capability of current trade models ; congress could redirect or add resources to improve the forecasting ability of current models . congress could also contract with private entities to develop new models . congress may also consider conducting oversight of the current state of u.s. data on trade and trade - related employment to determine what actions , if any , may be taken to improve such data and the costs and benefits involved in doing so . such efforts could provide ( 1 ) greater insights into the dynamic adjustments that would occur as the result of a given trade agreement ; ( 2 ) improved estimates of the number of jobs currently related to international trade ; ( 3 ) improved assessments of the impact of trade agreements on particular sectors in the economy ; and ( 4 ) a more informed assessment of the potential long - run impact of a trade agreement on the economy as a whole and on particular sectors within the economy . given the constant churning that occurs in u.s. labor markets , most economists likely would conclude that labor markets are sufficiently fluid to minimize the long - term impact of any adjustment costs that could arise from a trade agreement . economists recognize , however , that the adjustment costs associated with trade agreements and other types of market transformations can be highly concentrated on some workers , firms , and communities . recent research also indicates that impediments may inhibit the adjustment process in some local labor markets , resulting in prolonged periods of unemployment or underemployment for some workers .