appendix a . basic state grants allocation formula this appendix provides a detailed description of the formula used for allocating perkins iv basic state grant funds to the states after set - asides for the outlying areas , the native american cte program , and the native hawaiian cte program have been reserved . initial allocation after reservations for outlying areas and the native american and native hawaiian cte programs , basic state grants funds are award ed to the 50 states , the district of columbia , puerto rico , and the u.s. virgin islands . the base formula for state allocations was historically designed to target funds toward states with higher proportions of aged 15 to 19 . states with lower per capita incomes are also targeted by the initial allocation formula . the base formula depends on three population groups in each state: persons aged 15 to 19 , 20 to 24 , and 25 to 65 . each of these populations is then weighted in the calculation of initial allocations . the largest weight ( 0.5 ) is assigned to the 15 to 19 age group . the 20 to 24 age group is weighted 0.2 , while the 25 to 65 age group is weighted 0.15 . note that these weights differ from those stated in the body of the report , because this section provides a higher level of detail about the formula calculations . the second factor for calculating the initial allocation is the state's allotment ratio . this is calculated by dividing a state's per capita income ( pci ) by the national average pci . that quotient is then multiplied by 0.5 and subtracted from 1 . this calculation results in higher allotment ratio values for states with low pcis and lower allotment ratio values for states with high pcis . no state may have an allotment ratio higher than 0.6 or lower than 0.4 . allotment ratios for states with higher or lower calculated ratios are set to either 0.6 or 0.4 , respectively . each state's initial allocation is then calculated by adding four quantities based on weighted populations in the three age groups and allotment ratios . the first three components of the sum are calculated by multiplying a state's allotment ratio by its population in the given age group , and then dividing the result by the sum of all such products across all the states . that number is then multiplied by the weight corresponding to the particular age group: where 0.5 is the weight factor associated with the 15 to 19 population group . correspondingly , the allocations associated with the 20 to 24 and 25 to 65 population groups are calculated as follows: where 0.2 is the weight factor associated with the age 20 to 24 population group , and where 0.15 is the weight factor associated with the 25 to 65 population group . the fourth component of a state's initial allocation , allocationprop in the above formula , is calculated as that state's proportion of the total funding determined by the sum of the first three formulas . this last component is given a weight of 0.15 .