the committees of referral may not amend a pdr . if , for some reason , a committee thought language other than that required by the statute would be more appropriate to a given case , it could consider and report an alternative resolution framed in such language . the bctpaa , however , would accord such an alternative measure no eligibility for expedited consideration . in each chamber , if the respective committees of referral report a pdr , it becomes eligible for consideration by the chamber under statutory expedited procedures , but only if it is the first pdr reported with respect to that trade agreement in that chamber . the prescribed expedited procedures are separate from ( though similar to ) those provided by the trade act of 1974 for implementing bills , being set forth in section 152 ( d ) and 152 ( e ) of that act . under these provisions , the motion to proceed to consideration of a pdr in each chamber is privileged and not debatable . such a motion may not be amended , nor may the vote thereon be reconsidered . debate on the resolution itself is limited to 20 hours , equally divided: in the house , between supporters and opponents of the resolution , and in the senate , between the majority and minority leaders or their designees . , or conceivably even through its rarely - used motion to suspend the rules . these statutory conditions provide incentive for the executive to conduct trade negotiations in ways that do meet those requirements . also as with the pdr , these procedural regulations apply , in each chamber , only to the first trr reported with respect to a given presidential report on trade remedy laws . unlike the pdr , however , a trr may be submitted only in response to the report by the president ( listed above in the section on reports and notifications ) on proposals that may be included in a trade agreement under negotiation and that could require changes in u.s. trade remedy laws . the president is to submit this report to the revenue committees at least 180 days before entering into ( signing ) the trade agreement in question . these requirements include extensive specifications of the content that a covered trade agreement may have and of actions that must accompany the process of negotiating it . these requirements , however , are not self - enforcing , which means that these arrangements still leave open the question of how it would be determined whether or not a specific covered trade agreement meets the requirements . further provisions of the bctpaa , accordingly , address this consideration by specifying who may assess whether compliance has been achieved and means of implementing consequences for lack of compliance . the chief compliance mechanisms provided by the bctpaa are ( 1 ) the procedural disapproval resolution , ( 2 ) the consultation and compliance resolutions in each chamber , and ( 3 ) a resolution addressing provisions in trade agreements that affect trade remedy laws .