oecd . the oecd provides a forum to discuss principles and norms to facilitate a thriving digital economy . the oecd issued a series of reports in 2017 and 2018 related to digital trade , including an assessment of the digital transformation of each oecd economy and bridging the digital gender divide . the reports identified specific challenges and recommendations , including establishing a national digital strategy and removing market access barriers . the united states could work with its oecd partners to reinforce principles , including an open internet and the need to balance public policy objectives . the oecd global forum on the digital security for prosperity also allows for multi - stakeholder international engagement to discuss issues such as the governance of digital security issues . apec . the asian pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) forum presents another opportunity for sharing best practices and setting high - level principles on issues that may be of greater concern to developing countries with less advanced digital economies and industry . apec is implementing the cross - border privacy rules ( cbpr ) system to be consistent with the already established apec privacy framework . according to the business software alliance , most countries across the globe have data protection frameworks based on either the apec cbpr system or the eu regime , but some countries still lack privacy laws . currently , the united states , japan , mexico , canada , south korea , singapore , taiwan , and australia are cbpr members ; the philippines is in the process of joining . some observers view cbpr , which aims to reflect a diversity of national privacy regimes , as a scalable solution that could potentially be adopted multilaterally . others may view the eu regime as a more comprehensive , top - down approach . due to its voluntary nature , apec has served as an incubator for potential plurilateral agreements . regulatory cooperation . ongoing regulatory cooperation efforts are another important tool for addressing differences between parties , better aligning regulatory requirements , and reducing inconsistencies and redundancies that can hamper or discriminate against the free flow of data , goods , and services . these forums provide an opportunity for u.s. agencies to work directly with overseas counterparts and focus on specific aspects of digital trade such as online privacy , consumer protection , and rules for online contract formation and enforcement . the eu - u.s. privacy shield is one example of regulatory authorities working together to address such issues . policy questions continue to evolve as the internet - driven economy and innovations grow . digital trade is intimately connected to and woven into all parts of the u.s. economy and overlaps with other sectors , requiring policymakers to balance many different objectives . for example , digital trade relies on cross - border data flows , but policymakers must balance open data flows with public policy goals such as protecting privacy , supporting law enforcement , and improving personal and national security and safety . the complexity of the debate related to cross - border data flows and digital trade more generally involves complementary and competing interests and stakeholders .