enact minimum floodplain standards based on those flood maps . in addition , premiums collected from the sale of insurance in the nfip finance a flood mitigation assistance ( fma ) grant program that reduces overall flood risk . this section of the report briefly discusses each of these means of reducing comprehensive flood risk . fema enforces two regulatory conditions — probation and suspension — for removing a participating community from the nfip . whether or not a particular community has either been placed on probation or suspended can be found using the nfip's community status book . notably , a community cannot be removed from the nfip because of increased or excess flood insurance claims and losses . rather , probation and suspension only occur if the community fails to uphold its obligations related to floodplain management . a community can be placed on probation by fema if it is found that it is failing to adequately enforce the floodplain management standards it has adopted . as established by regulations , probation can result in a fee of $50 being charged to all policyholders in the community while the community is given time to rectify fema's concerns regarding their implementation of the floodplain management standards . ultimately , if the community does not correct its cited deficiencies after given time periods described in regulations , the community will be suspended from the nfip by fema . likewise , federally backed mortgages still require flood insurance for properties in the sfha , so these property - owners would be required to obtain such insurance in the private market . a community is allowed to leave the nfip at its will , but the potential consequences of that decision are similar to those if the community has been suspended . the funding for the nfip is primarily maintained in an authorized account called the national flood insurance fund ( nfif ) . generally , the nfip has been funded through three methods: receipts from the premiums of flood insurance policies , including fees and surcharges ; direct annual appropriations for specific costs of the nfip ; and borrowing from the u.s. treasury when the balance of the nfif has been insufficient to pay the nfip's obligations ( eg , insurance claims ) . the program collects about $3.6 billion in annual premium revenue . nationally , as of january 2019 , about 22,355 communities in 56 states and jurisdictions participated in the nfip . according to fema , the program saves the nation an estimated $1.87 billion annually in flood losses avoided because of the nfip's building and floodplain management regulations . this report provides introductory information on key components of the nfip , ranging from floodplain mapping to the standard flood insurance forms . this report will be updated as significant revisions are made to the nfip through legislation or administrative action . however , this report does not provide detail on current or future legislative issues for congress , which are covered in a separate report . crs also has a separate report on flood insurance and other federal disaster assistance programs .