to date , none of the bills has been enacted . both the house and the senate appropriations committees have reported fy2017 appropriations bills that would fund noaa , including nws , for fy2017 . reports accompanying each appropriation bill contain language that may influence nws operations in fy2017 and beyond . many different components and programs within noaa contribute to nws's mission of providing weather forecasts and warnings . other bills would address a broader array of programs within noaa and nws . several bills may affect nws only indirectly , such as those that would authorize strategies to improve resilience to extreme weather events . table 3 lists legislation introduced in the 114 th congress that may affect nws and briefly summarizes relevant provisions . several of the bills listed in table 3 indicate congressional interest in some of those components and programs , such as the research programs within the office of oceans and atmospheric research at noaa , and in the challenge of improving the integration of research results into operational weather forecasting ( eg , h.r . several of the bills are more narrowly focused , such as those that would require additional doppler radars to provide coverage for large population centers or state capitals ( eg , h.r . 5089 , s. 2058 ) or those that would require additional personnel at nws forecast offices ( eg , s. 1573 ) . noaa weather satellites are also critical components of the nws's core mission , and congress has been concerned about possible gaps in coverage and about the future of the weather satellite programs . nws is one of several line offices within the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) . in 2014 , nws restructured its organization structure , which is reflected in its annual congressional budget justifications since then . this report includes tables that summarize appropriated funding for nws , and the programs within nws that generate forecasts and warnings , and the funding for nws in its restructured accounts since fy2014 . the report also includes a table with a brief summary and analysis of various bills introduced in the 114 th congress that would have some bearing , directly or indirectly , on nws operations . in addition , several bills were introduced in the 114 th congress that , if enacted , could affect nws . some of the bills focus on single topics , such as increasing the number of doppler radar stations across the country . congress has expressed concern about the future of the weather satellite program in annual appropriations bills and accompanying reports and will likely continue to do so for the foreseeable future , as the budget for satellite acquisitions continues to be a major component of overall noaa annual spending . furthermore , congress likely will continue to introduce legislation that would shape nws operations , directly or indirectly , in an overall effort to improve nws's ability to provide forecasts and warnings for protection of life and property in the united states . the national weather service ( nws ) , at the discretion of the secretary of commerce , has statutory authority for weather forecasting and for issuing storm warnings ( 15 u.s.c .