a glossary of terms is included at the end of this report . in certain circumstances these two powers can conflict . for example , if a gse were placed in conservatorship because of a "violation of any law or regulation ... that is likely to ... weaken the condition of the regulated entity," it might be relatively simple to come into compliance and quickly leave conservatorship . in contrast , a more fundamental problem might take longer and lead to conflicts between quickly ending conservatorship by returning a gse to stockholder control and the gses' charters , which require them to support the mortgage market . congressional interest in fannie mae and freddie mac has increased in recent years , primarily because the federal government's continuing conservatorship of these gses has raised doubts about their future and concerns about the potential cost of supporting them . congressional interest has been reflected by the introduction of bills to reform or replace the gses and by oversight hearings . other reasons for congressional concern include the large role that the gses and government - guaranteed mortgages ( such as those guaranteed by the federal housing administration ) play in the overall mortgage market and treasury's contract to purchase up to $200 billion in special senior preferred stock from each gse . this report presents , in analytical question and answer form , the major issues surrounding fannie mae's and freddie mac's financial conditions , and various public policy options under discussion . the gses either keep the mbss as an investment or sell the mbss to investors . their congressional charters give the gses a special relationship with the federal government , and it is widely believed that the federal government implicitly guarantees their $808 billion in bonds and $4.6 trillion in mbss . their charters give these gses special public policy goals aimed at providing liquidity in the mortgage market and promoting homeownership for underserved groups and locations . in 2008 , the gses' financial condition had weakened , and there were concerns over their ability to meet obligations . on september 7 , 2008 , the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) took control of these gses from their stockholders and management in a process known as conservatorship . the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( hera ) specifies that as conservator , fhfa has the right to operate the gses . hera specifies: ( d ) powers as conservator — the [federal housing finance] agency may , as conservator , take such actions as may be — ( i ) necessary to put the regulated entity in a sound and solvent condition ; and ( ii ) appropriate to carry on the business of the regulated entity and preserve and conserve the assets and property of the regulated entity . fannie mae and freddie mac are stockholder - owned , government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) , which purchase existing mortgages and pool the mortgages into mortgage - backed securities ( mbss ) , which they guarantee will be paid on time .