eligible applicants include u.s . attorneys' offices ; federal , state , and local governments ( including state victim assistance and compensation programs ) ; and nongovernmental victim service organizations . table a - 1 includes awards made under the antiterrorism and emergency assistance program ( aeap ) from fy2014 through july 2016 . maximum reimbursement amounts vary widely from state to state . for example , california set its maximum reimbursement at $63,000 on a single application while virginia set its maximum award at $25,000 . the ovc awards each eligible state victim compensation program an annual grant equal to 60% of what the state spent in state - funded benefits in the previous two years . like victim assistance grants , victim compensation award project periods span several years . in fy2016 , $125.4 million in victim compensation grant funds was distributed to the states , territories , and the district of columbia . the antiterrorism emergency reserve was established in p.l . 104-132 to meet the immediate and long - term needs of victims of terrorism or mass violence . the director of the ovc was authorized to set aside $50 million of cvf money in the antiterrorism emergency reserve to respond to the needs of victims of the september 11 terrorist attacks , and subsequently to replenish any amounts expended so that not more than $50 million is reserved in any fiscal year for any future victims of terrorism or mass violence . of note , these funds do not fall under the annual obligation cap of the cvf , but rather funds retained in the cvf may be used to replenish the antiterrorism emergency reserve . this reserve fund supports the antiterrorism and emergency assistance program ( aeap ) , the international terrorism victim expense reimbursement program ( itverp ) , the crime victim emergency assistance fund , the victim reunification program , and other activities in support of victims of mass violence or terrorism . in addition , the antiterrorism emergency reserve supports other activities such as supplemental grants to other entities to provide emergency relief ( eg , crisis response efforts , assistance , compensation , training and technical assistance , and ongoing assistance , including during any investigation or prosecution ) to victims of terrorist acts or mass violence occurring within the united states . the ovc may respond to incidents of terrorism or mass violence with grants from the aeap . following these incidents , the ovc verifies that an act of terrorism or mass violence has resulted in a significant number of victims being injured or killed . it then contacts the relevant state's voca administrative office and advises the administrator that aeap resources may be available . in cases of terrorism or mass violence outside the united states , the ovc will determine which organizations or agencies within the united states may apply for funding . aeap funds may be used for the following types of assistance: crisis response , consequence management , criminal justice support , crime victim compensation , and training and technical assistance . see table a - 1 for award amounts distributed under the aeap from fy2014 through july 2016 .