the nature of communications between members of congress and constituents is evolving . this report is divided into five parts . first , it discusses the role of constituent communications in a representative democracy , and briefly reviews the historical development of constituent communications in the united states . second , it reviews the current nature of electronic communications in congress . third , it discusses how existing laws , rules , and regulations might apply to social media . fourth , it discusses some of the strategic opportunities and challenges social media presents to member offices . finally , it presents some concluding observations that cover both the public nature of social media and the changing nature of representation . since the continental congress , constituents have been communicating with their elected representatives . how communication occurs , however , has changed significantly . changes in congressional communications technology and use can be considered in three groups: 1. historical communications ( eg , postal mail , telephone calls , press releases , and face - to - face meetings ) , 2. electronic communications ( eg , email and websites ) , and 3. social media ( eg , web 2.0 , twitter , facebook , and other social media platforms ) . the rise electronic communication has altered the traditional communication between members and constituents . unlike postal letters , members can reach large numbers of constituents for a fixed cost , and constituents can reach members at virtually zero cost . likewise , information gets from capitol hill to the rest of the country much more quickly , to the point that as soon as something happens in congress , it can be known everywhere in real time . finally , members can easily reach large numbers of citizens who are not their own constituents . both the house and the senate have adopted formal social media policies to guide representatives and senators on the appropriate use of official resources in support of their offices' social media policy . the house and senate policies , however , are not identical and treat the adoption of individual social media platforms in different ways . as social media continues to evolve , regulations may continue to evolve as well . as was discussed above under " the nature of electronic communications ," the decision to adopt and use social media as a constituent communications tool has important implications for member office operations . the cost , speed , and scope of social media present members with new opportunities to communicate with constituents and wider audiences . the nature of electronic communications presents unique challenges for members of congress . these include challenges in the areas of office operations , communications strategies , and constituent representation . since the continental congress , individual citizens have been corresponding with their elected representatives . over time , how these communications took place and the expectations for response have changed . as the speed of communications has increased and the real and marginal costs decreased , the type of information that members of congress can communicate and the scope of individuals they communicate with have increased .