this difference may have policy implications that are not addressed in this report . budget functions 050 and 150 cover activities related to national defense and international affairs , respectively . table 1 shows the projected costs of operations classified as national defense and international affairs , as estimated by cbo and jct . defense and international affairs spending programs devote most of their outlays to military activities . other spending activities include engagement in international relations and nonmilitary defense programs . in contrast , the largest tax expenditure programs devote resources to foreign - based individuals and households with interests in the united states , while also offering some tax benefits to active military servicemembers . national defense and international diplomacy are some of the more notable public goods typically regulated by governments . programs that call for more frequent congressional action ( such as discretionary spending programs and expiring tax expenditures ) may also be useful for defense and international affairs activities , as the location and intensity of resource demands may be highly dependent on international events that are not always foreseeable . budget functions 250 , 270 , 300 , and 350 are devoted to government activities related to science and technology , energy , natural resources , and agriculture , respectively . table 2 shows the cbo and jct projections of the cost of such programs . both spending programs and tax expenditures devote the most resources in this area to support scientific and technological research and for agricultural services . these interventions also offer a wide range of programs , as the amount of resources devoted to "other" policies is greater than the combined resources spent on the largest three programs in each case . the complementary nature of spending programs and tax expenditure programs in the science and technology , energy , natural resources , and agriculture sectors may reflect an intention to offer support to both government agencies and private firms in these areas . budget functions 370 , 400 , and 450 capture government activities related to commerce and housing , transportation , and community and regional development , respectively . table 3 provides information on the costs of these programs as estimated by cbo and jct . the largest shares of spending resources are devoted to air and ground transportation programs . spending programs in these areas are also related to providing assistance in response to unexpected events . meanwhile , a variety of tax expenditures are used to offer incentives for activities related to homeownership , business activity , and community development . the combined resources devoted to tax expenditures listed as "other" in table 3 are larger than any single tax expenditure . budget function 500 is devoted to government activities related to education , training , employment , and social services . table 4 provides the projected costs of these programs in fy2016 , as estimated by cbo and jct . federal spending resources in these areas are focused mostly in the education sector , particularly in higher education financing ( state and local governments are responsible for much of the policies for elementary and secondary schools ) . conversely , tax expenditure programs for budget function 500 activities provide much of their resources to supporting social services .