certain other rights are reserved for the government . the government retains "a nonexclusive , nontransferable , irrevocable , paid - up license to practice or have practiced for or on behalf of the united states any subject invention throughout the world...." the government also retains "march - in rights" which enable the federal agency to require the contractor to license a third party to use the invention under certain circumstances . this report discusses march - in rights at greater length below . by its own terms , the bayh - dole act applies only to nonprofit organizations ( including universities ) and small businesses . however , in a february 1983 memorandum concerning the vesting of title to inventions made under federal funding , then - president ronald reagan ordered all agencies to treat , as allowable by law , all contractors within the bayh - dole act framework regardless of their size . this longstanding practice lacks a legislative basis , however . the bayh - dole act authorizes the government to withhold public disclosure of information for a "reasonable time" until a patent application can be made . licensing by any contractor retaining title under this act is restricted to companies that will manufacture substantially within the united states . this requirement may be waived if domestic manufacture is not commercially feasible , or if the contractor or its successors made reasonable but ultimately unsuccessful efforts to license domestic manufacturers . the secretary of commerce was provided the authority to issue regulations implementing the bayh - dole act . the report closes with an identification of potential issues for congressional consideration . even prior to the bayh - dole act , the federal government considered the intellectual property implications of r&d projects financed by public funds . in 1963 , the kennedy administration called for greater consistency in diverse agency practices regarding the disposition of rights to inventions made by government contractors . this early "government patent policy" generally allowed the u.s. government to retain rights to inventions developed through government contracts . however , the contractor could obtain title in specified circumstances . for example: [w]here the purpose of the contract is to build upon existing knowledge or technology to develop information , products , processes , or methods for use by the government , and the work called for by the contract is in a field of technology in which the contractor has acquired technical competence ( demonstrated by factors such as know - how , experience , and patent position ) directly related to an area in which the contractor has an established nongovernmental commercial position , the contractor shall normally acquire the principal or exclusive rights throughout the world in and to any resulting inventions , subject to the government acquiring at least an irrevocable non - exclusive royalty free license throughout the world for governmental purposes . in those situations , the 1963 policy retained significant government rights in privately held patents that resulted from publicly funded projects .