this could be intentional or unintentional . most federal disaster assistance programs are funded through annual appropriations . this generally ensures that the programs have funds available when an incident occurs . for example , a july 2015 sba oig study found that sba's processing time for home disaster loans averaged 18.7 days and application processing times for business disaster loans averaged 43.3 days . cdbg disaster assistance , on the other hand , is funded through supplemental funding . in general , congress only provides supplemental funding when disaster needs exceed the amount available through annual appropriations . this typically only occurs when a large incident takes place , such as hurricanes katrina and sandy . consequently , funding for cdbg - dr is not available for all incidents . in addition , congress must debate and pass supplemental funding . as demonstrated earlier in figure 3 , on average , congress has passed supplemental appropriations for disaster assistance within 38.9 days of the disaster declaration . in a few cases , supplemental funding has been provided in less than a week after an incident ( for example , hurricane katrina and 9 / 11 received funding in three days and seven days respectively ) . cdbg - dr assistance is not immediately made available after an appropriation . for example , an appropriation for cdbg - dr was enacted on june 3 , 2008 . the allocation date for the cdbg - dr was september 11 , 2008 — three months after the enacted appropriation . in addition to the amount of time it can take to pass a supplemental appropriation , it takes some time for hud to formulate distribution formulas for multiple states . consequently , cdbg - dr is generally provided later than other forms of disaster assistance . this explains , in part , why the delivery sequence is often broken — because other forms of assistance can be provided more quickly . one potential option would be to fund cdbg - dr through annual appropriations . doing so would create an account with funds that could be made immediately available and help expedite cdbg - dr assistance . this option may eliminate gaps and confusion in the delivery sequence because a recipient could potentially receive cdbg - dr assistance around the same time that a sba disaster loan could be processed . the annual appropriation could be designed similarly to fema's disaster relief fund ( drf ) . some observers contend that the authorities appear incongruous and confusing . the following is a listing of relevant authorities and regulations pertaining to duplication of benefits with respect to the sba disaster loan program and cdbg - dr . there are several key areas of congressional concern related to the duplication of cdbg - dr assistance and sba disaster loans , including confusion about the orderly execution of the delivery sequence as dictated by fema , how the duplication of benefits policy and the delivery sequence are interpreted , and concerns expressed about fairness , fraud , and delays in rebuilding efforts . as mentioned previously , fema's regulations do not specifically mention cdbg - dr funding in the delivery sequence .