research . the obama administration sought a $392 million ( 6.5% ) increase in funding for rra in fy2017 , for a total of $6.425 billion . of this total , the request included $6.079 billion as discretionary funding and $346 million as new mandatory budget authority . the fy2017 request included increases for all of the rra subaccounts except for the u.s. arctic research commission ( usarc ) , which would not have changed . the largest percentage increase would have gone to engineering ( eng , 9.4% ) . the senate report recommended increasing mrefc funding to $247 million ( $54 million above the request ) , including $159 million to build three ships for the rcrv program . these reports can be accessed via the crs website at http: / / www.crs.gov / cli / clis ? also , the status of each appropriations bill is available on the crs web page , status table of appropriations , available at http: / / www.crs.gov / appropriationsstatustable / index . because of the way that agencies report budget data to congress , it can be difficult to identify the portion that is r&d . consequently , r&d data presented in the agency analyses in this report may differ from r&d data provided by omb . funding for r&d is often included in appropriations line items that also include non - r&d activities ; therefore , it is not possible to identify precisely how much of the funding provided in appropriations laws is allocated to r&d specifically . in general , r&d funding levels are known only after departments and agencies allocate their appropriations to specific activities and report those figures . congress supports r&d in the department of defense ( dod ) primarily through its research , development , test , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) appropriation . the appropriation supports the development of the nation's future military hardware and software and the technology base upon which those products rely . nearly all of what dod spends on rdt&e is appropriated in title iv of the defense appropriations bill . ( see table 7 . ) however , rdt&e funds are also appropriated in other parts of the bill . for example , rdt&e funds are appropriated as part of the defense health program , chemical agents and munitions destruction program , and the national defense sealift fund . the defense health program ( dhp ) supports the delivery of health care to dod personnel and their families . dhp funds ( including the rdt&e funds ) are requested through the defensewide operations and maintenance appropriations request . the program's rdt&e funds support congressionally directed research on breast , prostate , and ovarian cancer ; traumatic brain injuries ; orthotics and prosthetics ; and other medical conditions . congress appropriates funds for this program in title vi ( other department of defense programs ) of the defense appropriations bill . the chemical agents and munitions destruction program supports activities to destroy the u.s. inventory of lethal chemical agents and munitions to avoid future risks and costs associated with storage . funds for this program are requested through the defensewide procurement appropriations request . congress appropriates funds for this program also in title vi .