this report is divided into five sections . the report discusses structural components of saps , the development of saps from the ronald reagan administration to the present , the coordination of executive branch actors involved in issuing saps , the receipt of saps and their impact on government institutions , and possible reactions to saps when they are released publicly . saps are written statements of the administration's policy position towards a particular piece of legislation . while other avenues and forms of communication exist between congress and the executive branch , saps serve as a contained summation of the administration's positions regarding a specific bill . this section describes a sap's structure , key components , position statements , and veto threats that may be found in saps . the report includes an example sap in the appendix . as described in the u.s. constitution under article ii , section 3 , the president shall recommend for congress's consideration "such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient.... " the recommendations clause , as this is known , has been viewed as the president's basis to make or respond to legislative proposals , and as the president's basis to refuse to do so even when congress asks for such proposals . when congress considers legislation , the executive branch conducts a parallel process to consider the legislation , make recommendations , and state the administration's views . the office of management and budget ( omb ) , in addition to assisting with the formulation of the president's budget , assists the president in creating the administration's recommendations and comments on congress's legislative proposals . since its inception , omb has been a source of institutional memory for executive branch operations , attempting to unify the branch both in directing its policy agenda and its program execution . furthermore , "legislators observe the president's action and conclude that he can ill afford politically to sign a bill that fails to give him what he has demanded , or at least something pretty close. a president's reputation is at stake if the administration fails to make the legislation conform to the administration's requirements laid out in a sap . lending this predictability to the process early on allows for all actors involved to set expectations for legislative outcomes and possible areas of compromise throughout the process . by virtue of being comprised of over 90% career civil servants that may stay beyond an individual administration , omb is situated to remember processes and procedures extending across many administrations . accordingly , some of omb's processes have been developed for internal management , rather than individual administration needs , over time . this section briefly discusses omb's role in supervising the creation of legislative recommendations and the historical creation of saps . saps are a formal vehicle through which the president and the president's administration comment on legislation pending before congress . the process of solicitation and coordination of the executive branch's legislative position is governed by omb circular a - 19 . this section details the administration's institutional uses for saps , discusses key provisions in circular a - 19 , and describes the omb and agency actors involved .