appendix a . approaches for deriving a discount rate the discount rate is a component in benefit - cost analyses ( bcas ) because it determines the present value of future benefits and costs . different discount rates will result in different present values for those benefits and costs . academic experts disagree on the appropriate discount rate for evaluating public investments , especially long - lived projects . the debate has economic , political , and ethical components . on one level , many economists support discounting because constructing and maintaining a federal project diverts resources from other investments or from consumption . therefore , each investment has a cost . this cost is either associated with the return that could be earned on the next - best use of capital ( known as the opportunity cost of capital , or occ ) or with the rate of return ( the productivity of capital ) that must be paid to induce people to defer an additional unit of current consumption . theoretically , this latter rate is equivalent to people's marginal social rate of time preference ( srtp ) . the social returns can be difficult to monetize , and private capital may not provide an adequate substitute for social or natural capital ( eg , community cohesion or wild places ) . for many projects , there are often benefits and costs experienced by future generations , which do not have a "say" in current capital markets or the trade - off between market goods and services or future non - market ones . for multigenerational investments , discount rates raise questions about the appropriate rate at which society would trade a unit of consumption in the present versus the consumption of future generations . for example , at discount rates set at private rates of return , even catastrophic losses 200 years in the future would be valued at almost nothing in present values . some economists propose that the discount rates for federal programs should vary depending on the conditions of the specific action being examined ( such as whether the project has effects on future generations known as intergenerational effects , and whether it causes crowding out of private investment ) . four ways to calculate the discount rate in a perfectly functioning market , a discount rate calculated to reflect the srtp would be identical to a discount rate calculated to reflect the occ . however , capital market imperfections , such as taxes , risk aversion , and uncertainty , cause these discount rates to differ and incite disagreement regarding the appropriate discount rate . economists have generally proposed four major methods for calculating the social discount rate ; they are the following: pretax return on investment method , after - tax savings method , weighted - average method , and shadow price of capital method . figure a - 1 depicts the relationship between the four methods and the approach to accounting for the cost of the investment in terms of capital . following a brief discussion on the omb recommendations for discount rates , each of the four approaches to calculating the discount rate is discussed below .