appendix a . methodology selection of low - income programs programs were selected for inclusion in this report series if they ( 1 ) have provisions that base an individual's eligibility or priority for service on a measure ( or proxy ) of low income ; ( 2 ) target resources in some way ( eg , through allocation formulas , variable matching rates ) using a measure ( or proxy ) of low income ; or ( 3 ) prioritize services to low - income segments of a larger target population . no universal definition or specific dollar amount was used to define low income for purposes of this report . however , most programs use a multiple of the federal poverty guidelines or other measures to target resources toward people and communities at the low end of the income distribution . how has this spending changed over time ? how is spending allocated among various categories of low - income benefits and services ? these questions may appear straightforward but their answers are complex . this is the third in a series of crs reports that address these questions . the first task — seemingly simple but in fact highly challenging — was to identify which federal activities can be characterized as "low - income" programs ; that is , programs that are not intended to be universal but that specifically target benefits or services toward low - income people or communities . a second task was to identify a consistent and reliable source of spending data , so that dollar amounts for individual programs could be meaningfully combined and compared . finally , programs were grouped into categories ( eg , health care , cash aid , food assistance , etc .

 ) , a relatively straightforward process for most programs but more complicated for those with multiple purposes . appendix a explains how crs addressed these challenges . this report focuses primarily on spending trends , both overall and by category . the report includes some limited programmatic details ; however , previous versions provide more extensive information on the specifics of each program included in the spending totals . the report begins with a discussion of aggregate trends in low - income spending from fy2008 through fy2015 . it then looks at trends by category and in the 10 largest low - income programs ( which now comprise more than 80% of total low - income spending ) . medicaid is the single largest program discussed in the report , and health care is the largest category ( due to the size of medicaid ) . the report briefly discusses the dominance of health care and explains the decision not to include spending for premium credits and cost - sharing subsidies under the aca . the report continues with a description of trends in spending for non - health low - income programs , both overall and by category . a series of appendices explains the methodology used for the report ( appendix a ) , provides spending and limited information for each of the programs included ( appendix b ) , and identifies additional reports that might be of interest ( appendix c ) .