if so , in what ways ? how effective are southeast asian governments' capabilities to monitor and combat the threat of terrorism in their homelands , and to coordinate efforts when those threats spread across borders ? where these capabilities are insufficient , could u.s. assistance help address capability gaps ? if so , then what are the most effective legislative and oversight tools that congress has at its disposal to ensure that u.s. assistance is used effectively towards these ends ? what priority should policymakers place on supporting counterterrorism efforts in southeast asia , compared with other u.s. security , diplomatic and economic goals ? are these threats increasing in significance ? are threat levels affected by the rise of the islamic state ? what are the most effective legislative and oversight tools that congress has at its disposal to help shape the development and ordering of those priorities ? what tools does congress have at its disposal to ensure that u.s. support for southeast asian counterterrorism efforts does not encourage and enable countries to unduly curtail human rights and the rule of law ? some observers also believe malaysia has been an active source and transit point for terrorist financing . with the notable exception of the jemaah islamiyah network in the early 2000s , the linkages among violent southeast asian groups , and links between them and groups centered in the middle east , traditionally have been weak . most southeast asian militant groups have operated only in their own country or islands , and focused on domestic issues such as promoting the adoption of islamic law ( sharia ) and seeking independence from central government control . however , the war in afghanistan and the rise of globalized social media contributed to the radicalization of islam in southeast asia , and jemaah islamiyah was widely linked to al qaeda , and to the abu sayyaf group in the philippines . likewise , over the past two years , the rise of the islamic state has led to a new phase of islamist militancy in southeast asia , as in the middle east and across the muslim world . terrorism experts say is offers inspiration , and the potential for training and material support , for militants in southeast asia . is has conducted online recruitment efforts in indonesia's national language ( called "bahasa indonesia" ) and in the malay language . analysts estimate that hundreds of southeast asians have travelled to the middle east to fight with is — just as some did in the late 1990s in afghanistan with al qaeda . terrorism experts describe a southeast asian "military arm" of the islamic state known as katibah nusantara , made up of indonesians , malaysians and others , operating in syria . several southeast asian governments , including indonesia , malaysia , and singapore , have intensified counterterror efforts since 2014 , outlawing calls for support of is and strengthening policing and border - control efforts . it is difficult to estimate with precision how many individuals from the region have traveled to the middle east to join the islamic state fight , or how much financial support the group has derived from southeast asia .