disease or predation . inadequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms . other natural or man - made factors affecting a species' continued existence . in making a listing determination , fws is charged with relying "solely on the basis of the best scientific and commercial data available. fws may list a species independently , or citizens may petition the agency to make a listing . when a petition is filed , certain deadlines are imposed by statute . fws must determine and publish a decision in the federal register within 90 days of the filing of the petition on whether the petition presents substantial evidence in support of a listing . within 12 months of filing the petition , fws must publish a notice on whether listing is warranted . a final decision must be made one year after the 12-month notice . fws has the option of publishing a determination at the time of a 12-month finding that a listing is "warranted but precluded" due to limited fws resources . if the adequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms provides the rationale not to list a species , those mechanisms must meet certain criteria , described below . this section provides a brief chronology of major sage - grouse protection actions , beginning with petitions filed in 1999 to list the sage - grouse for protection under esa and ending with the fws decision in 2015 not to list the species . major events are listed below and followed by discussion . between 1999 and 2005 , eight petitions were filed to protect sage - grouse in all or portions of the species' range . some petitions were rejected because they were not considered substantive enough to be eligible . the specific decision not to list the sage - grouse is discussed below in " why did fws decide not to list sage - grouse ? esa is intended to protect plants and animals from becoming extinct . it authorizes creating a list of protected species , either endangered ( defined as being in danger of extinction ) or threatened ( defined as likely to become endangered in the foreseeable future ) . in a 2007 court decision , the district court for the district of idaho held that the deputy assistant secretary of the department of the interior wrongfully interfered with the listing decision and that fws did not use the best science as required by esa . the case was remanded to the agency , and in 2008 fws issued a notice of status review for the species . in 2010 , fws found that "that the inadequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms is a significant threat to the greater sage - grouse now and in the foreseeable future" and announced that "listing the greater sage - grouse ( rangewide ) is warranted , but precluded by higher priority listing actions . we will develop a proposed rule to list the greater sage - grouse as our priorities allow. esa prohibits taking these species , with limited exceptions . in addition , it prohibits federal agencies from jeopardizing the continued existence of listed species and from destroying or adversely modifying listed species' designated critical habitats .