search and seizure . … ( b ) authority to issue a warrant . venue for a warrant application . at the request of a federal law enforcement officer or an attorney for the government: … ( 6 ) a magistrate judge with authority in any district where activities related to a crime may have occurred has authority to issue a warrant to use remote access to search electronic storage media and to seize or copy electronically stored information located within or outside that district if: ( a ) the district where the media or information is located has been concealed through technological means ; or ( b ) in an investigation of a violation of 19 18 u.s.c . § 1030 ( a ) ( 5 ) , the media are protected computers that have been damaged without authorization and are located in five or more districts . this requirement cannot be satisfied when the government does not know in which jurisdiction the computer is located . with the increasing use of anonymizing technology by criminals and other targets , doj has claimed it has been frustrated in its attempt to seek certain warrants when it cannot locate the device . … ( c ) receipt . this report provides a brief overview of the proposed amendment to rule 41 . first , it sets out background on the origin of , and rationale underlying , the proposed amendment and a description of the rule as currently written . second , it reviews the potential changes made by the proposed amendment and surveys various concerns commenters have raised with the proposal . rule 41 of the federal rules of criminal procedure governs the procedures for obtaining a search warrant in federal court . the current rule only permits judges to issue warrants within their jurisdiction , subject to several limited exceptions . to this end , doj requested that the judicial conference of the united states , the policy - making arm of the federal judiciary , evaluate two changes to rule 41 . the first would authorize remote access searches of computers in which the location has been hidden through technological means . the second would allow the government to use one warrant to search multiple computers when five or more computers have been the subject of certain hacking attacks . after several years of evaluation , the amendments have been approved by the judicial conference and are now pending before congress . unless congress acts , the amendments will take effect on december 1 , 2016 . opponents of the rule change have argued , among other things , that it would undermine fourth amendment privacy protections , including the particularity requirement . moreover , they argue that the rule change could have many unintended consequences that should be worked out by congress in the first instance , and not the rulemaking body of the federal courts . both doj and the judicial conference have asserted , on the other hand , that this rule change would only change the venue requirements of the rule , and that any constitutional questions would be addressed as they arise on a case - by - case basis .