to date , no party has done so . the united states is not a party to the agreement . ( see text box . ) trips defines gis as "indications which identify a good as originating in the territory of a member , or a region or locality in that territory , where a given quality , reputation or other characterist ic of the good is essentially attributable to its geographical origin" ( article 22 ( 1 ) ) . accordingly , a product's quality , reputation , or other characteristics can be determined by where it comes from , and gis are place names ( or in some countries words associated with a place ) used to identify products that come from these places and have these characteristics . previously , the united states challenged the eu's gi laws under wto dispute settlement in 1999 , alleging discrimination against u.s. gis and failure to protect u.s. trademarks . a wto panel ruled that aspects of the eu's gi laws were inconsistent with trips , resulting in changes to the eu program . trips builds on treaties administered by the world intellectual property organization ( wipo ) . wipo is a specialized agency in the u.n. system with the mission to "lead the development of a balanced and effective international intellectual property ( ip ) system. wipo has 188 member states , including the united states and each of the eu countries . wipo defines gis as "a sign used on products that have a specific geographical origin and possess qualities or a reputation that are due to that origin. to function as a gi , "a sign must identify a product as originating in a given place," "the qualities , characteristics or reputation of the product should be essentially due to the place of origin," and there must be "a clear link between the product and its original place of production. more than one - half of this estimated value is for wines . leading eu member states , by value of gi sales , include france , italy , germany , the united kingdom , spain , greece , and portugal . eu trade policy actively supports stronger protection of gis internationally , including as part of its multilateral and bilateral negotiations , given concerns about gi "violations throughout the world" from misuse and imitation . regarding protection of gis , the eu is seeking certain "trips - plus" provisions that would establish a list of eu names to be protected "directly and indefinitely" in countries outside the eu , allow coexistence with prior trademarks ( if they are "registered in good faith" ) , phase out other uses of eu names , ensure a right to use ( as opposed to trademark license system ) , guarantee administrative protections , and create a cooperation mechanism and dialogue . as of may 2016 , more than 4,500 product names are registered and protected in the eu for foods , wine , and spirits originating in both eu member states and other countries ( table 1 ) . nearly two - thirds are wine registrations .