discretionary budget authority . the main source of funding for samhsa is the discretionary budget authority it receives through the annual appropriations process . samhsa is funded through the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( labor - hhs - ed ) appropriations act . some of the advisory councils and committees are explicitly required in statute . phsa section 502 requires the hhs secretary to appoint an advisory council for samhsa and each of its three statutorily established centers ( cmhs , csat , and csap ) . phsa section 501 requires the samhsa administrator to appoint an associate administrator for women's services , who must establish an advisory committee for women's services . hhs has a tribal consultation policy , under which each division within hhs ( including samhsa ) must have "an accountable consultation process to ensure meaningful and timely input by tribal officials in the development of policies that have tribal implications" ( among other requirements ) . samhsa's tribal technical advisory committee is also consistent with a 2000 executive order and a 2004 presidential memorandum . samhsa's budget and appropriations fall under four categories: ( 1 ) mental health , ( 2 ) substance abuse treatment , ( 3 ) substance abuse prevention , and ( 4 ) health surveillance and program support . the first three of these categories correspond to samhsa's three statutorily established centers ; however , the fourth category does not correspond to the remaining center . cbhsq ( $120 million in fy2016 ) does not appear as a line item in samhsa's budget ; it is funded by a set - aside in the sabg , a portion of the appropriation for health surveillance and program support , transfers from the phs evaluation tap ( described below ) , and transfers from the prevention and public health fund ( described below ) . the following is excerpted from crs report r44375 , samhsa fy2017 budget request and funding history: a fact sheet . funding sources the total amount of funding available to samhsa ( i.e. , total program level ) traditionally includes discretionary budget authority provided in annual appropriations acts , public health service ( phs ) program evaluation set - aside funds , prevention and public health fund ( pphf ) transfers , and data request and publications user fees . also , samhsa's fy2017 budget request proposes new mandatory spending that , if enacted , would be in addition to the budgetary resources described below . phs program evaluation set - aside funds . the phs evaluation tap allows the hhs secretary to redistribute a portion of eligible phs agency appropriations for program evaluation across hhs . in the annual labor - hhs - ed appropriations acts , congress specifies the maximum percentage for the set - aside and directs specific amounts of funding from the tap to a number of hhs programs . prevention and public health fund ( pphf ) transfers . the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) established the prevention and public health fund ( pphf ) and provided it with a permanent annual mandatory appropriation .