the last u.s . ambassador to qatar , dana shell smith , resigned from that post in june 2017 , reportedly over disagreements with the trump administration . mary catherine phee has been nominated as a replacement . qatar's governing structure approximates that of the other gcc states . the country is led by a hereditary amir ( literally "prince," but interpreted as "ruler" ) , shaykh tamim bin hamad al thani . he became ruler in june 2013 when his father , amir hamad bin khalifa al thani , relinquished power voluntarily . the amir governs through a prime minister , who is a member of the al thani family , and a cabinet , several of whom are members of the al thani family or of prominent allied families . amir tamim serves concurrently as minister of defense , although most of the defense policy functions are performed by the minister of state for defense , a position with less authority than that of full minister . in november 2014 , amir tamim appointed a younger brother , shaykh abdullah bin hamad , to be deputy amir and the heir apparent . the prime minister , shaykh abdullah bin nasir bin khalifa al thani , also serves as interior minister . there is dissent within the al thani family — mostly from those of lineages linked to ousted former qatari rulers — but no significant challenge to tamim's rule is evident . there were no significant protests in qatar during the "arab spring" uprising of 2011 or since . political parties are banned , and unlike in kuwait and bahrain , there are no well - defined "political societies" that act as the equivalent of parties . political disagreements in qatar are aired mainly in private as part of a process of consensus building in which the leadership tries to balance the interests of the various families and other constituencies . then - amir hamad put a revised constitution to a public referendum on april 29 , 2003 , achieving a 98% vote in favor . nevertheless , it left in place significant limitations: for example , it affirms that qatar is a hereditary emirate . some western experts also criticize qatar's constitution for specifying islamic law as the main source of legislation . the constitution stipulates that elections will be held for 30 of the 45 seats of the country's advisory council ( majlis ash - shura ) , a national legislative body , but elections have been repeatedly delayed . the elected council is also to have broader powers , including the ability to remove ministers ( two - thirds majority vote ) , to approve a national budget , and to draft and vote on proposed legislation that can become law ( two - thirds majority vote and concurrence by the amir ) . in 2008 , it was agreed that naturalized qataris who have been citizens for at least 10 years will be eligible to vote , and those whose fathers were born in qatar will be eligible to run . qatar is the only gcc state other than saudi arabia not to have held elections for any seats in a legislative body . the country holds elections for a 29-seat central municipal council .