commerce . flsa defines commerce as "trade , commerce , transportation , transmission , or communication among the several states , or between any state and any place outside thereof. where one of these elements is missing — for example , where there is no employment relationship between a child and an employer — the flsa child labor provisions do not apply . in addition , certain occupations ( eg , newspaper delivery ) and work arrangements ( eg , children working for a parent ) are explicitly exempt from the child labor provisions . where so exempt , the provisions do not apply even if all three elements listed above are present . the flsa excludes certain occupations and work arrangements entirely from coverage of its child labor provisions: children with a p arental e mployer . a child who works for a parent or a person standing in place of a parent ( hereafter "parent" ) in an occupation other than manufacturing , mining , or hazardous work may be employed at any age and for any number of hours . child p erformers . children of any age may be employed as actors or performers in motion pictures or in theatrical , radio , or television productions . newspaper d elivery p ersons . children of any age may be employed to deliver newspapers to consumers . evergreen w reath p roduce r s ( h omebased ) . children of any age may be employed as homeworkers to make evergreen wreaths and to harvest forest products used in making such wreaths . the act also relaxes restrictions on oppressive child labor in select occupations or industries — notably agriculture — by exempting them from the child labor provisions when certain conditions are met . for example , children who are 14 years old — and in some cases , at any age — may by employed in agriculture outside of school hours . congress amended the flsa to expand the set of permissible activities for 16- and 17-year - old children working with scrap balers and paper box compactors , for 17-year - old children to drive cars and trucks , and for children who are at least 14 years old and excused from compulsory schooling to work in establishments that operate power - driven woodworking machines ( but they are not allowed to operate the machines ) . the flsa defines oppressive child labor , generally , as the employment of a child under the age of 16 years in any occupation and the employment of a child under the age of 18 in an occupation determined to be hazardous to children by the secretary of labor . however , the act includes several exemptions to the child labor provisions and the oppressive child labor definition that create a complex set of thresholds that depend on the child's age , local school hours , the nature of the work ( eg , occupation , industry , and work environment ) , parental involvement in the child's employment , and other factors . notably , exemptions to the act's child labor provisions create separate rules governing children's employment in non - agricultural and agricultural work .