the agencies did not adopt the 2011 incentive compensation proposal . a similar dynamic was at work in the mortgage markets . mortgage brokers and bankers went into the subprime and other risky markets because these markets generated high returns not just for investors but also for the originators themselves . the standard compensation practice of mortgage brokers and bankers was based on the volume of loans originated rather than the performance and quality of the loans made…. the financial crisis inquiry commission was a congressionally created panel charged with examining the causes of the financial crisis . among other things , the majority view on the panel's 2011 study concluded that "compensation structures were skewed all along the mortgage securitization chain , from people who originated mortgages to people on wall street who packaged them into securities. others have made similar observations: non - executive [pay] incentives .… significantly affected bank risk - taking prior to the 2007 financial crisis ; and the structure , as well as the level of those incentives , was determined largely by the market's demand for talent… . among banks , however , combining performance - based pay with competition , where employees can move from one employer to the next , has had perverse results . greater risk - taking can increase short - term bank profits and , in turn , the amount a non - executive is paid , potentially at the expense of long - term bank value . in greater detail , various financial regulators collectively spoke of a nexus between incentive compensation and potential financial loss: some compensation arrangements rewarded employees — including non - executive personnel like traders with large position limits , underwriters , and loan officers — for increasing an institution's revenue or short - term profit without sufficient recognition of the risks the employees' activities posed to the institutions , and therefore potentially to the broader financial system . traders with large position limits , underwriters , and loan officers are three examples of non - executive personnel who had the ability to expose an institution to material amounts of risk . significant losses caused by actions of individual traders or trading groups occurred at some of the largest financial institutions during and after the financial crisis . an attendant observation spoke of the corrosive long - term corporate impact that poorly designed bonus - based incentive compensation schemes were believed to have had on various financial institutions , another observer noted , "[t]he revenues that [often] served as the basis for calculating bonuses were generated immediately , while the risk outcomes might not have been realized for months or years after the transactions were completed. section 956 of the dodd - frank act represents an attempt to reduce the presence of problematically risky financial - sector incentive - based compensation arrangements . the section requires the agencies to jointly prescribe regulations or guidelines aimed at prohibiting incentive - based payment arrangements in financial institutions that they determine encourage inappropriate risks by providing excessive compensation or that could lead to a material financial loss .