5485 on july 7 , 2016 . although funding was shifted among some fsgg agencies , the overall level remained unchanged . each chamber created a new financial services and general government subcommittee . in the house , the jurisdiction of the fsgg subcommittee comprised primarily of agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the subcommittee on transportation , treasury , housing and urban development , the judiciary , the district of columbia , and independent agencies , commonly referred to as "tthud. in addition , the house fsgg subcommittee was assigned four independent agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the science , state , justice , commerce , and related agencies subcommittee: the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , and the small business administration ( sba ) . in the senate , the jurisdiction of the new fsgg subcommittee was a combination of agencies from the jurisdiction of three previously existing subcommittees . the district of columbia , which had its own subcommittee in the 109 th congress , was placed under the purview of the fsgg subcommittee , as were four independent agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies subcommittee: the fcc , ftc , sec , and sba . in addition , most of the agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the tthud subcommittee were assigned to the fsgg subcommittee . as a result of this reorganization , the house and senate fsgg subcommittees have nearly identical jurisdictions , except that the cftc is under the jurisdiction of the fsgg subcommittee in the senate and the agriculture subcommittee in the house . table 4 below lists various departments and agencies funded through fsgg appropriations and the names and contact information for the crs expert ( s ) on these departments and agencies . title vii contains general provisions applying government - wide . the fsgg bills have often also contained provisions relating to u.s. policy toward cuba . although funding for many financial regulatory agencies may not be provided by the fsgg bill , legislative provisions that would affect some of these agencies have often been included . the house and senate fsgg bills fund the same agencies , with one exception . the house bill also includes other provisions that would amend the dodd - frank act , such as changing the leadership of the cfpb to a five - person commission and changing the authority of the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) . previous fsgg bills have also included similar dodd - frank act changes that have proven controversial in the past . the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) is funded through the agriculture appropriations bill in the house and the fsgg bill in the senate . this structure has existed in its current form since the 2007 reorganization of the house and senate committees on appropriations . although financial services are a major focus of the bills , fsgg appropriations bills do not include many financial regulatory agencies , which are instead funded outside of the appropriations process .