escalation . china could choose to escalate the disputes by taking actions to assert what it believes to be its rights . such escalation could take many forms . some possibilities include: starting land reclamation at scarborough shoal , which has been under china's control since 2012 ; seizing control of second thomas shoal by removing the brp sierra madre , the philippine navy landing craft beached there since 1999 , and the philippine marines stationed on the vessel ; declaring an air defense identification zone ( adiz ) over parts or all of the south china sea ; establishing territorial baselines around the spratly island chain , similar to those china drew about the paracel islands in 1996 ; deploying surface - to - air missiles ( sams ) to some of the artificial islands china has constructed in the spratly island chain , particularly at fiery cross , mischief , and subi reefs ; increasing harassment of philippine vessels ; conducting additional military exercises in the south china sea ; or withdrawing from unclos . the philippines' possible response to the tribunal's award has been complicated by a change in administration . on june 30 , 2016 , the philippines swore in a new president , rodrigo duterte , to succeed president benigno aquino , whose administration initiated the arbitration proceedings . on president duterte's inauguration day , the philippines department of foreign affairs issued a statement that ended , the philippines believes that the rule of law prescribes a just and peaceful means of resolving differences , which is why the philippines will fully respect the tribunal's award as an affirmation of the unclos and hopes that members of the international community and parties to the convention will do the same . the position of president duterte himself has been less clear . on the campaign trail , duterte raised questions about whether he would abide by the tribunal's ruling when he was quoted as saying , "if the tribunal would favor us , good , but if not , i would disagree. one week after his inauguration , however , he stated that the philippines would accept any ruling as "a country which honors ( its ) international commitment" to unclos . duterte also reiterated his stance that he would be open to eventual bilateral negotiations with china on the countries' maritime disputes if efforts to address them in other fora did not bear fruit . in leaked remarks to his first cabinet meeting as president , duterte said that he would view an award in the philippines' favor as "a moral victory," but said that the philippines would need to face "reality," an apparent suggestion that the philippines would not be able to force china to accept the tribunal's award . he added , "god knows , i really don't want to declare any fighting with anybody and if we can have peace by just talking , i will be very happy. like the government of china , the obama administration has worked hard to line up international support for its position on the arbitration proceedings . in april 2016 , the united states succeeded in including a call for implementation of the tribunal's ruling in a group of seven ( g7 ) foreign ministers statement .