two issues arise here . the first is the extent to which lower rates will attract profit from abroad without making any real changes . the second is how the patent box regime will affect marginal investment in the united states when profits have already been shifted to low - tax jurisdictions . evidence suggests a significant amount of shifting of profits out of the united states , which may arise in large part from an inability to enforce arms - length pricing between related parties . if a u.s. parent sells the rights to difficult - to - value intangible assets ( such as drug formulas , search algorithms , and design of communication devices ) to its foreign subsidiary , it is easier than with other assets to set the price too low and reduce profits in the united states . by offering a lower tax rate in the united states , more profits appropriately attributable to u.s. investments would be retained ( or brought back ) to the united states . design is an important issue in this case as well . under the boustany - neal proposal , if an additional dollar is shifted to a u.s. firm it would be taxed not at the 10% patent / innovation box rate , but at the rate between 35% and 10% that arises from the cost allocation formula . peter merrill estimated that the lowest tax rate across the industries he examined was 27% . it is possible to design a patent box so that the marginal dollar of profit would be taxed at 10% . should it include income embedded in products produced from non - patented innovations ? should it include income from items not reflecting technological innovation such as trademarks , business names , and copyrights ? other design issues include whether to restrict the benefit to innovations developed in the united states and to income from products derived from the innovations that are produced in the united states . the european patent boxes generally do not have these restrictions . another issue is the treatment of income from existing patents and innovations . if the objective is to encourage domestic innovation , limiting benefits to new innovations may be appropriate , although administratively difficult . finally , as will be discussed subsequently , whether the tax rate is applied to gross or net income significantly affects the benefits of patent boxes . proposals for a patent box in the united states include a draft proposal by representatives boustany and neal , the innovation promotion act of 2015 , proposed legislation made by senator feinstein in the 112 th congress , and a bill introduced by representative schwartz in the 113 th congress ( h.r . the feinstein proposal provided a 15% tax rate on income from patents developed and used for manufacture in the united states , whereas the boustany - neal proposal and h.r . 2605 allowed a 71% deduction of income , which produces an effective 10% statutory rate on income in the patent box . the boustany - neal proposal covers income from patents , inventions , formulas , processes , knowhow , computer software , and other similar ip , and is for domestic earnings .