109-171 ; dra ) . the dra did not change the funding level for the basic tanf block grant , but it did increase mandatory child care funding by $1 billion over five years , directly appropriating ( or "pre - appropriating" ) a total of $2.917 billion for each of fy2006 to fy2010 . since then , level funding for tanf and the cces has generally been provided through a series of short - and medium - term extensions , the most recent of which ( p.l . 114-113 ) provided funding through september 30 , 2016 . the temporary nature of the tanf and cces extensions is particularly notable , given that federal and state funds associated with tanf and the cces have combined to account for between 72% and 89% of federal and state child care spending in every year reviewed for this report . funds originating in tanf and the cces also account for the majority of federal spending — typically more than 70% of annual federal spending ( with the exception of fy2009 due to arra ) . the ccdbg act also went many years without being reauthorized . the ccdbg act of 2014 ( p.l . 113-186 ) is the first time this law has been reauthorized since 1996 . the 2014 reauthorization law substantially amended the previous ccdbg act , with particular emphasis on strengthening requirements related to health and safety , licensing , enforcement , and quality of care . for instance , under the reauthorized ccdbg act states must establish and enforce minimum health and safety standards covering multiple topics , such as the prevention and control of infectious diseases , building and premises safety , first aid , and emergency preparedness ; all providers receiving ccdf funds must complete pre - service and ongoing training on health and safety topics ; states must set age - specific group size limits and child - to - provider ratios ; states must conduct pre - licensure and annual unannounced licensing inspections for all licensed ccdf providers , as well as annual inspections for unlicensed ( or "license - exempt" ) ccdf providers ; states must establish qualifications and training for licensing inspectors and set inspector - to - provider ratios ; states must conduct criminal background checks on applicable child care providers and staff members ; and minimum state spending on general quality improvement activities will increase incrementally from 4% of ccdf spending under prior law to 9% by fy2020 , plus states must spend an additional 3% on quality improvement activities for infants and toddlers . under current law , the new requirements in the ccdbg act generally apply to mandatory ccdf funds provided by the cces , as well as tanf funds transferred to the ccdf . however , they do not apply to tanf funds spent on child care directly within state tanf programs . reforms to child care programs in 1996 were , in part , designed to create a single , unified child care program ( albeit supported by multiple funding streams ) : the ccdf .