the recorders have not yet been found or recovered . in january 2015 , the ntsb issued aviation safety recommendations a - 15-1 through - 8 urging that aircraft used for overwater flights be capable of transmitting data on impact location and underwater location and carry recorders or transmitters allowing for the recovery of essential flight data parameters without the need for underwater retrieval . the ntsb urged faa to work with icao and foreign aviation authorities to harmonize technologies and regulations pertaining to location broadcasts and flight data transmissions from accident aircraft . the ntsb also sought protections to prevent disabling of flight recorder devices , as well as the installation and use of cockpit image recorders . the safe aviation and flight emergency tracking act of 2015 ( h.r . 753 ) would require faa to issue regulations that certain large passenger aircraft be equipped with a means to provide continuous tracking information and technology , such as automatic deployable flight recorders , that would enable timely and cost effective recovery of the flight data and cockpit voice recorders . while the bill is similar to the january 2015 ntsb safety recommendations , it does not cite them specifically . also , the october 2015 sinking of the u.s. - flag cargo vessel el faro in the atlantic ocean raised concerns over the ability to locate and recover maritime voyage data recorders . the el faro and its data recorder , which was affixed to its mast , sank to a depth of about 15,000 feet . the recorder was recovered in august 2016 , 10 months after the accident . in general , under the international convention for the safety of life at sea ( solas ) , certain passenger vessels and large cargo vessels making international voyages are required to carry voyage data recorders . the costs and benefits of the facility have been a long - standing concern . 109-443 required the ntsb to develop and implement a plan to attain financial self - sufficient operation of the training center . the increased utilization and lease revenue has resulted in improved cost recovery , with the annual operating deficit falling from $6.3 million in fy2004 to the $2 million - $2.5 million range in fy2013-fy2015 . nonetheless , the facility still fails to recoup all of its operating costs . although the utilization and operating costs of the training center may be of interest during oversight hearings , the ability of congress to make significant changes before the expiration of the ntsb's existing lease agreement may be limited . data and voice recorders have served as important investigative tools in aviation since they were first introduced in the 1960s . presently , two main issues exist regarding data recorders . the first involves the ability of investigators to recover accident recorders promptly following mishaps , particularly submerged aircraft and ship recorders . the second issue concerns privacy , particularly when it comes to public disclosures and non - accident related uses of recorder data .