pursuant to p.l . 106-531 , the records consolidation act of 2000 , and omb circular a - 136 , the sba oig issues an annual report on the most serious management and performance challenges facing the sba . this report is , arguably , the sba oig's signature oversight document , focusing attention "on areas that are particularly vulnerable to fraud , waste , error , and mismanagement , or otherwise pose a significant risk and generally have been subject to one or more oig or gao reports. the fy2019 report on the most serious management and performance challenges facing the sba lists the following eight challenges: 1 . weaknesses in small business contracting programs and inaccurate procurement data undermine the reliability of contracting goals achievements . sba needs to continue to improve information technology controls to address operational risks . sba needs effective human capital strategies to carry out its mission successfully and become a high - performing organization . sba needs to improve its risk management and oversight practices to ensure its loan programs operate effectively and will continue to benefit small businesses . sba needs to ensure that the section 8 ( a ) business development program identifies and addresses the needs of program participants , only eligible firms are admitted into the program , and standards for determining economic disadvantage are justifiable . sba can improve its loan programs by ensuring quality deliverables and reducing improper payments at sba loan operation centers . sba's disaster assistance programs must balance competing priorities to deliver timely assistance and reduce improper payments . sba needs robust oversight of its grant management . the sba oig provides a series of recommended actions within each of the reported challenges to enhance the effectiveness of the sba's programs and operations . the management challenges are "driven by sba's current needs" and based on the sba oig's understanding of the sba's programs and operations , as well as challenges presented in other agency reports , principally gao reports . accordingly , the challenges presented each year may change based on the sba's actions or inactions "to remedy past weaknesses. for example , in its fy2019 report , the sba oig reported that the sba had "increased its oversight of the acquisition program , updated its policies and procedures , and implemented a requirement for management to conduct annual reviews of the acquisition process controls. as a result , the sba oig removed sba's acquisition process from the list of the sba's most serious challenges and added a new challenge regarding sba's grant management oversight . oigs are , arguably , best known for investigations addressing waste , fraud , and abuse and audits containing recommendations to enhance programmatic and operational efficiencies .