appendix a . veterans choice program ( vcp ) high - level work flow appendix b. va information pertaining to the end of the contract with health ne . 115-26 , which amended p.l . 113-146 and made va the primary payer for veterans with ohi who seek care for nonservice - connected conditions through the vcp . this change went into effect on april 19 , 2017 . the va would coordinate with a veteran's ohi and recover any costs , and bill the veteran for any copayments that the veteran would be responsible for similar to what they would have paid had they received care within a va medical facility ( see figure 3 ) . community care providers or the tpas are no longer required to collect copays , cost - shares , or deductibles from veterans with ohi . medicare , medicaid , or tricare are not considered ohi plans under the vcp . this report provides details on how the vcp is being implemented . it is meant to provide insight into the execution of the current vcp program that is still functioning until the new vccp program becomes operational sometime in june 2019 . once an eligible veteran is authorized to receive necessary treatment , including follow - up appointments and ancillary and specialty medical services , under the vcp , a veteran may receive similar services that are offered through their personalized standard medical benefits package at a va facility . va's standard medical benefits package includes ( but is not limited to ) inpatient and outpatient medical , surgical , and mental health care ; pharmaceuticals ; pregnancy and delivery services ; dental care ; and durable medical equipment , and prosthetic devices , among other things . currently , 81 categories of medical services and procedures are authorized to be provided under vcp . however , institutional long - term care and emergency care in non - va facilities are excluded from the vcp . "it is important to note that the vcp does not provide guaranteed health care coverage or an unlimited medical benefit. these services are authorized and provided under separate statutory authorities outside the scope of vcp . generally , all veterans have to be enrolled in the va health care system to receive care under the vcp . once this initial criterion is met , a qualified veteran may choose to receive care through vcp . veterans may become eligible for care under the vcp through one of four different pathways: 30-d ay w ait l ist ( wait - time eligible ) : a veteran is eligible for care through the vcp when he or she is informed , by a local va medical facility , that an appointment cannot be scheduled within 30 days of the clinically determined date of when the veteran's provider determines that he or she needs to be seen ( this category also includes care not offered at the veteran's primary va medical facility and a referral cannot be made to another va medical facility or federal facility ) , or within 30 days of the date of when the veteran wishes to be seen .