these are termed core capacity projects . the cig program is administered by the federal transit administration ( fta ) within the department of transportation ( dot ) . a new starts project ( costing $300 million or more and requesting $100 million or more ) is now limited to a cig program funding share of 60% . the cig program is one of six major funding programs administered by fta , accounting for about 19% of fta's budget ( figure 1 ) . the fast act authorized $2.3 billion per year from fy2016 through fy2020 for cig . unlike fta's other major programs , funding for cig comes from the general fund of the u.s. treasury , not the mass transit account of the highway trust fund . for this reason , cig funding is subject to appropriation each year . moreover , the cig program allocates discretionary grants to local transit agencies , whereas the other major programs apportion funding by formula . the criteria enacted in sturaa required a cig project to be based on an alternatives analysis and preliminary engineering , to be cost - effective , and to be supported by an acceptable amount of local financial commitment that is stable and dependable . in the intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of 1991 ( istea ; p.l . 102-240 ) , congress added to the cost - effectiveness criterion the justifications of mobility improvements , environmental benefits , and operating efficiencies . istea also added a list of lesser considerations such as congestion relief , energy consumption , transit supportive land use policies and future patterns , and economic development . a cig project would still need to be based on alternatives analysis and preliminary engineering , and to have an acceptable amount of local financial commitment . the transportation equity act for the 21 st century ( tea - 21 ; p.l . 105-178 ) left the existing law mostly unchanged , but added a few additional considerations such as the costs of sprawl and the technical capacity of a grantee ( usually a transit agency ) to undertake a project . tea - 21 required fta to rate projects overall as "highly recommended," "recommended," or "not recommended. tea - 21 also made it a requirement that fta formally approve a project to move from preliminary engineering into final design . fta published its final rule in response to tea - 21 in 2000 , and subsequently published several program guidance documents . the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea ; p.l . 109-59 ) changed the three - point scale , introduced in tea - 21 , to a five - point scale of high , medium - high , medium , medium - low , and low . it also elevated two factors — economic development effects and public transportation supportive land use policies and future patterns — from considerations to project justifications . safetea also created the small starts program to allow smaller projects to pass through a simpler approval process . most projects in that year were light rail ( 16 projects ) , heavy rail ( 7 ) , and commuter rail ( 4 ) .