work has continued on this proposal . congress held hearings on may 17 , 2016 , on allowing a corporate dividend paid deduction and on may 24 , 2016 , on corporate integration and debt . the focus on corporate tax integration differs from the approach in some recent tax reform plans that have largely proposed broadening the base of the corporate tax , reducing the corporate tax rate , and revising the tax treatment of foreign source income . a number of these elements were addressed in the report of a senate finance committee working group in 2015 . former chairman of the house ways and means committee dave camp introduced a corporate tax reform bill ( h.r . the partial integration options include ( 1 ) dividend deductions with and without refundability , ( 2 ) dividend exclusions , and ( 3 ) additional revenue reductions for dividend proposals if capital gains taxes are also eliminate . two proposals would clearly simplify tax administration and compliance: ( 1 ) taxing only at the corporate level ( which would eliminate all shareholder taxes ) and ( 2 ) the dividend exclusion . the various shareholder allocation and dividend deduction proposals would add to the compliance burden with additional calculations by the shareholders to claim the credit , although if taxes on capital gains could be eliminated entirely ( i.e. , gains and losses because the net gain differed from the appreciation in value due to retained earnings also not be subject to tax ) , this change might lead to overall reductions in compliance costs . the mark - to - market approach is uncertain in its impact . it would initially appear that the mark - to - market proposal would eliminate the need to measure and calculate corporate tax liability including all of the deductions and credits that make up tax preferences , as well as the ordinary requirements of measuring depreciation and other costs . for multinational firms that operate abroad , as well as u.s. subsidiaries of foreign parents , however , the corporate tax base must be calculated to address transfer pricing disputes between firms and their affiliates . 1 ) in the 113 th congress . a tax reform could combine these elements with an integration proposal . corporate tax integration was the focus of a major treasury study issued in 1992 . congress instead lowered tax rates on dividends ( which had been taxed historically at ordinary rates ) and capital gains , with a maximum rate of 15% . these 2003 provisions , along with the 2001 tax cuts , were set to expire after 2010 . after some extensions , in 2013 an agreement was reached to retain the lower tax rates on dividends and capital gains but to tax these amounts at high - income levels of 20% . additionally , in 2010 , as part of the affordable care act ( p.l . 111-148 , as amended ) , an additional 3.8% tax was imposed on investment income , including dividends and capital gains , of high - income taxpayers . several factors that are important in considering proposals have changed in the almost 25 years since the 1992 study , aside from the lower shareholder taxes that exist today .