this authority , which derived from p.l . just over 40% of all presidential major disaster declarations during this period resulted in a designation for ia . the declarations contain the designations of the areas covered ( eg , counties ) by the declaration and the types of assistance ( pa and / or ia ) available . for example , the pie chart at the top of figure 1 reflects that division of the types of assistance provided under the declarations and the example below it is a major disaster declaration for south carolina during the fall of 2015 ( dr - 4241-sc ) that illustrates how the types of assistance are mentioned within a declaration , including the designation of counties . the designations indicate the types of assistance being provided for individual counties within a state or tribal areas . both the initial county designations , and any subsequent additions , are published in the federal register . as noted earlier , the primary types of assistance provided under ihp are repairs , rental assistance and other needs assistance ( ona ) . with the exception of hurricane katrina ( which is an outlier ) , for most disasters , the majority of assistance is provided through grants for home repairs to make a home habitable . that is followed by rental assistance costs and ona payments . the use of manufactured housing is not common and is a last resort when the other housing options are not available . the figure 4 pie chart on the right ( not including katrina ) illustrates that the plurality of assistance goes to owner - occupied housing . within that category the great majority of funds ( 74% ) are expended for home repairs , rental assistance , and other needs assistance ( ona ) . however , the graphic including katrina shows a significantly smaller amount spent on repairs and a larger amount devoted to rental assistance for both renters and homeowners , reflecting the degree of damage from that event and the diaspora of survivors in rental properties across the nation . hurricane katrina damaged or destroyed a significant amount of housing stock along the gulf coast , including rental properties . this presented limited alternatives for temporary housing for disaster survivors . many disaster survivors left the area to reach available housing because open rental units were often outside the impacted area . this led to significant amounts of rental assistance payments . in the case of hurricane sandy , and in fact for most disasters , the favored option for homeowners is to repair their homes and remain in them . in evaluating the history of this topic it can be argued that disaster housing has been driven by the assumption , by both fema and its state partners , of a temporary , short - term mission . this assumption was based upon the shared experiences of most non - catastrophic disaster events . these "garden variety disasters" required minimal help to house those made homeless by the disaster event .