donee states received more than they paid . this prediction proved to be incorrect . the shortfalls resulting from the overly optimistic forecasts associated with safetea were rectified by treasury general fund contributions . in september 2008 , congress enacted a bill that transferred $8 billion of treasury general funds to shore up the htf . other transfers followed ( see table 1 ) . the era of automatic trust fund growth may be over . annual vehicle miles traveled ( vmt ) are no longer increasing at the 2% average rate experienced from the 1960s until 2008 ; although vehicle use is growing again after slumping between 2008 and 2012 due to the sluggish economy , total mileage is projected to grow at an average of roughly 1% per year over the next 20 years . meanwhile , other policy changes are weakening the link between driving activity and motor fuel tax revenues . under new rules issued in 2012 , combined new passenger car and light truck corporate average fuel economy standards are expected to reach 41.0 miles per gallon in model year 2021 and 49.7 miles per gallon in model year 2025 . this will eventually reduce the number of gallons of fuel used , although the impact in the near term will be modest . the expanding fleets of hybrid and electric vehicles , respectively , pay less or nothing by way of fuel taxes , raising equity issues that are likely to become more prominent as the electric vehicle fleet expands . an increase in the existing fuel tax rates would provide immediate relief to the trust fund . as a rule of thumb , adding a penny to federal motor fuel taxes provides the trust fund with roughly $1.5 billion to $1.7 billion per year . the prospect of reduced motor fuel consumption , however , casts doubt on the ability of the motor fuel taxes to support increased surface transportation spending beyond the next decade , even with modest increases in tax rates . the first federal tax on gasoline ( 1 cent per gallon ) was imposed in 1932 , during the hoover administration , as a deficit - reduction measure following the depression - induced fall in general revenues . the rate was raised to help pay for world war ii ( to 1.5 cents per gallon ) and raised again during the korean war ( to 2 cents per gallon ) . the highway revenue act of 1956 ( p.l . 84-627 ) established the htf and raised the rate to 3 cents per gallon to pay for the construction of the interstate highway system . the federal - aid highway act of 1959 ( p.l . 86-342 ) raised the rate to 4 cents per gallon . the gasoline tax remained at 4 cents from october 1 , 1959 , until march 31 , 1983 . during this period , revenues grew automatically from year to year as fuel consumption grew along with increases in vehicle miles traveled . since 1983 lawmakers have passed legislation raising the tax rates on highway fuel use three times . although infrequent , these rate increases were quite large in a proportional sense .