for example , after the d.c . circuit issued a stay of the cross - state air pollution rule ( csapr ) in 2011 , epa issued a final rule in february 2012 correcting errors and delaying the effective date for certain provisions of the stayed csapr rule . epa argued that the rule "is consistent with and is unaffected by the court's order staying the underlying final [csapr] . finalizing this action in and of itself does not impose any requirements on regulated units or states. president obama vetoed the resolution in december 2015 . if enacted , the resolution would have prohibited the cpp rulemaking from taking effect . more recently , the house passed h.r . 5538 ( department of the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations act , 2017 ) on july 14 , 2016 . section 495 of this bill would prohibit epa from using appropriations to "finalize , implement , administer , or enforce" the ceip proposed rule . various state and industry parties applied to the supreme court in late january 2016 for an immediate stay of the cpp final rule . in a move that surprised many observers , the supreme court issued a stay of the final rule until the legal challenges have been resolved . the first section of this report discusses the details of the ceip proposed rule . the second section discusses the legal status of the cpp and how the supreme court stay may or may not affect the ceip rulemaking developments . epa established the framework of the ceip in its cpp final rule in 2015 and published a proposed rule for the ceip in the federal register on june 30 , 2016 . the proposed rule seeks to provide additional detail , clarify certain elements that were previously outlined , and alter some of the program eligibility requirements . the ceip , as described in the proposed rule , is a voluntary program that would encourage states to support energy efficiency measures and renewable energy projects before the first cpp compliance obligations are scheduled to take effect in 2022 . under the cpp , states would submit plans to epa detailing how they would comply with state - specific interim and final targets . the cpp allows states to use either emission rate targets ( measured in pounds of co 2 emissions per megawatt - hour [mwh] of electricity generation ) or mass - based targets ( measured in tons of co 2 emissions ) . in addition , states would need to include particular design elements in their plans in order to participate in the ceip . the ceip would establish a system to award either emission rate credits or emission allowances for two categories of activities: 1 . energy efficiency and solar renewable energy projects in low - income communities , and 2 . renewable energy projects in participating states . the proposed rule altered these two categories from the ceip introduced in 2015 by adding solar power projects to the low - income community category and expanding the scope of renewable energy project types to include not only wind and solar but also geothermal and hydropower . electricity generated from nuclear power or biomass would not qualify .