and always have been . the one place that aids the defenders , the one place the mathematics is on our side , is on encryption . in that one area , we are stronger than they are. also , by employing strong cryptosystems , users can achieve a level of integrity in their data and communications . although encryption itself would not stop an adversary from intercepting and manipulating data , the altered data would not be readable by the user since the alteration would change one of the inputs ( the ciphertext ) in the cryptosystem . as a result , they would be made aware of illegitimate alterations to their data . this extra layer of security also helps to mitigate the onslaught of attacks users face every day . in the physical world , an attacker would need to be physically near its target to carry out an attack . but online , attackers can automate a coordinated attack against many targets regardless of physical location because of the interconnected nature of the public internet . encrypting data mitigates the potential attacks users may face when they connect online . the spread of ubiquitous encryption occurred faster than many other technologies were adopted . the speed at which encryption was promulgated left many end - users without the time to consider the implications of employing strong encryption for their data . if a user were to forget or otherwise lose the key , the data would remain in a ciphertext state and stay unreadable to that otherwise legitimate user . with full - disk encryption by default , users have the opportunity to encrypt data without judging the sensitivity of that data first . a user's data may be sensitive , but not require strong security . in the physical world , a user may keep a diary in a locked desk drawer , but in the digital world , that same diary may be encrypted preventing access by anyone other than that user . the implications for that level of protection are generally not considered by users when they employ encryption . strong encryption may deny otherwise - authorized users from accessing shared information , such as family photos and tax records , in the event that the user who maintains the key is not available to decrypt information . this level of security is also a contributing factor to the encryption element of the going dark debate . generally , impositions on the fourth amendment right to security of papers and effects against unreasonable searches and seizure is considered satisfied upon an independent judge issuing a warrant or other court order to access that information . fifth amendment concerns are more nuanced . the fifth amendment protects an individual's right not to be compelled to give incriminating evidence against oneself . depending on the facts of the case , this might include providing one's passcode to a locked device . in the pre - digital era , the supreme court employed a distinction between requiring an individual to disclose a safe combination , which impermissibly required the target to reveal the contents of his mind , and handing over a safe key , which did not .