forever. however , a diagnosis of ptsd in and of itself is not a disqualifying factor for the purposes of gun control under the nics improvement amendments , previous law , or current law . the veterans' medical administration has rarely submitted any disqualifying records on va medical care recipients to the fbi for inclusion in nics for any medical / psychiatric reason ( like ptsd ) . while veterans with ptsd or any other condition , who have been involuntarily committed under a state court order to a va medical facility because they posed a danger to themselves or others , are ineligible to ship , transport , receive , or possess a firearm or ammunition under federal law , the veterans' medical administration would not always make a related referral about that ineligibility to the fbi . instead , the state in which the court resides would submit the disqualifying record to the fbi , if such a submission would be appropriate and permissible under state law . should definitions related to mental incompetency in federal gun control regulations be codified or revised ? debate on the latter three issues mirrored congressional debate in the senate that followed the december 2012 , newtown , ct , mass shooting . while congress did not pass any of these proposals , congress included a provision in the 21 st century cures act ( p.l . 114-255 ) that codified certain department of veterans' affairs ( va ) procedures that address benefit claims , mental incompetency determinations , and firearms transfer and possession eligibility . for context , this report provides background on the two major federal gun control statutory frameworks: the national firearms act of 1934 ( nfa ) , as amended , and the gun control act of 1968 ( gca ) , as amended . it also provides analysis of several senate - considered amendments in the 114 th congress that would have addressed the above listed issues . the ongoing struggle between gun control and gun rights advocates has resulted in what has been described as a divisive fault line in the american body politic . gun control advocates generally view the prevalence of firearms in the united states as causing more harm than good . in their view , guns intensify violence by escalating the chances that a crime victim will die in a robbery , aggravated assault , or domestic dispute . they observe that most american gun violence involves "attacks on intimate partners," "gang and drug beefs in disadvantaged neighborhoods," and "suicides," not necessarily in that order . they observe further that there is considerable overlap between mental illness and suicide , and the use of a gun in a suicide attempt nearly always proves fatal . they contend that level of gun violence in the united states is out of line with other industrialized nations and that those nations' experience shows that progressive gun control laws have successfully reduced crime and other forms of gun violence . gun control supporters , moreover , often view the use of firearms for self - defense or to resist a tyrannical government as impractical and unnecessary , especially in countries with well - developed democratic institutions and rule of law like in the united states .