circuit . although the court denied the petitioners' motion to vacate the stay , the court is moving forward with briefing of the case and has asked the parties to address standing and mootness now that the three - month stay has expired . the final briefs in the case are due on february 26 , 2018 . the petitioners' litigation issues mirror those raised in the challenge to the 2016 oil and gas nspss stay , arguing that epa exceeded its authority under section 307 ( d ) ( 7 ) ( b ) because the agency failed to meet preconditions for mandatory reconsideration . the petitioners also claim that the stay is arbitrary and capricious because the stay of both regulations in their entirety is "overbroad" relative to the "narrow" issues under reconsiderations . although epa is reconsidering the 2016 msw landfills emission guidelines , the guidelines themselves are being challenged in court . prior to the start of the trump administration , industry trade associations and waste management and recycling companies challenged epa's 2016 revised emission guidelines for existing msw landfills in the d.c . circuit . on june 14 , 2017 , the court granted epa's request to hold the case in abeyance while the agency reviews and reconsiders the rule . although the litigation is on hold , the petitioners have submitted preliminary statements of issues that challenge epa's authority to revise emission guidelines . among the various legal arguments raised , petitioners make a unique and potentially far - reaching challenge to epa's authority to revise emission guidelines issued under section 111 ( d ) of the caa . petitioners challenging the landfill emission guidelines question whether epa has the authority to revise the 1996 emission guidelines for existing msw landfills under caa section 111 ( d ) . the core of the legal argument is whether section 111 ( d ) implicitly allows epa to revise and update emission standards . pursuant to caa section 111 ( b ) , epa is required to "at least every 8 years review and , if appropriate , revise" nspss for new , modified , and reconstructed sources . however , section 111 ( d ) does not include a similar mandated review period for emission guidelines for existing sources . epa's implementing regulations for section 111 ( d ) emission guidelines only address revisions to the agency's determination regarding adverse public health effects that may alter compliance times under the guidelines and require states to make corresponding revisions to their state plans . under the obama administration , epa asserted in the 2016 landfill emission guidelines' preamble that the agency "is not statutorily obligated to conduct a review of the emission guidelines , but has the discretionary authority to do so when circumstances indicate that it is appropriate. epa reasoned that this is a permissible interpretation of the caa , and "is consistent with the gap filling nature of section 111 ( d ) " to regulate air pollutants and sources not addressed in other sections of the caa . epa argued that it would be "illogical" for the agency to be precluded from requiring existing sources to update air pollution controls when the bser will change over time as these sources continue to operate for decades .