1253 et seq. ) the states' criteria must protect the designated use of a waterbody and be based on "sound scientific rationale. if a state adopts criteria that differ from epa's recommended criteria , the state must explain its rationale for doing so , as part of developing enforceable water quality standards that are reviewed and approved by epa . established by states and approved by epa , they define a state's water quality goals , and they result in direct requirements for dischargers because states issue enforceable discharge permits based on criteria limits in the standards . they also provide the benchmark against which states identify impaired waters and then develop plans that establish total maximum daily loads ( tmdls ) to attain the standards . water quality standards consist of narrative and numeric limits on pollutants , designated uses or goals for protection of the waterbody ( such as fishing , swimming , or public water supply ) , and antidegradation policy to maintain and protect existing uses and high - quality waters . in support of standard setting by states , epa develops risk - based water quality criteria that set a concentration for contaminants in water to ensure that public health and aquatic life will not be harmed . for most pollutants , epa develops water quality criteria to protect aquatic life and separate water quality criteria to protect human health . the latter are sometimes referred to as the potable water criteria , since they are intended to protect human health from water that is consumed directly or protect human health from exposure to contaminants that may occur as a result of consuming fish . at the same time , epa argues that it has a duty under the cwa to ensure that water quality standards adequately protect designated uses of waters and are consistent with the law . criticism of epa's actions regarding state water quality standards has increased recently . critics include affected states and organizations representing major dischargers that are directly affected by adoption of stringent water quality criteria . one such organization is the national association of clean water administrators ( nacwa ) , whose members include public wastewater treatment agencies . in a december 2015 letter commenting on epa's proposed federal water criteria for washington state , nacwa criticized "epa's tactics of influence and intimidation," which the organization said "are inconsistent with the cwa's cooperative federalism foundation and history that provides the states the responsibility for developing and approving water quality standards. in a separate letter concerning idaho's development of revised water quality criteria , nacwa observed that epa's engagement with states before formal criteria are submitted is intended to influence the content of state proposals . "whether due to a lack of resources or political will , states have often succumbed to this 'informal' pressure from epa and made revisions to their rules , even if the changes were counter to the state's policy and risk choice positions. other critics contend that epa's recommended national human health criteria are based on extreme and unrealistic assumptions , reflecting compounded conservatism , and that the agency has gone beyond the national criteria in its discussions with maine and the pacific northwest states .