location , iii . source , or iv . they might even act on these beliefs . for example , it has been reported that the sermons of anwar al awlaki were instrumental in influencing the ideology of certain individuals accused of terrorist activities , including the perpetrators of the san bernardino shooting and the boston marathon bombers . awlaki was a u.s. citizen who was targeted and killed by a drone strike on foreign soil . awlaki left behind numerous digital videos on websites like youtube of himself preaching his interpretation of the islamic faith . some of his videos expound upon less controversial topics such as respect for the holy month of ramadan , the nature of marriage , or the relationship between islam and jesus christ . however , other videos depict awlaki exhorting his followers never to trust a non - muslim ; that muslims are at war with the united states ; and , in a video entitled "call to jihad," that "it is every muslim's religious duty to kill americans. it was messages like these , particularly the "call to jihad," that reportedly motivated the san bernardino and boston marathon attackers . more broadly , the islamic state organization has been known to use popular internet services such as twitter and youtube to disseminate videos of its fighters executing prisoners , claim credit for organizing terrorist attacks such as the attack that occurred in paris in november of 2015 , and recruit new members to their cause . is personnel also disseminate high - quality electronic publications encouraging supporters to conduct violent attacks in their communities . members of hamas and al shabaab have reportedly used facebook and twitter to disseminate their ideology as well . one recent study estimated that over 30,000 accounts on twitter were controlled by the islamic state organization alone as of 2014 . the media arm of al shabaab used twitter to claim credit for the terrorist attack on the westgate shopping mall in nairobi , kenya , and distribute information and pictures of the attack while it remained ongoing . speech advocating violence and terrorism is prohibited by the terms of service of twitter , facebook , and other social media outlets . sites like twitter reportedly have increased their efforts to disable accounts that are associated with terrorist groups or the advocacy of terrorist ideologies . however , these efforts have not been wholly successful . when one account is disabled , another might soon appear to replace it . many policymakers , including some members of congress , have expressed concern about the influence the speech of terrorist groups and the speech of others who advocate terrorism can have on those who view or read it . some policymakers have expressed particular concern regarding the ease by which persons who might otherwise not have been exposed to the ideology or recruitment efforts of terrorist entities may become radicalized . these concerns raise the question of whether it would be permissible for the federal government to restrict or prohibit the publication and distribution of speech that advocates the commission of terrorist acts when that speech appears on the internet .