satellites . president george h.w . bush suspended export licenses for satellites contracted to be launched in china after the tiananmen square crackdown in 1989 , an action re - enforced by congress a few months later when it enacted the tiananmen square sanctions in 1990 . the restriction remains in law but was waived on a case - by - case basis by presidents george h.w . bush and clinton , who each found it in the u.s. national interest to do so . following several controversial issuances of export licenses for satellites during the clinton administration , the president has been required , since 1998 , to provide a detailed description and justification of each waiver applicable to satellites or related items . the state department suspended the processing of export licenses for satellites to china in february 2000 . each year since fy2002 , congress has enacted legislation to require 15-days advance notification of any licensing for export to china of satellites or satellite components . proliferation - related sanctions . china is a party to the nuclear nonproliferation treaty , a signatory to the comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty ( though it has not ratified this ) , the chemical weapons convention , and the biological weapons convention . it is a member of the zangger committee ( pertaining to nuclear trade ) , and has issued export control regulations to demonstrate its commitment to follow the guidelines of the missile technology control regime . nonetheless , entities and individuals in china have been found to be in violation of u.s. laws pertaining to proliferation of weapons of mass destruction . over the years , chinese entities and individuals have been linked to sales or transfers of controlled nuclear and missile technology to iran , north korea , libya , syria , and pakistan . as a result of violating u.s. laws intended to staunch international proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , the charged chinese entities have been denied u.s. government contracts relating to missile equipment or technology ( unlikely to occur in any event ) ; licenses to transfer controlled materials ( also unlikely in any circumstance ) ; the right to import any products into the united states ; u.s. government sales or transfers of items controlled on the usml ; access to u.s. foreign assistance' ; and any u.s. ( government or commercial ) sales or transfers of dual - use items on the ccl ( for which china is already heavily restricted ) . depending on the goods or services traded or transferred , sanctions are imposed for one year , two , or indefinitely . chinese entities on which such sanctions have been imposed in the several years are listed in appendix b . a number of chinese entities and individuals are designated by the department of the treasury's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) as specially designated nationals ( sdn ) for purposes of sanctions regimes relating to weapons proliferation , international terrorism , and illicit narcotics trafficking .