how much would this cost ? each of these topics is discussed in more detail below . the department of defense plans further reductions in the size of the army , proposing a fy2018 end strength of 450,000 . to reconcile competing interpretations and judgments about the proper size of the army , congress may gather additional information from the army and outside experts . some key questions congress may pose to them include include the following . although the international security environment is arguably becoming more challenging and complex , the role of ground forces — relative to other services — in helping the nation meet those challenges is somewhat unclear . what are the tasks that the army , specifically , needs to accomplish for the nation ? within a coalition context ? on behalf of the other u.s. military services ? compounding matters , the united states has a somewhat precarious track record when attempting to predict the type and character of future conflicts . what might an agile army force structure , capable of more rapidly adapting to future security challenges , look like ? at present , it is not known what types of new units the army would create should it be provided with additional end strength , making it difficult to assess the benefit of any additional strength . what would the army do with additional end strength ? would it build new units and , if so , what types ? would it augment existing units and , if so , in what ways ? how would these units enhance the capabilities or capacity of the army to perform essential missions ? what existing capability gaps would be addressed ? how quickly would the army be able to field these new or augmented units ? how would such plans coincide with or conflict with congressional priorities for army force structure ? additional military personnel generates costs beyond their pay and benefits . when combined into units , they require additional funding for training , operations , equipment , maintenance , and travel so they can effectively conduct their designated mission . what additional resources would be associated with creating new units or augmenting existing units — for example , equipment , training , facilities , and funding ? is there excess equipment that can be used or would there also be a requirement to procure new equipment and major weapon systems ? how long would it take to equip and train new units ? the number of military personnel also affects the cost of the military . more personnel require additional funding for their pay and benefits ; combined into units , they require additional funding for training , operations , equipment , maintenance , and travel . the number of military personnel also has a long - term impact on the cost of veterans benefits . the house and senate versions of the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fy2017 authorized differing levels for active duty personnel in each of the services , but these authorizations diverge most significantly with respect to the army .