appendix a . major laws on biologics regulation in general , biological products are regulated ( licensed for marketing ) under the public health service act — originally by the national institutes of health ( nih ) and its precursors and later , starting in 1972 , by the fda — and chemical drugs are regulated ( approved for marketing ) under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act — by the fda . a study by stevens et al . published in 2011 claims to be more comprehensive than these earlier investigations . the stevens study found that of the 1,541 drugs approved by fda from 1990 through 2007 , 143 , or 9.3% , resulted from work conducted in publicly funded labs . of the total 1,541 drug applications , fda granted priority review to 348 applications , and 66 of these ( 19% ) resulted from publicly funded research . the authors state that "viewed from another perspective , 46.2% of the new - drug applications from psris [public - sector research institutions] received priority reviews , as compared with 20.0% of applications that were based purely on private - sector research , an increase by a factor of 2.3. . an fda designation of priority review is for "the evaluation of applications for drugs that , if approved , would be significant improvements in the safety or effectiveness of the treatment , diagnosis , or prevention of serious conditions when compared to standard applications. according to the authors , their data "suggest that psris tend to discover drugs that are expected to have a disproportionately important clinical effect. the 2011 stevens study considered a psri "to have participated in the applied phase of research that led to discovery of a drug if it , solely or jointly , created intellectual property specific to the drug that was subsequently transferred to a company through a commercial license. it is important to understand that the methodology used by the stevens study "excluded the role of psris in the development of platform technologies that have contributed to the development of whole new classes of drugs. for example , the following platform technologies were all developed with public funds and were excluded from the study: recombinant dna technology ( cohen - boyer patents ) ; bacterial production methods for recombinant dna ( riggs - itakura patents ) ; production and chimerization methods for antibodies ( cabilly patents ) ; methods to produce glycosylated recombinant proteins in mammalian cells ( axel patents ) ; and methods of gene silencing with the use of small interfering rnas ( mello - fire patents ) . although these platform technologies enabled the development of many of the products approved by fda during the period evaluated in the study , they were excluded "because the psri scientists who developed the platforms generally did not use them to develop specific drug candidates. however , without these platform technologies , many new drugs would not have been developed , resulting perhaps in a vastly different economic outlook for the pharmaceutical industry . according to the stevens et al. , 2011 publication , the 36 biologic drugs listed in table 6 were "discovered at least in part by psris during the past 40 years.