congress denied the request both times . congress expressed concern that the npgp had not been authorized by congress , lacked sufficient detail regarding the implementation of the program , and lacked sufficient stakeholder participation in the development of the proposal . the administration proposed the npgp once again in fy2015 budget request . the administration indicated that its latest proposal included adjustments that responded to congressional concerns . would program consolidation improve domestic security ? finally , does the purpose and number of assistance programs affect the administration of the grants ? empg is an example of an all - hazards assistance program . terrorism preparedness - focused programs allow recipients to obligate and fund activities to prepare for , respond to , and recover from terrorist incidents . shsg is an example of a terrorism preparedness - focused program . does the number of individual grant programs result in coordination challenges and deficient preparedness at the state and local level ? an all - hazards assistance program allows recipients to obligate and fund activities to prepare for , respond to , and recover from almost any emergency regardless of type or reason , which includes man - made ( accidental or intentional ) and natural disasters . the majority of disasters and emergencies that have occurred since september 11 , 2001 , have been natural disasters from everyday floods and tornadoes , to major incidents such as hurricane katrina . however , the majority of homeland security assistance funding to states and localities has been appropriated to programs dedicated to preparing for and responding to terrorist attacks . a dhs fact sheet regarding homeland security presidential directive 8 states that federal preparedness assistance is intended primarily to support state and local efforts to build capacity to address major ( or catastrophic ) events , especially terrorism . in july 2005 , the government accountability office ( gao ) stated that emergency response capabilities for terrorism , as well as man - made and natural disasters , are similar for response and recovery activities , but differ for preparedness . the similarity is associated with first responder actions following a disaster that are focused on immediately saving lives and mitigating the effects of the disaster . preparing for a hurricane , or any natural disaster , by comparison is markedly different than preparing for a terrorist attack . preparing for or preventing a terrorist attack includes such activities as installing security barriers and conducting counter - intelligence , whereas preparing for a natural disaster involves a different set of functions such as planning for evacuations or stockpiling equipment , food , and water . gao stated that legislation and presidential directives related to emergencies and disasters following the september 2001 terrorist attacks emphasize terrorism preparedness . one way potentially to address the issue of all - hazards versus terrorism preparedness is to consolidate these grants into a single block grant program . if a block grant were authorized and appropriated by congress , states and localities may be allowed to identify the individual threats and risks that are unique to their location .