some presidential proclamations of national monuments have been controversial . — the president may reserve parcels of land as a part of the national monuments . the limits of the parcels shall be confined to the smallest area compatible with the proper care and management of the objects to be protected . courts have expansively interpreted presidential authority to declare national monuments under the antiquities act . use of the antiquities act was challenged after president theodore roosevelt issued a proclamation declaring more than 800,000 acres around the grand canyon to be a national monument . in cameron v. united states , decided in 1920 , the supreme court held that the antiquities act broadly empowered the president "to establish reserves embracing 'objects of historic or scientific interest. the grand canyon , as stated in his proclamation , 'is an object of unusual scientific interest.' the court did not consider the size of the monument disqualifying . subsequent cases also have upheld presidential proclamations designating national monuments and have affirmed the antiquities act's broad application . the antiquities act is silent as to procedures to create a national monument , stating only that the president shall "declare" one by "public proclamation. because the antiquities act involves action by the president , presidential designation of a national monument does not trigger the procedures usually required for agency actions under the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) ; the president lies outside of nepa's definition of a "federal agency. the overriding management goal for all national monuments is protection of the objects described in the proclamations . limitations or prohibitions on certain uses may be included in the proclamations themselves , in management plans developed by the agencies to govern monument lands , in agency policies , or in other sources . recent proclamations under the antiquities act have stated , among other provisions , that federal lands reserved as national monuments are "hereby appropriated and withdrawn from all forms of entry , location , selection , sale , or other disposition under the public land laws , from location , entry , and patent under the mining laws , and from disposition under all laws relating to mineral and geothermal leasing," or similar language , "subject to valid existing rights. the question has arisen whether a president lawfully could revoke or substantially modify a previously designated national monument . at first glance , it would appear that this question may be answered in the affirmative: there is no clear distinction between proclamations and executive orders , and presidents generally have authority to revoke , modify , or supersede their own executive orders and proclamations or those issued by predecessors . however , because the authority for national monument proclamations is provided by a specific statute , the authority to revoke such proclamations has been interpreted to be more limited . congress can establish national monuments on federal land primarily pursuant to its authority under the property clause of the u.s. constitution , which states: "the congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the united states. congress has created several dozen specific national monuments .