the house bill ( h.r . 5398 ) would have provided $73 million for these purposes , of which not less than $25 million would have been for grants for purposes addressed in p.l . the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l . 115-31 ) includes $73 million for these purposes , including the $25 million set aside for the grant programs established by p.l . for fy2017 , the obama administration requested $10 million for the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) to sponsor research into preventing and ameliorating gun violence . although the budget request uses the term "violence," cdc's stated intent was to use the funds "to address gaps in knowledge about firearm injury prevention," which were identified in a report prepared by the institute of medicine and national research council in 2013 following the newtown , ct , mass shooting in december 2012 . for fy2013 , congress included words of futurity ( "for any fiscal year thereafter" ) in this provision , which appear to have been intended to make it permanent law . as part of its fy2014 , fy2015 , and fy2016 budget request , the obama administration requested that this proviso be repealed . the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l . based on this report , cdc stated that the research to be funded would have addressed questions related to "youth access to firearms , risk factors for firearm violence , and risks and benefits of firearms ownership , among other issues. the obama administration made similar requests for fy2014 , fy2015 , and fy2016 , but congress did not appropriate funding for these purposes . for fy1997 and every fiscal year thereafter , congress has attached a provision to departments of labor , health and human services ( hhs ) , and education appropriations prohibiting the use of appropriated funds to "advocate or promote gun control. on june 14 , 1996 , during subcommittee markup of the fy1997 labor , hhs , and education appropriations bill ( h.r . 3755 ) , representative jay dickey offered an amendment that would have redirected $2.6 million in funding away from a cdc program that had previously funded research on the risks of gun death and injury associated with gun ownership . although the dickey amendment was not approved , the subcommittee gave voice vote approval to an alternative amendment by the committee chair , representative robert livingston . this amendment read , "provided further , that none of the funds made available for injury prevention and control at the centers for disease control and prevention may be used to advocate or promote gun control. although this language was not offered by representative dickey , it has become known as the "dickey" amendment . the explanatory statement accompanying h.r . 244 , submitted by the house committee on appropriations chair , representative rodney frelinghuysen , indicated that p.l . 115-31 included $511.3 million for cjis , and that this funding supports fully the cjis programs , including nics . congress has appropriated funding to improve criminal history recordkeeping under a doj - administered grant program known as the national criminal history improvement program . this program was originally authorized under the 1993 brady act ( p.l .