litigation in some states continues . recent rulings in michigan , north carolina , ohio , and texas are illustrative examples . although the 2016 presidential election is drawing near , state election laws have been subject to recent changes by the courts . decisions such as those evaluating laws in north carolina and texas , while still in the nascent stages , signal a willingness by the courts to hold that state election laws violate section 2 of the vra . as section 2 has generally been invoked in the context of redistricting , this is a relatively new application of the law . therefore , the attendant case law is just beginning to develop . likewise , questions of whether specific voter photo id laws comply with the fourteenth amendment equal protection clause and the vra continue to be answered . although the supreme court upheld the constitutionality of an indiana voter photo id law in 2008 against a facial challenge , some courts have concluded that other state laws are distinguishable from the indiana law or have evaluated such laws under section 2 of the vra . it is possible that the supreme court may ultimately decide to revisit this issue . the elections clause of the u.s. constitution provides to the states the initial and principal authority to administer elections within their jurisdictions . as a result of this decentralized authority , there is significant variation among the states as to how the voting process and elections are administered . for example , states have enacted differing laws addressing whether and to what degree voters can cast ballots prior to the day of an election , known as early voting ; the types of identification required to cast a ballot , including voter photo id requirements ; and voter registration procedures , such as whether to permit registration on the same day as an election . in addition , congress has enacted specific overriding federal laws , including the voting rights act and the national voter registration act , with which states must comply in administering the election process . as the november 8 , 2016 , presidential election draws near , various court rulings have invalidated , enjoined , or required modification to several state election laws . this report begins by setting forth key constitutional provisions relevant to recent state election law challenges . next , it discusses federal statutory provisions contained in the voting rights act and the national voter registration act , which have been invoked in recent cases , and briefly examines pertinent supreme court precedent . then , based on that legal framework , it provides an overview of several recent challenges to state election laws in michigan , north carolina , ohio , and texas that resulted in major decisions by the various federal courts of appeals as illustrative examples of the types of challenges that have been playing out in the courts . finally , the report discusses some potential implications of these challenges . although presidential and congressional elections have national impact , they are primarily administered by state laws . in some cases , litigation is still ongoing .