some tasks have already begun . the "ad hoc working group on the pa" ( apa ) met for the first time in may 2016 in bonn , germany . the first session of the cop , serving as the meeting of the parties to the pa ( cma 1 ) , was also held in marrakech , morocco , in november 2016 , a few days after the agreement entered into force on november 4 , 2016 . ( see question above , " how did the pa enter into force ? " many parties advocate for quick decisions by the cma on numerous topics identified in the work program decided in november 2016 . the main elements include: ndcs adaptation communications transparency framework for action and support the global stocktake the mechanism to facilitate implementation and compliance the adaptation fund the public registry / registries for ndcs and adaptation communications periodic assessments of the technology mechanism cooperative approaches under pa article 6 ; and accounting for financial resources provided and mobilized . ( see appendix , "schedule for some key tasks under the pa." ) many of those activities will require sensitive negotiations over issues that were controversial in the lead - up to the pa. a complete list of tasks arising from the decision to adopt the pa is available from the unfccc secretariat . some highlights of the tasks: the cma is to develop guidance on the information to be submitted in ndcs so that they are clear , transparent , and comparable . the secretariat established a public , interim ndc registry containing ndcs communicated by parties . the cma is tasked with agreeing on guidance to ensure measurement of pa parties' performance on their ndcs . elements of this guidance may consider criteria in the pa that ndcs should promote environmental integrity , transparency , accuracy , completeness , comparability , and consistency and avoid double counting . countries were invited to communicate , by 2020 , their mid - century , long - term low ghg emission development strategies . the executive committee of the warsaw mechanism was charged with reviewing work in september 2016 to develop recommendations for integrated approaches to avert , minimize , and address displacement of people related to the adverse impacts of climate , and for a repository for information on insurance and risk transfer to help parties develop and implement comprehensive risk management strategies . associated with "cooperative approaches," the subsidiary body for scientific and technological advice under the unfccc is tasked with developing guidance for market - based systems that the pa recognizes will be used by parties to meet their ndcs . the bodies will also develop a work program for considering other cooperative approaches , including non - market - based approaches , to ghg emissions reductions . the adaptation committee under the cop must develop methods to recognize the adaptation efforts of developing countries and for communication of parties' priorities , implementation , support needs , plans , and actions and for recording them in a registry maintained by the secretariat . the cma will , in the 2020s , negotiate to set a new collective , quantified goal for climate finance by 2025 .