appendix a . idea , part b age ranges appendix b . commonly used acronym . prior to the enactment of p.l . 108-446 in 2004 , the maximum amount a state could receive under the part b grants - to - states program was based on 40% of the national appe multiplied by the number of children with disabilities the state serves . 108-446 changed the method of calculating the maximum amount of states' grants . a state's maximum grant amount for purposes of calculating "full funding" differs from the maximum grant level calculation performed in years when the idea part b appropriation has increased , as described earlier in this report . the maximum grant level calculation described earlier is used in years when the most common funding scenario occurs — idea part b appropriations increase but remain below the full funding level . in contrast , the maximum amount of each state's grant for the purposes of full funding would only be calculated in a year when idea part b was fully funded . the most recent reauthorization was p.l . 108-446 set a new calculation to determine the maximum amount of state grants under full funding . beginning in fy2007 and used for all subsequent fiscal years , the maximum amount of state grants for the purposes of full funding has been calculated as 40% of appe multiplied by the number of children with disabilities the state served in school year 2004-2005 , and then adjusted by the annual rates of change in the state's population in the age range comparable to ages for which the state provides fape for children with disabilities ( 85% of the adjustment ) and in the state's population of children living in poverty in the same age range ( 15% of the adjustment ) . that is , a state's maximum grant amount or full funding level under the part b grant - to - states program is 40% of appe multiplied by the number of children with disabilities served and adjusted for each state's annual changes in child population and poverty rate . prior to the enactment of p.l . 108-446 , the idea authorized "such sums as may be necessary" for the part b grants - to - states program . in response to debate over how and when to reach full funding for the idea , p.l . 108-446 ( §611 ( i ) ) amended the act to include several years of specific authorization levels , which culminated in an amount estimated to provide each state with its maximum grant amount in fy2011 . the part b grants - to - states program was not appropriated the amounts authorized by p.l . 108-446 and did not obtain full funding in fy2011 . the idea was intended to help states and leas increase overall educational spending , rather than substituting federal funds for education spending at the state and local levels . the grants to states made under part b may only be used to pay for the excess costs of providing special education and related services to students with disabilities and may not replace state or local funding .