congress did not direct fra to do so . many members of congress have objected to funding for both the california high - speed rail corridor project and amtrak's northeast corridor improvement project ; politically , both projects face a challenge in that their direct benefits are limited to relatively few states . similar political considerations may pose an obstacle to future congressional support for high - speed rail . 110-432 ) in the fall of 2008 . priia , which reauthorized amtrak , included language authorizing the first federal grants to states to develop intercity passenger rail service . two grant programs for helping states finance rail facilities , infrastructure , and equipment were authorized at a total of $2.225 billion over five years . this legislation was passed after a number of states expressed interest in expanding intercity passenger rail operations . president barack obama , who took office in january 2009 , proposed spending on high - speed rail projects as part of a larger economic stimulus program to address a deep recession . congress approved the passenger rail program in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l . 111-5 ) , which appropriated $8 billion for grants to states to develop high - speed and intercity passenger rail services . in april 2009 , two months after the passage of arra , the president declared that development of high - speed rail ( hsr ) was a priority for his administration and said he would ask congress to appropriate an additional $1 billion annually for that purpose . this priority was reflected in the fy2010 department of transportation appropriations act ( division a , title i , p.l . 111-117 ) , in which congress appropriated $2.5 billion for high - speed and intercity passenger rail grants to states . since that time , congress has not appropriated further amounts for the hsipr program , although the administration has repeatedly requested billions of dollars in additional funding for intercity passenger rail development . indeed , the 112 th congress rescinded $400 million previously appropriated for this purpose . in december 2015 congress reauthorized federal surface transportation programs in the fixing america's surface transportation ( fast ) act ( p.l . the act authorized $2.2 billion for grants to states and rail carriers for improving intercity passenger and freight rail transportation systems , in addition to funding for amtrak . however , this funding was authorized from the general fund , not from dedicated funds , and whether any of the funding is actually appropriated will be determined by congress through the annual department of transportation ( dot ) appropriations acts . for fy2016 , the fast act authorized $200 million for such grants , but congress did not appropriate any funding for this purpose . table 1 provides a detailed chronology of recent congressional actions to support new or improved intercity passenger rail service . fra in dot has primary responsibility for federal grants for passenger rail projects . the fra had primarily been a rail safety regulatory agency throughout its history , with virtually no experience in grantmaking until september 2008 , when it awarded the $30 million congress appropriated for grants in fy2008 .