what rules govern casework ? casework is not required of members of congress , but it is commonly expected by constituents . some constituents may view a member's office as the best point of a contact for assistance with the federal government . it appears that each member office today provides some type of casework , reflecting a broadly held understanding among members and their staff that casework is integral to the representational duties of a member of congress . some also believe that casework activities can be part of an outreach strategy to build political support among constituents . casework may also be viewed as an evaluative stage of the legislative process . some observers suggest that casework inquiries afford members the opportunity to evaluate whether a program is functioning as congress intended . often , federal agencies have designated legislative affairs or congressional relations staff assigned as general points of contact for congressional caseworkers . many of these contacts are listed in crs report 98-446 , congressional liaison offices of selected federal agencies . constituent inquiries about specific policies , programs , or benefits may also suggest areas in which programs or policies require additional oversight , or further legislative consideration . federal statute prohibits members of congress , chamber officers , and congressional staff from representing anyone before the federal government , except in the performance of their official duties . house and senate rules and federal law also prohibit ex parte , or off - the - record , communications with agency employees reasonably expected to be involved in case adjudication . generally , a member of congress may do the following on behalf of eligible individuals seeking their assistance , under house and senate guidelines: request information or a status report ; urge prompt consideration ; arrange for interviews or appointments ; express judgments ; call for reconsideration of an administrative response that the member believes is not reasonably supported by statutes , regulations , or considerations of equity or public policy ; or perform any other service of a similar nature consistent with the provisions of the rules of the house or senate . under the privacy act of 1974 , executive branch agencies cannot share records containing an individual's personally identifiable information with any outside entity unless that individual has authorized the release of that information . agencies may request a particular format or types of information on a privacy act release . requests involving medical information might require an additional waiver , pursuant to rules promulgated under the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) . because casework is often viewed as a representational activity , the primary recipients of an office's casework services are usually considered to be individual constituents residing within a house member's district , or a senator's state . yet there are reasons why other persons or entities might seek assistance from a member's office . for example , foreign - born individuals seeking to immigrate to the united states may contact a member of congress for assistance . a family member or other concerned party outside of a member's district may contact an office on behalf of a resident constituent .