these are often referred to as "anomalies. the purpose of anomalies is to preserve congress's constitutional prerogative to provide appropriations in the manner it sees fit , even in instances when only short - term funding is provided . second , certain provisions may have the effect of creating new law or changing existing law . most typically , these provisions are used to renew expiring provisions of law or extend the scope of certain existing statutory requirements to the funds provided in the cr . substantive provisions that establish major new policies have also been included on occasion . unless otherwise indicated , such provisions are temporary in nature and expire when the cr sunsets . these anomalies and provisions that change law may be included at the request of the president . congress could accept , reject , or modify these proposals in the course of drafting and considering appropriations measures that provide continuing appropriations . in addition , congress may identify or initiate any other anomalies and provisions changing law that they want to be included in the cr . this section of the report summarizes provisions in this cr that are agency - , account - , or program - specific , alphabetically organized by appropriations act title for 10 of the 11 regular appropriations acts covered in section 101 ( there are no anomalies concerning items funded in the state foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act ) , as well as a provision directing the use of fy2017 advance appropriations provided in the medical services account of the fy2016 military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies appropriations act ( p.l . 114-113 , division j ) for the jason simcakoski memorial and promise act ( title ix of the comprehensive addiction and recovery act of 2016 , p.l . the summaries generally provide brief explanations of the provisions . in some cases they include additional information , such as whether a provision was requested by the president or included in prior year crs . for additional information on specific provisions in the cr , congressional clients may contact the crs appropriations experts listed in table 1 at the end of the report . the "duration" of a cr refers to the period of time for which budget authority is provided for covered activities . crs usually fund projects and activities using a "rate for operations" or "funding rate" to provide budget authority at a restricted level , but they do not prescribe a specified dollar amount . the funding rate for a project or activity is based on the total amount of budget authority that would be available annually for that project or activity under the referenced appropriations acts and is prorated based on the fraction of a year for which the cr is in effect . in addition to the general provisions that establish the coverage , duration , and rate , crs typically include provisions that are specific to certain agencies , accounts , or programs . a cr's "coverage" relates to the purposes for which funds are provided . none of the fy2017 regular appropriations bills was enacted prior to the enactment of h.r .