the house passed h.r . 3875 , the department of homeland security cbrne defense act of 2015 , which would restructure the dhs cbrne activities consistent with the structure in the budget request . the senate has not passed a similar bill . 3875 , the new office would be headed by an assistant secretary and have the mission "to coordinate , strengthen , and provide chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear , and explosives ( cbrne ) capabilities in support of homeland security. the house appropriation bill followed the structure of the president's request and h.r . the biowatch program deploys sensors in more than 30 u.s. cities to detect the possible aerosol release of a bioterrorism pathogen , in order that medications could be distributed before exposed individuals became ill. operation of biowatch accounts for most of oha's budget . the program had sought for several years to deploy more sophisticated autonomous sensors that could detect airborne pathogens in a few hours , rather than the day or more that is currently required . however , after several years of unsuccessful efforts to procure a replacement for the existing system , dhs announced the termination of further procurement activities in april 2014 . the administration requested $82 million for biowatch , approximately the same amount as was provided in fy2016 . the senate committee recommended $12 million ( 14.6% ) less than the requested amount for biowatch for fy2017 . it recommended redirecting this $12 million to the s&t directorate to "speed the development of a new bio - detection technology" rather than funding the "recapitalization , training , and other support activities of the current system. the house committee recommended providing the requested amounts for biowatch for fy2017 , including $1 million to support the replacement and recapitalization of current generation biowatch equipment . however , the committee expressed concern about the effectiveness of the current system and dhs progress towards improving this system . the committee directed dhs to "more clearly articulate future technology requirements for the program to the private sector and innovators who are being called upon to help address those needs. the senate has not passed a similar bill . proponents of such a reorganization suggest that consolidating cbrne activities would create a stronger focus within the department and improve interagency and interdepartmental coordination for these activities . fletc employs approximately 1,100 personnel . the s&t directorate is the primary dhs organization for research and development ( r&d ) . led by a senate - confirmed under secretary for science and technology , it performs r&d in several laboratories of its own and funds r&d performed by the department of energy national laboratories , industry , universities , and others . it also conducts testing and other technology - related activities in support of other dhs components . the president's budget request proposed consolidating several offices and activities into a new chemical , biological , radiological , nuclear , and explosives office .