what are the implications of any such changes ? if provisions in the senate - passed version of the fy2017 ndaa were enacted , would it be feasible for dod to implement those provisions within timeframes required by the legislation ? what would be the implications of delays ? how might reforms strengthen or weaken congressional policymaking control and oversight of security cooperation , including implications for committee jurisdiction over such matters ? to what extent should congress place limits ( temporal , geographic , human rights - related , etc. ) on dod's ability to provide assistance to foreign security forces ? to what extent do such restrictions support , or impede , congressional oversight ? in addition to appropriations decisions and funding constraints in the near - term , the next administration's management and execution of security sector assistance could be affected by future national - level and agency - specific policy decisions . 4420 ) to the bill . although the amendment was ultimately tabled and no further action was taken prior to s. 2943 's passage , it signaled several foreign policy concerns in the legislation . proponents of security cooperation proposals in the fy2017 ndaa argue that changes are necessary to provide for flexible and robust dod - led security cooperation authorities that will better serve u.s. strategic and military objectives than the current policy architecture . dod's deputy assistant secretary of defense for security cooperation , for example , has argued that defense security cooperation should be viewed as a core element of military strategy , as it contributes specifically ( 1 ) to mitigating u.s. security risks by enabling partners to operate in coalition with the u.s. military or independently against shared objectives , ( 2 ) to deterring adversaries , and ( 3 ) to setting theater conditions that enable successful u.s. military operations . sasc has insisted , meanwhile , that its security cooperation provisions in s. 2943 are intended to improve dod and state department integration on security cooperation efforts . according to sasc , s. 2943 could also address other critiques of dod's current security cooperation programs and activities , through its provisions to professionalize the security cooperation workforce and provide more tools for dod to manage its security cooperation programs , including multi - year funding and authority to sustain capacity - building efforts . on july 8 , 2016 , the fy2017 ndaa went to conference amid pressure from various stakeholders to reconcile disparate viewpoints on security cooperation reform . while the conference report is not yet released , it is expected to be brought before the house and senate during the lame duck session . the implementation of changes to dod's security cooperation authorities may be affected by near - term appropriations decisions . security cooperation programs and activities are currently funded through december 9 , 2016 , under the continuing appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l . the house version of the fy2017 dod appropriations ( h.r . 5293 ) , which passed the house on june 16 , 2016 , does not include reference to funding for s. 2943 's scef or any additional changes to dod's security cooperation authorities , programs or activities .