, selectees ) . in 2001 , the aviation and transportation security act ( p.l . 107-71 ) authorized tsa to "establish requirements to implement trusted passenger programs and use available technologies to expedite the security screening of passengers who participate in such programs , thereby allowing security screening personnel to focus on those passengers who should be subject to more extensive screening. esta draws on records from the tsbd . in november 2014 , dhs responded to concerns regarding terrorists entering the united states from vwp countries by expanding the information collected from vwp travelers through esta . what about travelers from visa waiver program ( vwp ) countries where their citizens do not need visas to travel to the united states ? in implementing the vwp , cbp uses the electronic system for travel authorization ( esta ) , a security vetting tool , to review prospective travelers from visa waiver countries "to determine if they pose a law enforcement or security risk before they board aircraft destined for the united states. dhs has stated that esta has been a "highly effective security and vetting tool" enabling "dhs to deny travel under the vwp to thousands of prospective travelers who may pose a risk to the united states [presumably endangering national security or public safety] , prior to those individuals boarding a u.s. bound aircraft. however , since esta is a biographic and not a biometric security check and there is no interview by a consular officer , some contend that esta does not provide the same level of screening as a visa application . in addition to the enhancements of esta data elements discussed above , in 2015 dhs boosted the security criteria that countries "must meet to participate in the vwp. also , in december 2015 congress passed legislation requiring changes to the vwp . among other changes , the legislation established new eligibility requirements for the vwp which , as implemented , modified what data were to be collected from travelers via esta . furthermore , as of april 2016 all foreign travelers participating in the vwp have to use e - passports . tsa has initiated a number of risk - based passenger screening initiatives to focus its resources and apply directed measures based on intelligence - driven assessments of security risk . these efforts involve identifying known threats to aviation by comparing passenger names and birthdates to the no fly and selectee lists , and potentially the expanded selectee list , to deny boarding to no fly matches and apply enhanced screening processes to selectees . it also involves identifying low - risk travelers who can be routinely granted expedited physical screening so that tsa screening resources can be focused on passengers of unknown risk that tsa has no information about and on passengers that pose an elevated risk ( i.e. a cornerstone of tsa's risk - based initiatives created under this authority is the precheck program . precheck is tsa's latest version of a trusted traveler program . under precheck , participants vetted through a background check process ( including screening against terrorist watchlist information ) are processed through expedited screening lanes where they can keep shoes on and keep liquids and laptops inside carry - on bags .