appendix b . history of criminal alien removal programs in 1986 , with passage of the immigration reform and control act ( p.l . 99-603 ) , congress made deporting aliens who had been convicted of certain crimes a formal enforcement priority . the law required the attorney general "in the case of an alien who is convicted of an offense which makes the alien subject to deportation … [to] begin any deportation proceeding as expeditiously as possible after the date of the conviction. the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) established a pair of programs in 1988 to comply with this requirement: the institutional removal program ( irp ) and the alien criminal apprehension program ( acap ) . the programs forged partnerships with corrections facilities to identify deportable aliens convicted of crimes before their release from prison . they also worked with the department of justice's executive office for immigration review ( eoir ) to initiate deportation proceedings against aliens serving sentences for deportable offenses during their period of incarceration . the irp and acap initially focused on aggravated felons , a class of serious criminal aliens created in immigration law by the anti - drug abuse act of 1988 ( p.l . 100-690 ) and enumerated in §101 ( a ) ( 43 ) of the ina . the anti - drug abuse act defined aggravated felonies to include aliens convicted of murder , drug trafficking , or illegal trafficking in firearms or destructive devices . between 1990 and 1996 , congress enacted a series of measures that expanded the definition of aggravated felons and created additional criminal grounds for removal . the mandates of the irp and acap likewise expanded to include this broader list of offenses . in 1999 , the ins issued an interior enforcement strategy , which named as the agency's top interior enforcement priority the identification and removal of criminal aliens and the minimization of recidivism ( i.e. , illegal reentry by previously removed aliens ) . accordingly , between 1998 and 2002 the ins devoted more resources to the removal of criminal aliens than to all other interior enforcement priorities combined . in the wake of the september 11 terrorist attacks , the new department of homeland security ( dhs ) focused its enforcement activities on suspected terrorists and homeland defense , but with the continued growth of the foreign - born population after 2000 , programs targeting criminal aliens also remained an enforcement priority . within dhs , the irp and acap initially were managed jointly by immigration and customs enforcement's ( ice ) detention and removal operations ( dro ) and its office of homeland security investigations . between 2005 and 2007 , the irp and acap were combined into a single criminal alien program ( cap ) program within dro . in 2010 , dro was renamed enforcement and removal operations ( ero ) . on november 20 , 2014 , the president issued his immigration accountability executive order that ended the secure communities program and replaced it with the priority enforcement program ( pep ) . dhs fully implemented pep in july 2015 . this report adopts this broad definition unless otherwise noted . ( see appendix a for a glossary of additional related terms. )