over the years , taxes on shareholders have been reduced . these approaches can be divided into three basic types: ( 1 ) full integration ; ( 2 ) partial integration , which addresses only dividends ; and ( 3 ) proposals that also address the treatment of interest . they also depend on many other features , including the pass - through of preferences , which are addressed in more detail in crs report r44638 , corporate tax integration and tax reform . three basic issues that relate to corporate integration policy are the revenue impacts , the administrative concerns , and the economic efficiency effects . revenue impacts are an important consideration in any tax reform proposal . table 2 provides estimates for the proposals ( in the form of effective average tax rates ) , which show the cost as a percentage of current corporate tax revenues . these estimates suggest that allowing refundable credits or mark to market do not appear feasible if revenue neutrality is an objective . although the other proposals lose revenues , offsetting them with restrictions on debt or other base - broadening provisions would be possible . mark to market could also be feasible if taxes are imposed directly on exempt or largely exempt firms . some proposals face considerable administrative barriers , especially mark to market , which would require tax payment when income is not realized . most proposals would add complications for shareholders , but mark to market would simplify at the corporate level . providing tax credits to creditors if interest is subject to a withholding tax might be difficult because of the tracing of interest payments . efficiency gains reflecting the traditional goals of integration are limited , with the exception of reducing the debt - equity distortion and potentially eliminating distortion across assets within the corporate sector under mark to market . similarly , most proposals would not have significant effects on the international allocation of capital , repatriation , profit - shifting and inversions . disallowing deductions for interest would eliminate some methods of profit shifting and make inversions less attractive . these firms' choices about the location of investment and profits are affected by firm - level rather than shareholder - level taxes . a second is that the fraction of shareholders who are not subject to u.s. shareholder taxes has increased . currently only about a quarter of the corporate stock of u.s. firms is estimated to be owned by shareholders subject to u.s. individual tax ( compared with about half in 1992 ) . inflation has declined , affecting tax rates . tax - favored intangible assets , which are more important in the corporate sector , have also grown in importance . a number of approaches to integration are possible . mark to market would create a residence - based tax , which would provide efficiency gains in all areas: allocation of capital , repatriation , profit - shifting , and inversions . one goal of corporate integration is to reduce or eliminate these distortions .