section 4002 of p.l . 113-79 required that retailers seeking authorization based on inventory ( i.e. , criterion a ) will have to increase their variety of stock . namely , the law was amended to require stores to stock at least seven varieties of staple foods in each of the four staple food categories and to stock perishable foods in at least three categories . section 4002 , which includes other requirements for retailers , also amended the authorizing law to require a review of retailer applications to consider "whether the [retailer] applicant is located in an area with significantly limited access to food. the law's conference report included further information on the decision to craft this policy change . in a march 2014 policy memorandum , usda - fns said that the 2014 farm bill changes to inventory requirements would require rulemaking to implement . this section summarizes the usda - fns final rule's changes to prior regulations and includes comparison to the proposed rule . this section has also been amended to reflect changes made by the fy2017 appropriations law , which limits some of the final rule's provisions . as a basis for rulemaking , in the february 2016 proposed rule , usda - fns explained that the proposed rule was "the result of two separate developments": ( 1 ) the 2014 farm bill's statutory changes , and ( 2 ) "the effort initiated by fns in 2013 to look at enhancing the eligibility standards for snap retailers to better enforce the intent of the [food and nutrition act of 2008] to permit low - income individuals to purchase more nutritious foods for home preparation and consumption. related to the latter development , usda - fns cited findings from an august 2013 request for information ( rfi ) , which posed 14 questions to the public on snap retailer eligibility and authorization . usda - fns stated that they received from the rfi over 200 comments "from a diverse group , including retailers , academics , trade associations , policy advocates , professional associations , government entities , and the general public. the agency also cited related listening sessions . before issuing the final rule , fns reviewed 1,260 germane , nonduplicative comments on the proposed rule . about 72% of comments came from retail food store representatives , owners , managers , or employees , most of whom submitted template or form letters . some members of congress and other stakeholders had voiced strong opposition to aspects of the proposed rule . as the proposed rule would have , the final rule made changes to 7 c.f.r . part 271 and part 278 in five areas of retailer authorization policy: ( 1 ) sales of hot , prepared foods ; ( 2 ) definition of staple foods ; ( 3 ) inventory and depth of stock ; ( 4 ) access - related exceptions to the rules ; and ( 5 ) disclosures of retailer information . the final rule's ultimate changes in some ways vary notably from those in the proposed rule . these areas are briefly discussed in the sections to follow .