treasury. one commenter described section 1341 of the aca as "impos[ing] few requirements on the expenditure of reinsurance contributions , stating that the statute does not specify that payments must be made to insurers and to the u.s. treasury simultaneously , or that the u.s. treasury must receive its full funding before reinsurance pool payments are made. cms noted its agreement with this argument , stating that section 1341 "provides [the agency] with the discretion ... to determine the priority , method , and timing for the allocation of reinsurance contributions collected. consistent with this conclusion , a final rule issued on may 27 , 2014 , revised the allocation formula . under the current system , no funds collected from insurers are deposited in the treasury until sufficient amounts have been received to fund the reinsurance program . the permissibility of cms's final rule has been called into question by some observers . on september 29 , 2016 , gao issued a legal opinion stating that the current method of allocating contributions from insurers is not authorized by section 1341 . in its opinion , gao focused on the language of section 1341 , noting that when congress has enacted statutory language that speaks directly to an issue , such statutory language , viewed in the context of the overall statutory scheme , must control . in particular , section 1341 states that each insurer's contribution into the transitional reinsurance program "shall be designed so that each issuer's contribution amount for any calendar year ... reflects its proportionate share of an additional $2,000,000,000 for 2014 , an additional $2,000,000,000 for 2015 , and an additional $1,000,000,000 for 2016. . gao noted that this provision uses the mandatory term "shall" when directing hhs to collect amounts from insurers for the u.s. treasury . the use of this term led gao to the conclusion that the plain language of section 1341 "requires[s] hhs to collect amounts for the treasury and do so without qualification. in reaching this conclusion , gao rejected cms's argument that the use of the term "reflects" indicated that cms retained a degree of flexibility in determining how to assess an insurer's u.s. treasury contribution . in gao's view , the plain language and structure of the statutory provision counseled against a permissive reading of the statute's allocation requirements . further , gao concluded that the statute "explicitly prohibits" such amounts collected for the u.s. treasury from being used for reinsurance payments to insurers . where overall collections were insufficient to meet the statutory targets , gao stated that the proper course of action was to apportion the receipts between reinsurance payments and the u.s. treasury on a pro rata basis instead of prioritizing one over the other . in support of this pro rata allocation of collections , gao cited federal court decisions that held that , in cases where programs of federal spending were underfunded , the agency should "preserve the allocation formula" provided in the statute rather than exercise "total discretion in the allocation of the funds. following the issuance of gao's opinion , cms indicated that it disagreed with gao's conclusions and would continue to prioritize collections toward reinsurance payments . section 1341 of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .