they have nonetheless proven controversial . authorized generics ordinarily enter the market at about the time the brand - name drug company's patents are set to expire . some observers argue that such products may decrease the value of the potential 180-day market exclusivity for the first approved generic . this in turn may discourage independent generic firms both from challenging drug patents and from selling their own generic products . the hatch - waxman act requires generic drug companies to prove that their proposed products are bioequivalent to the brand - name drug . bioequivalence testing therefore requires that the generic firm use the brand - name product as a basis for comparison . some generic firms have expressed concerns , however , that certain brand - name firms have refused to sell them samples of their drugs for use in developing competing products . the creating and restoring equal access to equivalent samples ( creates ) act of 2016 , s. 3056 , addresses access to reference product samples when a brand - name product is subject to limited distribution channels — either voluntarily or via fda - imposed "risk evaluation and mitigation strategies ( rems ) " procedures . the bill would allow a generic or biosimilar firm to commence litigation in federal court in order to obtain a sample of a drug or biologic that is subject to a restricted distribution scheme so that it may obtain fda approval of its competing product . at least six bills have been introduced in the 114 th congress that would allow individuals to import lower - cost prescription drugs from foreign jurisdictions . the bills differ on the jurisdictions from which imports are permissible . 2228 and s. 122 , each titled the safe and affordable drugs from canada act of 2015 ; along with h.r . 3513 and s. 2023 , each titled the prescription drug affordability act of 2015 ; would allow u.s. - approved drugs to be imported from approved canadian pharmacies . 2623 , the personal drug importation fairness act , would allow u.s. - approved drugs to be imported from australia , canada , israel , japan , new zealand , switzerland , south africa , a member state of the european union , or a country in the european economic area , as well as any other country determined by the commissioner of food and drugs to have safety and efficacy standards at least as protective as the united states . finally , s. 1790 , the safe and affordable prescription drugs act of 2015 , would allow u.s. - approved drugs to be imported from approved pharmacies located anywhere in the world . congress continues to express interest in regulatory exclusivities . in the 114 th congress , the curb opioid misuse by advancing technology ( combat ) act of 2016 , h.r . 5127 , would extend the three - year new clinical study exclusivity by 12 months if the new study was related to clinical abuse potential and the product's labeling characterized the drug's abuse - deterrent potential . the combat act would similarly extend the 180-day generic exclusivity by 60 days in such circumstances .