however , those predictions have not been borne out . u.s. - uruguayan relations are strong and have grown closer in recent years . some analysts predicted that bilateral relations would deteriorate following the broad front's assumption of power , given ideological opposition to working with the united states by some sectors of the coalition . over the past decade , the united states and uruguay have forged closer trade and investment ties and have worked together to promote stability and security in latin america and around the world . u ruguay is a small nation of 3.4 million people located on the atlantic coast of south america . the country emerged as an independent state in 1828 following a three - year war between brazil and argentina over control of the disputed territory . uruguay has a long democratic tradition but experienced 12 years of authoritarian rule following a 1973 coup . during the dictatorship , tens of thousands of uruguayan citizens were forced into political exile , 3,000-4,000 were imprisoned , and several hundred were killed or "disappeared. the country restored civilian democratic governance in 1985 and is now considered to be one of the strongest democracies in the world . uruguay has drawn increased congressional attention in recent years as a result of the country's controversial decisions to legalize cannabis and grant refugee status to six men who had been detained at the u.s . naval station at guantanamo bay , cuba . president tabaré vázquez of the center - left broad front ( frente amplio ) coalition was inaugurated to a five - year term on march 1 , 2015 . this is his second term in office — he previously served as president from 2005 to 2010 — and the third consecutive term in which the broad front holds the presidency and majorities in both houses of the uruguayan general assembly . the coalition holds 50 seats in the 99-member chamber of representatives and 15 seats in the 30-member senate ; vice president raúl sendic , who presides over the senate , provides the broad front with a 16 th vote in the upper chamber . vázquez's initial election ended 170 years of political domination by the center - right national and colorado parties . since taking power in 2005 , the broad front has maintained market - oriented economic policies while gradually expanding social welfare programs , establishing a more progressive tax system , and implementing union - empowering labor reforms . this policy mix , combined with a boom in international prices for uruguay's agricultural commodity exports , produced several years of strong economic growth and considerable improvements in living standards . the broad front also has enacted several far - reaching social policy reforms , some of which have been controversial domestically . the coalition has positioned uruguay on the leading edge of lesbian , gay , bisexual , and transgender ( lgbt ) rights in latin america by allowing lgbt individuals to serve openly in the military , legalizing adoption by same - sex couples , allowing individuals to change official documents to reflect their gender identities , and legalizing same - sex marriage .