appendix a . hiring flexibilities available for the civilian defense acquisition workforc . does dod have the appropriate number and type of flexibilities ? what factors may impact effective use of available flexibilities to improve the civilian defense acquisition workforce ? the oversight options presented in this section may help congress gauge whether the current number and type of hiring flexibilities are appropriate and are improving the civilian acquisition workforce . doing so may enable congress to consider ( 1 ) expanding or authorizing new flexibilities , ( 2 ) consolidating or removing flexibilities , ( 3 ) otherwise restructuring flexibilities , and / or ( 4 ) using other tools to achieve workforce reforms . while this report has focused on enhancing recruitment through hiring flexibilities for the civilian defense acquisition workforce , congress may also want to consider other workforce improvement efforts , such as retaining acquisition personnel that have been hired . as mentioned previously , a 2016 gao report found that high attrition rates contributed to shortfalls in certain acquisition career fields . while hiring flexibilities aim to enhance the recruitment of qualified individuals , they are not necessarily structured to retain them . the subsections below describe two efforts undertaken by congress and dod in recent years to increase the retention of acquisition personnel: pay flexibilities and acqdemo . pay flexibilities aim to increase retention by providing additional or higher compensation that is not typically available to federal employees . dod officials asserted that the department is exploring ways to better use opm - issued retention incentives , such as targeting incentives to acquisition career fields experiencing high attrition . dod officials further noted that use of retention incentives is restricted to employees who are likely to leave federal service and "needs to" be expanded to those likely to leave the current organization . congress has also authorized pay flexibilities for the defense acquisition workforce . acqdemo is an alternative personnel system that operates outside the gs and waives certain personnel laws and regulations . acqdemo features , among other things , consolidated pay bands and a contribution - based performance management system . these structures are intended to provide a stronger link between pay and performance , particularly by basing pay increases on contribution to the agency . a 2014 rand report found higher retention rates among acqdemo employees compared to those covered by the gs and other alternative personnel systems . for instance , the fy2016 ndaa authorized dod to pay certain acquisition personnel up to 150% above the basic pay rate for level i of the executive schedule , which exceeds gs - 15 , step 10 pay rates . congress and dod have taken steps to expand the scope and use of acqdemo , including ( 1 ) expanding the participation cap to 120,000 employees , ( 2 ) extending operation to december 31 , 2020 , and ( 3 ) streamlining the application process to join the project . section 1104 of the ndaa for fy2017 ( s. 2943 ) , as passed by the senate , would establish a new personnel system for defense acquisition personnel and support staff .