appendix a . historical commemorative coins between 1892 and 1954 , 60 commemorative coins were authorized by congress . table a - 1 provides a list of these coins organized by the year in which they were struck by the mint . the table also includes the type of coin , the subject , and the authorization statute . appendix b . modern commemorative coins , 1982-1997 between 1982 and 1997 , 47 commemorative coins were authorized by congress . table b - 1 provides a list of these coins organized by the year in which they were struck by the mint . the table also includes the coin's subject and authorizing statute . coin denominations are not provided for modern commemorative coins because authorizing legislation generally provides for more than one denomination per commemorative coin series . marshals museum . after that , additional surcharges were divided equally among the national center for missing & exploited children , the federal law enforcement officers association foundation , and the national law enforcement officers memorial fund . once a commemorative coin has been authorized , the ccra requires that certain standards be met before surcharge payments can be distributed to designated recipient organizations: 1 . the recipient organization must raise funds from private sources "in an amount that is equal to or greater than the total amount of the proceeds of such surcharge derived from the sale of such numismatic item. the qualifying funds raised from private sources must be for the purposes specified by the enabling legislation . the u.s. mint must recover "all numismatic operation and program costs allocable to the program. the recipient organization must submit an audited financial statement and submit the results of annual audits to demonstrate , to the satisfaction of the secretary of the treasury , that it has qualified for surcharge proceeds and is properly expending them . guidance provided by the u.s. mint in surcharge recipient organization's compliance procedures for surcharge eligibility & payments includes further details of the requirements placed on designated recipient groups before surcharge payments can be made . these include requirements for documentation on the amount of money raised from private sources and the period of fund raising . to document these requirements , designated recipient groups must fill out a "schedule of funds raised from private sources," which is provided in an appendix to the surcharge recipient organization's compliance procedures for surcharge eligibility & payments publication . following completion of these tasks , and after the mint has recouped any expenses related to minting the commemorative coin , surcharges are then disbursed to the designated recipient organization . since 1982 , when the commemorative coin program was restarted , the u.s. mint has raised more than $506 million in surcharges for various designated recipient groups . production costs for each commemorative coin can differ based on design , administrative costs , and metals used . for example , table 4 shows how the u.s. mint calculated surcharges for a commemorative coin for the 2007 benjamin franklin commemorative coin . as members of congress contemplate introducing legislation , and the house or the senate potentially considers commemorative coin measures , there are several issues that could be considered .