the court found that this standard was satisfied in this case . in the aia , congress elected to make the uspto's decision on whether an ipr should proceed "final and nonappealable" ; thus , the court's "conclusion that courts may not revisit this initial determination gives effect to this statutory command. some commentators also questioned the proceedings' effectiveness . in 2011 , congress enacted the leahy - smith america invents act ( aia ) , which made significant changes to the uspto's reexamination proceedings . the aia first created the patent trial and appeal board ( ptab ) within the uspto to handle these proceedings . he first observed that section 314 ( d ) "does not say that an institution decision is 'not subject to review,'" but rather makes such decision "nonappealable. he would interpret this statutory language to "bar only an appeal from the institution decision itself , while allowing review of institution - related issues in an appeal from the patent office's final written decision at the end of the proceeding. under justice alito's interpretation of section 314 ( d ) , a court cannot prevent an ipr proceeding from commencing ( because the decision to institute ipr is "final and nonappealable" ) , but "the question whether it was lawful to institute review will not escape judicial scrutiny. the ptab's membership consists of the uspto director , deputy director , the commissioner for patents , the commissioner for trademarks , and the administrative patent judges . a panel of at least three members of the ptab , who are designated by the uspto director , hears challenges to a patent's validity . one of the statutory requirements for patentability of an invention is "novelty. for an invention to be considered "novel," the subject matter must be different than , and not be wholly "anticipated" by , the so - called "prior art," or public domain materials such as publications and other patents . another statutory requirement is that the subject matter of an alleged invention must be "nonobvious" at the time of its creation . a patent claim is invalid if "the differences between the subject matter sought to be patented and the prior art are such that the subject matter as a whole would have been obvious at the time the invention was made to a person having ordinary skill in the art to which said subject matter pertains. a pgr must be completed within a year of its commencement , with an extension of six months possible for good cause shown . a challenger to a patent may file a petition with the uspto requesting the institution of an ipr proceeding nine months after a patent issues or reissues , or the conclusion of any post - grant review , whichever occurs later . in an ipr proceeding , petitioners may challenge the validity of an issued patent only on the basis of prior art consisting of patents or printed publications . as a result , patent challenges under ipr are limited to the patentability issues of novelty and nonobviousness .