simplification of preference procedures . the different forms of preference and the varied applications of preference can make it difficult for veterans to understand their preference rights . similarly , the complexity of preference rules may increase the likelihood of an agency misapplying preference . the candidates with the highest assessments are then eligible for selection . veterans' preference applies in both the assessment and selection processes . the most recent data on the employment of veterans in the executive branch are from fy2016 . data in this section refer to nonseasonal , full - time , permanent employees . table 3 shows that veterans with preference accounted for 28% of all permanent , nonseasonal , full - time , executive branch employees in fy2016 . the share of veterans in the federal workforce was substantially higher than the share of veterans in the overall civilian labor force: in 2016 , veterans accounted for about 7% of all workers . some members of congress have suggested amending preference laws to extend preference to veterans who do not currently qualify . simplified eligibility and selection policies may reduce errors and provide clarity for veterans and hiring agencies . also described are recommendations from federal agencies . limitations on veterans' preference . the two federal agencies with the largest numbers of veterans ( the departments of defense and veterans' affairs ) were also the two agencies with the largest number of employees . veterans with preference accounted for 37% of federal new hires in fy2016 . disabled veterans were about half of the veterans with preference , accounting for 18% of total new hires during that year . the agencies with the largest numbers of hires ( in terms of overall hires and veteran hires ) were the department of defense and the department of veterans affairs . combined , these two departments accounted for about 65% of total new hires and 73% of newly hired veterans with preference across all executive agencies . the share of veteran new hires being higher than the share of overall veteran employees aligns with a recent increase in the overall share of veterans employed in the executive branch . in fy2010 , veterans with preference accounted for 25% of total federal employees and the proportion increased each year to its fy2016 level of 28% . recent congresses have devoted some attention to proposing revisions or reforms to veterans' preference . as this has occurred , some competing interests and issues have surfaced . one type of proposal that has been forwarded focuses on placing some limitations on existing preferences . this could result in greater emphasis being placed on federal agencies selecting job applicants with the highest job - related qualifications . other types of proposals would expand veterans' preference to incentivize and reward military service . still other proposals , such as simplifying preference criteria , relate to administration and would not necessarily strengthen or weaken preference . the bullet points below briefly describe the principles of proposals that have been introduced in the 114 th and 115 th congresses that would substantively revise veterans' preference in competitive examination . under current law , preference eligible status is a permanent designation and a preference eligible can use his or her status an unlimited number of times .