, the rate at which prices rise . long - term — that is , longer than 26 weeks — unemployment rates . the natural rate model suggests that government's ability to spur higher employment through fiscal and monetary policies is limited in important ways . expansionary fiscal and monetary policies can be used to boost gross domestic product ( gdp ) growth and reduce unemployment , by increasing demand for goods and services , but doing so comes at a cost . so why is the federal reserve reducing the amount of stimulus entering the economy when so many people are still looking for work ? the answer involves the relationship between the two parts of the federal reserve's dual mandate — maximum employment and stable prices . in general , economists have observed an inverse relationship between the unemployment rate and the inflation rate , i.e. this trade - off between unemployment and inflation become particularly pronounced ( i.e. , small changes in unemployment result in relatively large price swings ) when the unemployment rate drops below a certain level , referred to by economists as the "natural unemployment rate. alternatively , when the unemployment rate rises above the natural rate , inflation will tend to decelerate . in response to the financial crisis and subsequent recession , the federal reserve began employing expansionary monetary policy to spur economic growth and improve labor market conditions . recently , the unemployment rate has fallen to a level consistent with many estimates of the natural rate of unemployment , between 4.6% and 5.0% . if the unemployment rate were to continue falling , it would likely fall below the natural rate of unemployment and cause accelerating inflation , violating the federal reserve's mandate of stable prices . this report discusses the relationship between unemployment and inflation , the general economic theory surrounding this topic , the relationship since the financial crisis , and its use in policymaking . a relationship between the unemployment rate and prices was first prominently established in the late 1950s . this early research focused on the relationship between the unemployment rate and the rate of wage inflation . economist a. w. phillips found that between 1861 and 1957 , there was a negative relationship between the unemployment rate and the rate of change in wages in the united kingdom , showing wages tended to grow faster when the unemployment rate was lower , and vice versa . his work was then replicated using u.s. data between 1934 and 1958 , discovering a similar negative relationship between unemployment and wage growth . economists reasoned that this relationship existed due to simple supply and demand within the labor market . as the unemployment rate decreases , the supply of unemployed workers decreases , thus employers must offer higher wages to attract additional employees from other firms . this body of research was expanded , shifting the focus from wage growth to changes in the price level more generally . the negative relationship between unemployment and inflation was dubbed the phillips curve , due to phillips's seminal work on the issue . many interpreted the early research around the phillips curve to mean that a stable relationship existed between unemployment and inflation .