of course , some people are poorer than others . attention is also paid to living arrangements . because poverty is measured at the family level , considerations such as whether someone lives alone , or whom someone lives and potentially shares resources with , influence economic well - being . other factors that affect family well - being , and that influence individuals' attachment to and success in the labor market , are important for considering individuals' experiences of poverty but are beyond the scope of this report . this snapshot looks at the composition of people in poverty — what groups comprise what share of the poverty population — rather than at poverty rates among different groups . this provides a different perspective in viewing poverty . a large population group such as non - hispanic whites might have relatively low poverty rates , but because of the group's size in the overall population it represents a relatively large share of the poverty population . a small population , such as american indians , might have relatively high poverty rates , but because of the group's size it represents a relatively small share of the poverty population . both perspectives on poverty are valid and relevant to public policy . readers interested in an examination of poverty rates for different demographic groups — and trends in poverty over time — should see crs report r44644 , poverty in the united states in 2015: in brief , by [author name scrubbed] . in 2015 , an estimated 43.1 million people had pre - tax money income below the poverty threshold . as this report shows , certain groups are over - represented among those living in poverty relative to the total population . these include , among others , women , minorities , children , and people living outside of families or alone . the report also shows the central role of income from work in determining whether a group is over - represented among those living in poverty . for children , this income is based on the work of their parents or other family members . for working - age adults , it is their own work that generally determines their poverty status . for aged adults , who are often retired from the workforce , it is primarily their past work or the work of those they live with that determines their status . however , sometimes earnings from work are not enough to prevent poverty . as shown in figure 1 , people who were poor accounted for 13.5% of the total noninstitutionalized population . the number and percentage of people in poverty reflect those whose family income fell short of the poverty threshold by any dollar amount . recently , there has been increasing attention on the very poor: those considered to be in "deep poverty. figure 2 shows the number of people in poverty in 2015 by the severity of their poverty . deep poverty is usually defined as having income below 50% of the poverty threshold . in 2015 , an estimated 19.4 million persons , close to half of all people in poverty ( 45.1% ) , were counted as living in deep poverty .