coasts ." part iii provides a primer on policy considerations . it raises considerations and questions associated with policies to address the causes and effects of sea - level rise . it also discusses federalism issues and general considerations associated with sea - level rise policies and investments . ( see " part iii . policy considerations and questions ." two descriptions of sea level are commonly used by scientists: global sea level ( gsl ) and relative sea level ( rsl ) . gsl and rsl pose different policy challenges . figure 5 illustrates the factors contributing to gsl and rsl rise . the drivers for rising gsl since 1900 are predominantly thermal expansion of the oceans due to warming ocean water and melting glaciers and ice sheets ( table 2 ) . the oceans have warmed due to a combination of natural variability and the influence of greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions on atmospheric temperatures . similarly , glaciers and polar ice sheets have melted since 1900 due to a combination of natural variability and ghg - induced climate change and deposition of pollutants . the global factors driving rsl change include those that influence gsl , but in some cases regional or local factors are responsible for the largest changes in rsl along the coastlines . these regional or local factors can be natural , such as the land rebounding upward after continental ice sheets melted at the end of the last ice age , or they can be due to human activities , such as groundwater pumping , oil and gas extraction , sediment compaction , land management practices , or other factors . ( see table 2 . ) understanding the relative contributions from these different drivers of rsl rise is important for crafting responses to help coastal communities predict , mitigate , and adapt to the changing risks that sea - level rise brings . after a brief introduction to the effects of sea - level rise on u.s. coasts , part ii of the report is divided into the following three sections: effects on shorelines and ecosystems , which discusses how coastal processes and topography influence how u.s. shorelines and ecosystems may change with sea - level rise ; effects on development and society , which describes u.s. coastal development and its coastal storm and nuisance flooding risks ; and actions addressing the impacts of sea - level rise , which describes the activities of various federal agencies , existing federal coastal management statutes , and the role of public and private actions . sea - level rise raises several questions: what does sea - level rise portend for future economic development of u.s. coasts ? how does sea - level rise affect the safety and quality of life of coastal residents ? how does sea - level rise alter the coastal ecosystems and potentially alter the benefits that society derives from those ecosystems , such as recreation and commercial fisheries ? near - term choices on managing and adapting to sea - level rise have the potential to significantly shape the responses to these questions and the future of u.s. coastal development . general categories of policy options related to sea - level rise include the following: maintaining the status q uo .