appendix b . there is no additional va copayment . similarly , veterans who reside in state veterans homes may have out - of - pocket costs ; this varies from state to state and is often on a sliding fee scale . the payment is made to the state veterans home , and there is no additional va copayment . does the va have the appropriate number of clc beds offering the right types of care ? does the va have the ability and flexibility needed to partner with community long - term care facilities to provide care to veterans in their communities and potentially reduce demand for va - owned and operated clcs ? should congress review the va's long - term care infrastructure , comparing projected demand against capacity ? and , finally , how might congress compel the va to shift care from institutions to home and community - based settings ? appendix a. vha copayments for long - term care services veterans who are enrolled in the va health care system do not pay any premiums ; however , some veterans are required to pay copayments for certain services and outpatient medications related to the treatment of a nonservice - connected condition . table a - 1 summarizes which priority groups are charged copayments for long - term care services . only veterans in priority group 1 ( those who have been rated 50% or more service - connected ) and veterans who are deemed catastrophically disabled by a va provider are never charged a copayment , even for treatment of a nonservice - connected condition . for veterans required to pay long - term care copayments , these charges are based on three levels of nonservice - connected care , including copayments for inpatient , non - institutional , and adult day health care . however , actual copayments may vary depending on a veteran's financial situation . for example , p.l.114-315 , the jeff miller and richard blumenthal veterans health care and benefits improvement act of 2016 exempted medal of honor recipients from paying ltc copayments for both service and nonservice connected ltc . certain va long - term care programs have associated costs other than a va copayment . for example , regardless of service - connected status , veterans residing in medical foster home or community residential care homes pay out of pocket for room and board . the out - of - pocket cost varies by geographical area and amount of care needed . conversely , there is no copayment or cost to the veteran of any kind for va hospice services , regardless of veterans' income or service - connected status . veterans priority groups figure b - 1 lists the veterans priority groups 1 through 8 and their eligibility criteria . not all veterans rely on the va exclusively for their health care . many veterans access care through other sources of health coverage , and most enrolled veterans have more than one source of coverage . according to the 2015 vha survey of enrollees , approximately 78% of veterans enrolled in the vha have some type of public or private health care coverage in addition to va health care .