attorneys . the bipartisan budget act of 2015 also revised the amount of the allowable ssa adjustment amounts to be more generous in fy2017-fy2019 , but less generous in fy2021 . separate from these cap adjustments , the 21 st century cures act ( cures act , p.l . 114-255 ) , which was enacted on december 13 , 2016 , included additional budget enforcement procedures related to the discretionary spending limits . these procedures apply to two accounts within the scope of the lhhs bill: the nih innovation account and the account for the state response to the opioid abuse crisis . the cures act created these accounts and authorized appropriations from them for specific fiscal years ( fy2017-fy2026 for the nih innovation account and fy2017-fy2018 for the account for the state response to the opioid abuse crisis ) . the cures act further provided that subsequent discretionary appropriations from these accounts ( up to the amounts authorized for each fiscal year ) are to be subtracted from any cost estimates provided for purposes of budget controls . effectively , this means that the appropriations from these accounts will not count against any spending limits , such as the statutory discretionary spending limits ; that is , the amounts appropriated from these accounts will be considered to be outside those limits . in addition , although sequestration largely consists of automatic , across - the - board spending reductions , the law exempts a limited number of programs from sequestration and subjects others to special rules . the lhhs bill contains several programs that are exempt from sequestration , including medicaid , payments to health care trust funds , supplemental security income , special benefits for disabled coal miners , retirement pay and medical benefits for commissioned public health service officers , foster care and adoption assistance , and certain family support payments . the lhhs bill also contains several programs that are subject to special rules under sequestration , such as unemployment compensation , certain student loans , health centers , and portions of medicare . budget resolution and 302 ( b ) suballocations the procedural elements of budget enforcement generally stem from requirements under the congressional budget act of 1974 ( p.l . 93-44 ) that are associated with the adoption of an annual budget resolution . through this process , the appropriations committee in each chamber receives a procedural limit on the total amount of discretionary budget authority for the upcoming fiscal year , referred to as a 302 ( a ) allocation . the appropriations committee subsequently divides this allocation among its 12 subcommittees . these subcommittee - level spending limits are referred to as 302 ( b ) suballocations . the 302 ( b ) suballocations restrict the amount of budget authority available to each subcommittee for the agencies , projects , and activities under its jurisdiction , effectively acting as a cap on each of the 12 regular appropriations bills . enforcement of the 302 ( a ) allocation and 302 ( b ) suballocations occurs through points of order . the house and the senate did not adopt a budget resolution prior to the start of fy2017 .