most committees also provide internet video broadcasts of their open proceedings . limited television bandwidth and signal strength , for example , initially prevented the house and senate from obtaining the unedited , gavel - to - gavel coverage they desired on existing networks . cable and satellite technology made specialized , nationwide television stations , like c - span , possible . the house and senate initially sought the commitment of a network to ensure an audience for their broadcasts , and c - span needed access to the video content exclusively provided by the house and the senate . congress and c - span have maintained this partnership for many years , yet neither chamber has any formal agreement with c - span to cover their proceedings , nor do they grant c - span any special access . today , the combination of cell phones or other pocket - sized cameras , wireless networks , and video broadcasting websites present new challenges to congressional video coverage controlled by the house and the senate . although the house and senate typically discourage cell phone use within their chambers , their rules also recognize that members may bring their devices with them to the floor for productivity and safety reasons . widespread cell phone video could affect congressional decorum ; however , when no official video coverage is available from the chambers , these alternative means of broadcasting might provide a way to keep the public informed about what is happening in congress . as video footage becomes easier for anyone to produce and broadcast , the house and senate may continue to address institutional rules regarding technology use and video coverage of their proceedings . some of these communications advancements also facilitate better information within congress as it un dertakes its legislative work . by the mid - 20 th century , radio and television broadcasts offered congress the ability , for the first time , to provide real - time information about events unfolding on the chamber floors or in committees . the idea of offering live video broadcasts initially appealed to some , but others had reservations about the potential effects of broadcasting on congressional behavior . prior to the 1979 house and 1986 senate decisions to broadcast proceedings , television cameras rarely covered floor proceedings in either chamber . in 1947 , the house allowed television cameras to broadcast portions of the opening session of the 80 th congress , but no other regular sessions were broadcast over the next few decades . technical challenges also existed , including setting up the necessary lights , microphones , cameras , and other equipment and making arrangements with media outlets for broadcast coverage . although the house and senate experimented with television broadcasts as early as 1948 , regular coverage of the house floor began in 1977 and regular coverage of the senate floor began in 1986 . many people are familiar with congressional video because it is continually broadcast on the privately operated , nonprofit cable - satellite public affairs network ( c - span ) .