recommendations . broadly , the committee recommended that the federal government continue promoting the development of research capacity in all states , asserting that "students in all parts of the country must have the chance to participate in high - quality research , and it is in the national interest that federal funding be provided to universities in every state to ensure that these research opportunities are available. to improve the focus and impact of the epscor program , recommendations included an enhancement of research and stem training capacity ; more rigorous proposal and project evaluation processes , including effective third - party evaluation ; a matching funds requirement for all research awards ; and , working through the eicc , development of a new framework for eligibility and graduation . in 2014 , the institute for defense analyses ( ida ) science and technology policy institute ( stpi ) released a report commissioned by nsf in 2011 to conduct a life - of - program assessment of nsf - specific epscor activities , outputs , and outcomes . the analyses focused on program goals and funding levels , competitiveness for research funding , s&t research base enhancements , eligibility indicators , and the concentration of nsf research funding . the ida / stpi report found that nsf's epscor program has meaningfully contributed to increased competitiveness for nsf funding overall ; however , competitiveness increased for state cohorts entering the program prior to 2000 , but not for those entering after . furthermore , evaluators stated that the geographic concentration of nsf r&d funding was shown to have decreased slightly since 1980 , though the decrease could not be attributed to epscor . evaluators also noted that jurisdictions have developed their research bases , improved university policies promoting research , and sustained their epscor activities over the long term . while the epscor statute states that the purpose of the program is to assist states that "historically have received relatively little federal research and development funding," it does not define "relatively little" with respect to determining program eligibility nor does it define the units to be considered ( eg , dollars , share of total federal research funding ) . the report notes that the choice of such criteria can have important implications for determining eligibility . to help ensure that epscor funding has the greatest impact , the ida / stpi report concluded that nsf should define "undue concentration" ; encourage jurisdictions to use experimental strategies to enhance their research capacity ; and improve eligibility calculations , program - level evaluations , and research competitiveness data analysis . in 2015 , nsf provided an official response to the nas and stpi reports . in the two - page response , the agency proposed strengthening program - level evaluations ; encouraging jurisdictions to experiment with flexible and competitive mechanisms to support research , faculty , and stem education ; and working with other agencies in the eicc to explore the use of specific indicators of "undue concentration" and to reexamine eligibility criteria .