appendix a . fabric forward . producers may use fibers and yarns from any country , but fabric must be knitted or woven in fta member countries . cut and s ew . yarn forward . fibers may be produced in any country , but each component starting with the yarn used to make the textiles or apparel must be formed within the free - trade area . this rule is sometimes called "triple transformation," as it requires that spinning of the yarn or thread , weaving or knitting of the fabric , and assembly of the final product all occur within the region . only the cutting and sewing of the finished article must occur in fta member countries , providing maximum flexibility for sourcing . textile and apparel tariffs differ considerably among tpp countries , but are generally far higher than those on other types of products . ( see appendix c for a list of textile and apparel tariff rates in various countries. ) in general , tariffs increase with each stage of manufacturing . as a result , duty rates are usually higher on apparel than on yarn or fabric inputs . under the tpp , tariffs on textile and apparel would either be eliminated immediately or phased out in various stages over a decade or more . according to an analysis by the national council of textile organizations ( ncto ) , the united states will phase out its tariffs over 10 to 12 years on the majority of the textile and apparel products it imported from vietnam in 2012 . the phase - out period is meant to give manufacturers in the cafta - dr region and other u.s. fta partner countries in latin america sufficient time to adapt before the most sensitive textile and apparel products can be shipped to the united states duty - free . if the proposed agreement is approved by congress and foreign governments , the tpp will require that textiles and apparel meet a yarn - forward rule to qualify for duty - free treatment . in january 2016 , the ncto endorsed the tpp agreement largely because it included the yarn - forward rule . several tpp members , including vietnam , had opposed u.s. demands for a yarn - forward requirement , supporting instead a "cut - and - sew" rule that would allow them to enjoy preferential access for apparel that has been cut and sewn from fabric made in china or other countries not included in the tpp . since u.s. apparel companies and retailers purchase the bulk of their garments from asian countries outside the tpp , they favored the immediate elimination of tariffs upon implementation of the tpp agreement and more liberal rules of origin for textiles and apparel . despite the inclusion of the yarn - forward rule , the leading apparel and retail industry trade groups , including the american apparel and footwear association and the national retail federation ( nrf ) , announced their support of the tpp agreement in february 2016 .