the oig reports to congress and the secretary of dhs . for fy2016 , the administration requested $157 million in discretionary budget authority for the oig . this is $20 million ( 14.3% ) more than was provided in fy2016 . the administration also requested a $24 million transfer from the disaster relief fund ( drf ) specifically for oversight of disaster relief activities . transfers from the drf are a long - standing means of supporting the dhs oig's annual budget for oversight of disaster relief , first occurring in fy2004 , the first annual appropriations act for the department . senate appropriations committee - reported s. 3001 included $155 million in discretionary budget authority for the oig . the explanatory statement notes "the oig is directed to allocate not less than $20,856,000 to disaster - related investigations and audits. issues surrounding the dhs oig are generally issues that impact the broader oversight community , or are issues that are shared throughout the broader community of inspectors general . the office of operations coordination develops and coordinates departmental and interagency operations plans . it also manages the national operations center , the primary 24 / 7 national - level hub for domestic incident management , operations coordination , and situational awareness , fusing law enforcement , national intelligence , emergency response , and private sector information . the dhs office of the inspector general ( oig ) is intended to be an independent , objective body that conducts audits and investigations of the department's activities to prevent waste , fraud , and abuse . the oig keeps congress informed about problems within the department's programs and operations ; ensures dhs information technology is secure pursuant to the federal information security management act ; and reviews and makes recommendations regarding existing and proposed legislation and regulations related to the department . this was $2 million ( 1.3% ) less than was requested by the administration , and $18 million ( 12.8% ) more than was provided in fy2016 . the house appropriations committee - reported bill included the requested transfer from the drf for disaster relief oversight activities . house appropriations committee - reported h.r . 5634 included $157 million in discretionary budget authority for the oig . this was the funding level requested by the administration , and $20 million ( 14.3% ) more than was provided in fy2016 . the house committee - reported funding level is $2 million ( 1.3% ) more than was proposed in the senate committee - reported bill . like the house appropriations committee - reported bill , the senate appropriations committee - reported bill included the requested transfer from the drf for disaster relief oversight activities . the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2017 , provided $175 million for the oig , $6 million ( 3.4% ) less than was requested and $14 million ( 8.4% ) more than was provided in fy2016 . in a departure from previous practice , this budget authority was wholly appropriated to the oig — none of it was provided as a transfer from fema for disaster - related work .