today , the u.s . postal service ( usps or postal service ) faces similar challenges but for different reasons . between 2006 and 2015 , total mail volume dropped sharply . market changes and global economic conditions contributed to the postal service's financial challenges and affected its efforts to control expenses and expand revenue . statutory mandates , such as the requirements to maintain six - day delivery and prefund health benefits for future retirees , may limit the actions usps might take to mitigate these challenges . in some cases , however , congress has proposed legislation that would halt or amend actions that the usps has already initiated . to fulfill its mission of providing "prompt , reliable , and efficient" postal services to its customers , the usps has a fleet of approximately 190,000 delivery vehicles . these vehicles transport more than 153 billion pieces of mail each year to more than 150 million delivery points . the usps oig estimates that after a five - year period of developing these services , the usps could generate $1.1 billion in additional revenue annually . beyond this approach , the white paper also identified four alternative models that draw heavily on the experience of other countries . for each of these approaches , the upfront costs would be higher and the usps oig states additional statutory authority would be needed . these four approaches are ( 1 ) a partnership with one outside firm to offer services through the usps ; ( 2 ) partnerships with multiple outside firms that are specialized for each individual product ; ( 3 ) a marketplace model wherein the usps facilitates many options for each financial service ; and ( 4 ) a full - fledged postal bank , which would offer financial products wholly managed by the usps or an entity within the agency . the work of the usps oig began a national conversation around the merits of developing postal financial services at the usps , with many advocates for and against the concept . as mentioned above , proponents of postal financial services believe that such an expansion would offer financial services to underserved populations and provide needed revenue to the postal service at a time when demand for their traditional product line of first class mail delivery is declining . recently , many journalists and organizations have recommended a postal savings system as a way to reach households and individuals that do not currently make use of an insured financial institution and instead rely on alternative financial services ( afs ) . according to a 2013 report from the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , this population is relatively large . the report found that 7.7% of all u.s. households were unbanked , meaning they had no account at an insured financial institution , while 20% of households were considered underbanked , meaning they had used afs in the previous 12 months . on the other side of the debate over postal financial services are those who believe the expanded services would not generate revenue or would unfairly encroach on the private market for financial services .