as a result , many of the issues faced by the restaurants today are addressed by the contractors themselves . other issues are addressed by the house administration committee , senate rules and administration committee , or other congressional support offices . other issues affect the restaurants in both chambers or are typical challenges in any food service operation . this section focuses on current issues related to the congressional restaurants , but many of the challenges the house and senate restaurants face today are similar to issues they have faced in the past . for more background on these topics , see crs report r44600 , history of house and senate restaurants: context for current operations and issues , by sarah j. eckman . in many regards , the house and senate food services operate like many large , institutional cafeterias do . similar to many office cafeterias , house and senate food services primarily serve breakfast , lunch , and snacks during regular workday business hours , and provide vending options for patrons who may be on - site during other times . the house and senate restaurant systems have existed since the early 1800s and have grown and modernized over time . although many of their services may seem similar , food operations are separately administered and managed for the house , for the senate , and for the capitol visitor center ( cvc ) . by meeting congressional dining needs during workdays that frequently can be unpredictable , the restaurant systems help facilitate the legislative and representational work of congress . because many members and staff visit these restaurants every day , they remain a subject of ongoing congressional interest . some of the issues affecting the restaurant systems are unique to the house and others are unique to the senate , resulting from the fact that each chamber administers its own restaurant services . recognizing the availability of other dining options , the house and senate food service providers attempt to provide convenient service , keep their prices competitive , and offer the types of menu items that customers enjoy . some aspects of house and senate dining operations , however , are necessarily unique , given the congressional environment in which they exist . conversely , when congress is in session , house and senate food services must be able to handle high volumes of customers with a variety of needs . the members' dining rooms , for example , provide an ambiance not typically found in workplace eateries . in addition to their historic and architectural value , these dining rooms also provide members of congress and staff members a more formal and private setting in which to meet with guests or one another . another feature house and senate dining operations must account for is that the schedule of congress can be less predictable than that of other institutions , which can have a variety of effects on food services . this shared administration resulted from how the congressional restaurant systems developed and grew over time . together , these entities strive to meet the needs of the members and staff who rely upon congressional dining services to help them carry out their daily legislative and representational work .