the stakes are high . succession outcomes are likely to shape future developments in all major policy arenas , and the succession process could generate political and economic instability , possibly violent , in the wider southern africa region . succession is subject to the interplay of diverse , primarily domestic factors , however , making it an unpredictable and fluid process , and one not readily influenced by u.s. or other foreign policy interventions . enduring support and admiration for mugabe in southern african political circles — including within south africa — may also limit the impact of u.s. actions . human rights advocates have for years raised concern with documented government violations of the rule of law and respect for human rights , particularly during election periods and with regard to its treatment of political opponents and human rights and democracy advocacy groups . frequent reported perpetrators of political violence in recent years have included the state security forces , zanu - pf youth militants , members of znlwva , and , to a lesser extent , mdc militants . in july 2016 , amnesty international ( ai ) reported that "recently , human rights defenders and activists in zimbabwe have been receiving threats and [are] subjected to arbitrary arrests , ill – treatment and attempted abductions. zanu - pf supporters were implicated in harassment and intimidation in the lead - up to the by - elections in mid - 2015 , in addition to prior violence linked to the purge of mujuru supporters , while opposition activists engaged in violent skirmishes in connection with intra - mdc competition . there have also been reports of state - and party - mediated allocations of food , fertilizer , and other commodities , as well as coercion , to secure votes or political support for zanu - pf . the reported march 2015 daytime abduction of a zimbabwean journalist and human rights activist , itai dzamara , allegedly by state security officials , has also drawn widespread local and international attention . dzamara has not been found , and u.s. officials have called for a full and open investigation of his case . similar allegations of state involvement in other abduction cases have periodically been reported since the early 2000s . police regularly halt public political and economic demonstrations and arrest political and labor union protesters . in its 2016 world report , human rights watch ( hrw ) asserted that in 2015 , "those who criticized mugabe or his government , including human rights defenders , civil society activists , political opponents , and outspoken street vendors , were harassed , threatened , or arbitrarily arrested by police and state security agents. zimbabwe lawyers for human rights ( zlhr ) , a nongovernment advocacy group , has contended that authorities intentionally "misinterpret and selectively misapply laws. annual state department human rights reports have reflected similar findings . recently , however , and against the government's wishes , some judges have allowed bond for detainees facing protest - related charges , reduced or tossed out such charges , and permitted several protests for which the police have denied permits .