programs and grants are listed separately below according to agency . this report begins by clarifying the scope of information covered . it then provides background information about ai / an behavioral health — including the high prevalence of risk factors , the high prevalence of specific behavioral health problems , and limited access to care . the report then summarizes each of the programs that meet criteria for inclusion . it concludes with a brief discussion of how an understanding of the scope and limits of existing programs might inform certain policy decisions . behavioral health among the ai / an population is a broad and potentially amorphous topic . this report limits the scope by setting parameters for ( 1 ) the definition of behavioral health used , ( 2 ) the definition of the ai / an population used , ( 3 ) the federal agencies included , and ( 4 ) the types of programs included . research on ai / an behavioral health demonstrates three key points: the ai / an population has ( 1 ) a high prevalence of risk factors for behavioral health problems , ( 2 ) a high prevalence of behavioral health problems , and ( 3 ) limited access to care for behavioral health problems . ihs and samhsa have programs aimed at improving ai / an behavioral health . in some cases , both agencies have programs with the same ( or a very similar ) specific focus ( eg , suicide prevention ) . given the fundamental differences between the two agencies — with ihs primarily delivering health care services and samhsa primarily awarding grants — programs with similar names or goals may not be comparable . the programs in this report do not represent a comprehensive list of ihs programs that may treat behavioral health conditions and samhsa programs for which its and tos are eligible . that is , ai / ans may receive behavioral health services as part of ihs programs that are not focused on behavioral health , and its or tos may receive funds from samhsa programs that have not been identified as particularly relevant to the ai / an population . furthermore , some of the samhsa programs included in this report are not limited to its , tos , or the ai / an population . for these reasons , presenting funding for the included programs would be misleading — underestimating spending in ai / an behavioral health in some ways and overestimating it in others . this report is not intended to capture federal spending on ai / an behavioral health and does not include funding for the programs . this report is intended to provide background information about behavioral health among the ai / an population and a summary of the most relevant federal programs . the report is not intended to address policy options for modifying , eliminating , or adding such programs ( and future crs reports may explore these policies in greater detail ) ; however , the information in this report may help policymakers address a range of potential policy issues related to ai / an behavioral health care .