the department of state . the department of state uses its diplomatic and public outreach capacities to support girls' empowerment and access to education , building partnerships to facilitate progress . one programmatic example is the implementation of a girls steam ( science , technology , engineering , art and design , and math ) camp in rwanda to provide the learning space and resources for girls to gain skillsets needed to be competitive in the workforce . girls who participate are able to take courses on computer science , robotics , and design , and are given access to mentors in the steam fields . an $85 million president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) partnership is dedicated to helping young girls access school and remain in school . department of labor . the department of labor addresses the issue of child labor by providing education programs . its let girls learn contribution is to direct funding specifically to the education of adolescent girls engaged in or at high risk of entering child labor . for example , a $5 million grant has been issued to increase 2,500 girls' access to formal and non - formal education and training in zambia . department of agriculture . the department of agriculture is contributing $7 million under the mcgovern - dole international food for education and child nutrition program to keep girls in malawi in school by providing meals , scholarships , and classroom construction . the peace corps . for many years , individual peace corps volunteers have initiated girls' leadership camps and other efforts to encourage girls' education and empowerment in local communities . under let girls learn , the agency is actively promoting and funding such programs and incorporating let girls learn objectives into its in - country programming with a three - pillar strategy: empowering leaders . peace corps volunteers and community leaders are being trained to effectively incorporate gender awareness into their programming . w orking hand in hand with communities . private sector donations to a let girls learn fund support volunteer - initiated projects in local communities to implement gender - related projects . increasing the impact of peace corps volunteers . the peace corps is increasing the number of volunteers whose work focuses on the advancement of girls' education and women's empowerment . the peace corps currently targets 35 countries for let girls learn programming . the millennium challenge corporation . with an operational model that relies on aid recipients to develop and implement assistance projects , the mcc's ability to initiate girls' education efforts on its own is limited . however , the mcc has always been attentive to the role of gender in economic development — gender analysis is a regular part of its compact projects and the level of girls' school enrollment is a qualifying factor in its compact eligibility process . its current education projects , which pre - date let girls learn , address gender equality concerns . for example , the georgia project described above includes measures to promote the inclusion of women and girls in science , technology , engineering , and math ( stem ) fields , both at student and faculty levels .