fulltiltpoker.com reopened in europe . with the exception of new jersey , americans cannot gamble on the full tilt or pokerstars websites . pokerstars in 2015 acquired licenses to operate in new jersey , allowing it to offer games involving real money to players physically located in the state . doj announced a major shift in its view of internet gambling in december 2011 , when it concluded that the wire act applies only to sport - related gambling activities . this reversed its long - held assertion that all forms of internet gambling are illegal . doj's opinion has been widely interpreted to mean that states can allow online gambling if it does not involve sports . a number of states and tribes have taken advantage of the doj memo to allow online betting on horse races and internet lotteries . nevada now permits online poker , and delaware and new jersey have authorized all forms of internet gambling ( poker , slots , and various table games ) , with the exception of sports wagering . internet gambling is also regulated in the u.s. virgin islands , another tiny internet gambling market . these state - authorized activities rely on software that uses global positioning technology , internet addresses , and other data to ensure that gamblers are physically located within the state's borders and are old enough to gamble legally . regulations to implement uigea have also made it easier for state lotteries and other legal gambling operators to receive payment via credit cards and other electronic methods . with at least some restrictions now lifted , many participants in the gambling industry have been exploring ways to increase their involvement in internet gambling . companies not involved in the traditional gambling industry are also interested . social gaming — games hosted on social networking sites such as facebook and google+ — provides a way to play online games in the united states , but without cash prizes . internet sweepstakes cafés , where consumers buy phone cards that , as a bonus , include sweepstakes entries and then use the cards to play games that resemble slot machines , are estimated to take in $10 billion to $15 billion annually nationwide , but ohio , florida , mississippi , and california have outlawed them . daily fantasy sports ( dfs ) , where players assemble imaginary teams on online platforms for a chance to win cash jackpots based on the statistical performance of players in real - life games , is another form of gambling that can be played over the internet . in 2014 , dfs operators were reported to have $86 million in revenue after payouts to winning players . at the state level , a patchwork approach is being used to regulate dfs . nevada , for example , requires a dfs operator to obtain a license . a few states , including kansas , allow dfs companies to operate without regulation . and some states , such as washington , expressly prohibit internet gambling , including online fantasy sports wagering . many traditional forms of gambling , which can require substantial capital investments , could be affected in significant ways by the legalization of additional internet gambling .