procedures established by the democratic and republican parties are detailed below . presidential transitions are generally considered to begin immediately after election day . throughout the first phase of transition , which lasts through the meetings of the electoral college , the winning candidates are considered to be the next president and vice president , but their status is informal and presumptive . it should be noted that there actually is no president - or vice president - elect until after the electoral votes have been cast . the apparent winners , during this first period , are still the nominees of their parties . the use of the titles "president - elect" and "vice president - elect" is a time - honored courtesy that anticipates the ultimate status of the candidates who won an apparent majority of electoral votes . the second period during which succession procedures would be invoked in the event a president - elect or vice president - elect were to die or leave the ticket occurs between the time the electors vote and congress counts the electoral votes . presidential electors meet in their respective states to cast their votes on the first monday after the second wednesday in december in the year of the presidential election , which falls on december 19 in 2016 . federal law sets january 6 of the following year as the date on which congress convenes in joint session to count the electoral vote and declare the results . the succession process during this period would turn on the issue of when the candidates who received an electoral vote majority actually become president - elect and vice president - elect . the results of the electoral college are publicly known , but are the candidates who won a majority of electoral votes actually "elect" at this point , or do they attain this position only after the electoral college returns have been counted and declared by congress on january 6 ? some commentators doubt that there would be a president - and vice president - elect before the results are certified . they maintain that this contingency would lack clear constitutional or statutory direction . the balance of scholarly opinion , however , holds that once a majority of electoral votes has been cast , the winning candidates immediately become the president - and vice president - elect , even though the votes have yet to be officially counted or the results declared . if this is the case , then section 3 of the 20 th amendment would apply as soon as the electoral votes were cast: namely , if the president - elect dies , then the vice president - elect becomes the president - elect . this point of view receives strong support from the language of the 1932 house committee report accompanying the 20 th amendment , which arguably settles the question .