the ccc has no personnel of its own . rather , usda employees and facilities carry out all of its activities . administrative functions generally fall to the usda agencies directed to administer the various ccc programs . the majority of its functions are administered by the farm service agency ( fsa ) , which operates most of the commodity and income support programs . remove and dispose of surplus agricultural commodities . increase the domestic consumption of commodities by expanding markets or developing new and additional markets , marketing facilities , and uses for commodities . export , or cause to be exported , or aid in the development of foreign markets for commodities . the charter act makes ccc an agency and instrumentality of the united states within usda , subject to the supervision and direction of the secretary of agriculture . a board of directors appointed by the president , consisting of the secretary and seven other usda officials , is responsible for the management of ccc . ccc officers and advisors—also usda officials—are charged with maintaining liaisons with other governmental and private trade operations on the ccc's behalf . other agencies that administer ccc programs include the natural resources conservation service , the agricultural marketing service , the foreign agricultural service , and the united states agency for international development ( usaid ) . its capital stock remains at this level today . in 1939 , executive order 8219 ordered that all rights of the united states arising out of the ownership of ccc be transferred to the secretary of agriculture . at that time , low prices became so critical for cotton and corn producers that waiting for another season for supply controls to impact the market was judged to be untenable . with the establishment of ccc , it became possible to make nonrecourse loans so that farmers would have funds to hold their products off the market until prices improve . the first loans were made to cotton farmers at the rate of 10 cents per pound , while the average market price was between eight and nine cents per pound . since loans were higher than the market price and were nonrecourse , they could be satisfied by forfeiting the cotton pledged as collateral against the loan , they served as a form of price support and set the floor for the domestic market . funding for these first loan operations came from a tax on commodity processing and from ccc's $3 million capital account , which was appropriated under authority of the national industrial recovery act and the fourth deficiency act . constitutional difficulties with some provisions of the aaa , and practical shortcomings with elements of the law , led to additional legislation in the 1930s that continues today as permanent authority for many usda activities . subsequent omnibus "farm bills" now set most of the policy goals and program constraints for farm price and income support operations that are funded through ccc . the government corporation control act of 1945 ( gcca ) required all wholly owned government corporations to be reincorporated as agencies or instrumentalities of the united states . accordingly , congress passed the commodity credit corporation charter act of 1948 ( charter act ) .