fy2004 remains the peak year in constant dollars . the introduction of oco funding in fy2012 briefly elevated sfops funding , but in the following years , funding levels off at nearly the same amount as the fy2012 level . after removing inflation , funding for fy2013 through the fy2020 request declines below that level , suggesting that the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ) has kept foreign affairs funding below the rate of inflation . the administration distinguishes between enduring ( also called base , regular , or ongoing ) , emergency supplemental , and overseas contingency operations ( oco ) funds . funds designated as emergency or oco are not subject to procedural limits on discretionary spending in congressional budget resolutions , or the statutory discretionary spending limits provided through the budget control act of 2011 for fy2011-fy2021 ( bca , p.l . prior to fy2012 , the president typically submitted to congress additional funding requests ( after the initial annual budget request ) , referred to as emergency supplementals . supplemental funding packages have historically been approved to address emergency , war - related , or otherwise off - cycle budget needs . the obama administration requested emergency supplemental appropriations for urgent unexpected expenses , such as the u.s. international responses to ebola , the zika virus , and famine relief to syria , yemen , somalia , and northeast nigeria . the trump administration has not requested supplemental funding for unexpected international crises . in contrast to emergency supplemental appropriations , the obama administration included within the regular budget request in fy2012 what it described as short - term , temporary , war - related funding for the frontline states of iraq , afghanistan , and pakistan — designated as overseas contingency operations funds , or oco . congress had used the oco designation in earlier years for department of defense appropriations to distinguish between ongoing versus war - related expenditures . in response to the fy2012 sfops oco request , congress appropriated oco funds for the department of state and usaid activities beyond the requested level and for more than just activities in iraq , afghanistan , and pakistan . in fy2012 , congress included oco funds for the three frontline states as well as for yemen , somalia , kenya , and the philippines . the obama administration first requested oco funds for a country other than the three frontline states in fy2015 , when it requested oco funds for syria . in fy2018 , the trump administration requested oco funds for the department of state and usaid activities in iraq , afghanistan , and pakistan , as well as "high threat / high risk" areas . these included syria , yemen , nigeria , somalia , and south sudan , among others . the administration's initial fy2019 request included oco funds for the department of state and usaid , but after passage of the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba 2018 , p.l . 115-123 ) , the administration requested that all previously requested sfops oco funds be moved to enduring funds . for fy2020 , the trump administration again requested no oco funds for foreign affairs agencies .