these funds are not appropriated by congress . they are available for obligation and included in the president's budget to calculate the gross budget authority . 302 ( a ) and 302 ( b ) allocations in general practice , the maximum budget authority for annual appropriations ( including dhs ) is determined through a two - stage congressional budget process . those amounts are included in the budget authority totals . a subtotal for each component of total estimated resources that would be available under the legislation and from other sources ( such as fees , mandatory spending , and trust funds ) for the given fiscal year is also provided . at the bottom of each table , totals indicate the total for the title on its own , funding through general provisions and supplemental appropriations ( when such were requested or provided ) , the total for the title's components in the entire bill , and the projected total fy2017 funding for the title's components from all sources ( such as fees not governed by the bill , trust funds , etc .

 ) most of the fy2017 dhs appropriations request categorized its appropriations in this fashion . the exception was the coast guard , which was in the process of migrating its financial information to a new system . the senate appropriations committee did not use the new structure , instead drafting its annual dhs appropriations bill and report using the same structure as was used in fy2016 . two of these — emergency spending and overseas contingency operations / global war on terror — are not limited . the third justification — disaster relief — is limited . under the budget control act , the allowable adjustment for disaster relief is determined by the office of management and budget ( omb ) , using the following formula: limit on disaster relief cap adjustment for the fiscal year = rolling average of the disaster relief spending over the last ten fiscal years ( throwing out the high and low years ) + the unused amount of the rolling average from the previous fiscal year . the disaster relief allowable adjustment for fy2017 was $8.129 billion , and was used to provide $6.713 billion for fema's disaster relief fund and $1.416 billion for the department of housing and urban development's ( hud's ) community development fund . on the left are the five appropriations categories of the revised cas with a black bar representing the total fy2017 funding levels enacted for dhs for each . a sixth catch - all category is included for budget authority associated with the legislation that does not fit the cas categories , and a seventh category is included for appropriations for the u.s. coast guard , which has not transitioned its accounting system to the cas format . section 563 of division f of p.l . appropriations measures for dhs typically have been organized into five titles . the first four are thematic groupings of components , while the fifth provides general direction to the department , and sometimes includes provisions providing additional budget authority .