appendix a . list of federally funded research and development centers , fy2017 appendix b . number of ffrdcs , fy1967 – fy201 . many of these concerns remain . the following sections describe some of these issues . the adequacy of agency oversight and management of ffrdcs is a long - standing congressional concern . some members of congress have repeatedly expressed concern about the ability of federal agencies to control costs and address perceived mismanagement at ffrdcs . for example , in 1992 , a senate subcommittee report indicated "that ffrdcs today operate under an inadequate , inconsistent patchwork of federal cost , accounting and auditing controls , whose deficiencies have contributed to the wasteful or inappropriate use of millions of federal dollars. more recently , in a 2016 hearing examining the mission and management of doe's ffrdcs , representative fred upton , chairman of the house committee on energy and commerce , stated , doe's safety , security , and contract management problems span administrations , span congresses . from my experience , and as our witnesses will explain , improving doe's performance requires long , sustained attention to ensure sustained improvement in agency performance . congressional scrutiny is driven , in part , by a number of high - profile incidents . for example , in 2000 , two los alamos national laboratory ( lanl ) computer hard drives went missing and an employee was accused of planning to sell nuclear information to china . in 2004 , the mishandling of classified data and the partial blinding of a student from a laser accident closed lanl for seven months , costing $370 million . more recently , an investigation found that lanl mishandled hazardous waste , and nine lanl workers were injured during routine maintenance of an electrical substation . since the early 1990s , the government accountability office ( gao ) has designated doe's contract management as a high - risk area for fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement . in 2013 , gao narrowed its high - risk designation to major contracts and projects within doe's office of environmental management and the national nuclear security administration , which manages three doe ffrdcs . in 2015 , while noting some of the progress made by doe in addressing its oversight and management challenges , gao indicated that "more work is needed. since 2002 , doe has been shifting its ffrdc oversight from a transactional model to a systems - based approach that assesses analytical information collected by the ffrdcs through what is known as contractor assurance systems ( cas ) . many stakeholders recognize the use of cas as a positive step to improving doe oversight . however , in 2013 , the national academy of public administration ( napa ) called on doe to exercise caution as it transitioned to this oversight model . napa indicated that the maturity of cas varies and that doe needs to verify the ability of an ffrdc's cas to identify problems before they occur . in contrast , others view doe's overall oversight and management activities as burdensome , counterproductive , and a distortion of the ffrdc model .