parental involvement leave . 5535 would have entitled eligible employees to up to eight hours of leave during any 30-day period , with a maximum of 48 hours during any 12-month period , to participate in or attend a school conference or an activity that is sponsored by a school or community organization attended by the employee's child or grandchild . in both cases , employees would be required to notify employers of their intention to use such leave at least seven days in advance of the leave , where possible . this 7-day notice requirement is shorter than the 30-day notice required , where possible , for a foreseeable need to use fmla leave for the arrival of a new child , a serious health condition , or the serious injury or illness of a servicemember . under current law , eligible employees may use fmla leave to care for and bond with a new child , for a serious health condition that renders the employee unable to perform at least one essential function of his or her job , to provide care to a close family member with a serious health condition , and for certain military family needs . the 114 th congress considered several proposals to expand this set of qualifying uses of fmla leave by ( 1 ) creating new leave categories , and ( 2 ) broadening the circumstances under which employees may use existing leave categories . bills introduced in the 114 th congress would have allowed employees to use the existing fmla leave entitlement for bereavement , needs related to domestic violence experienced by the employee or a close family member , family involvement , and medical needs related to certain service - connected disabilities for veterans . the following proposals would have permitted eligible employees to use the existing fmla leave entitlement for the death of a close family member ( or members ) : s. 1302 / h.r . the 114 th congress considered several bills to amend the fmla . these proposals sought to create new entitlements ( i.e. , provide additional leave time ) ; expand categories of permissible leave by creating new fmla - qualifying uses of leave and by expanding the circumstances under which existing leave categories may be used ; and modify employee eligibility requirements , generally and for specific worker groups . the fmla requires that covered employers grant up to 12 workweeks of leave in a 12-month period to eligible employees for one or more of the following reasons: the birth and care of the employee's newborn child , provided that leave is taken within 12 months of the child's birth ; the placement of an adopted or fostered child with the employee , provided that leave is taken within 12 months of the child's placement ; to care for a spouse , child ( generally a minor child ) , or parent with a serious health condition ; the employee's own serious health condition that renders the employee unable to perform the essential functions of his or her job ; and qualified military exigencies if the employee's spouse , child , or parent is a covered military member on covered active duty .