by the middle of the nineteenth century , each chamber operated its own restaurants . independent restauranteurs provided the earliest dining for the house , and decisions related to the restaurants during the 1800s were made , at different times , by the speaker of the house , the commissioner of public buildings , the committee on public buildings and grounds , and the committee on accounts . the restauranteur was able to set menu prices and keep any profits made from sales , but he was required to pay the house a flat fee for "the privilege of keeping the restaurant of the house. as part of the capitol facilities , the additional resources required to run the restaurants , like coal , gas , and , electricity , were provided by congress , despite the objection of some members . the subcommittee recommended an extension to the east central front of the capitol , in which a new private dining room for house members ( and a separate one for senators ) opened during january 1962 . the house restaurant system , overall , struggled to break even . many of the financial problems were tied to the restaurants' operating hours , which often extended beyond the times the house was in session . as a result , dining revenues were not sufficient to cover the labor costs associated with keeping the restaurants open . some attempts to improve restaurant finances involved menu price increases , yet these were generally not enough to offset the increases in costs . those familiar with the restaurants noted that house restaurant workers were paid higher wages than workers in comparable private restaurants , although some members maintained that restaurant workers were still paid too little . house restaurant finances were particularly impacted by measures that affected the wages and benefits of house employees . often , the smaller eateries , like the coffee shops , carry - outs , and vending machines , and catering services , would generate revenue for the house restaurant system , but not enough to offset losses from other facilities in the system . even when the restaurants did turn a profit , some news accounts suggested that the house restaurant system was propped up through taxpayer subsidies . table 2 displays the congressional entities that have been involved with senate restaurant management . the hole in the wall , also known as the senate club , was the first restaurant in the senate , set up in a small , circular room accessible through the old senate post office . it began as an informal eatery sometime before the mid - 1830s , where the sergeant at arms would bring in food made at home by his wife to serve as luncheon fare . at some point before it closed in 1857 , expenses related to the hole in the wall were paid for out of the senate contingency fund . a newspaper article from 1881 stated that the president pro tempore would review applicants for new senate restaurant vendors and that "[u]nder the rules of the senate the vice president has control of the restaurant.