it was entirely funded through the nip . in the words of francis taylor , the current under secretary for intelligence and analysis ( dhs / i&a ) , "i&a has one of the broadest customer bases in the ic , ranging from the secretary , to dhs policymakers and operators , to thousands of state and local officials and private sector partners — each of whom have different information classification requirements and limitations. the fers act ( p.l . 99-335 ) provided for those cia employees , who qualified for ciards - like retirement , by creating two special categories known as section 302 and section 303 employees ( for the applicable provisions in fers and the central intelligence agency retirement act of 1964 for certain employees , respectively ) . under fers , section 302 and 303 employees are eligible for retirement benefits similar to those available to federal law enforcement officers . background the central intelligence agency retirement act of 1964 for certain employees ( ciara ) ( p.l . 88-643 , title ii ) created ciards to meet the needs of certain cia employees who were less likely than other federal employees to be in federal service long enough to qualify for csrs retirement benefits . as a result , there is no comprehensive reporting to congress regarding the overall resources and personnel required in support of the department's intelligence activities . in summary , within dhs , the nip budget funds activities within the oia that support national - level , ic - wide roles and responsibilities . the nip does not fund oia department - specific activities . the nip budget provides no funds to operate dhs intelligence activities such as its immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) office of intelligence because ice is not an ic element . because it is not part of the nip , management of the hsip does not belong to the dni ; it belongs to the secretary of homeland security . thus , the secretary of dhs manages intelligence - related budgets ( that fall outside the nip ) that include: department specific , intelligence - related activities of an ic component ; and intelligence - related activities of non - ic components within their departments . they may also vary in terms of scope and detail . national - level s trategic i ntelligence is associated with grand - scale ( big picture ) policy objectives . operational intelligence narrows its focus to foreign military or military - related situations or activities within theaters or operational areas . tactical i ntelligence is very detailed intelligence required for planning and conducting military operations at the troop level . to help clarify these three levels of intelligence , table 1 provides an overview of the intelligence associated with what the department of defense ( dod ) refers to as levels of war . organizations such as the central intelligence agency ( cia ) integrate intelligence from all sources into national intelligence in support of the policy process while organizations such as the defense intelligence agency ( dia ) are more focused on integrating service - specific intelligence into d efense intelligence for the warfighter .