for example , in 2004 , the d.c . such regulations are often referred to as "legislative rules. however , "nonlegislative" rules , such as interpretive rules and policy statements , are exempt from this requirement . federal courts will thus remand or invalidate an agency document issued without notice - and - comment procedures if a court concludes that it qualifies as a legislative rule . courts doing so will sometimes review the issue de novo , refusing to grant any deference to the agency because congress has not granted the agency authority to administer the apa . in addition , the apa's "good cause" provision permits agencies to bypass these requirements if compliance would be "impracticable , unnecessary , or contrary to the public interest. circuit upheld on security grounds the federal aviation administration's rule , promulgated without notice and comment , covering the suspension and revocation of pilot certificates . the court accepted the agency's contention that the regulation was necessary to protect the public against security threats , ruling that the "legitimate concern over the threat of further terrorist acts involving aircraft in the aftermath of september 11 , 2001," supported the good cause finding . nonetheless , the appropriate standard of review for determining what constitutes "good cause" under the apa is unsettled . similarly , parties may challenge the procedures used in agency adjudications . when conducting "formal" or "on the record" adjudications , agencies must provide trial - type procedures during the hearing before the agency . while agencies are generally free to choose between utilizing rulemaking or adjudications to set policy , certain legal requirements nevertheless apply to adjudications . formal adjudications require trial - like procedures and must be conducted before an administrative law judge ( alj ) or agency head ; informal adjudications have fewer procedural requirements and need not take place before an alj . state farm auto mutual insurance co . , explains that the scope of this review is "narrow," as "a court is not to substitute its judgment for that of the agency. however , courts will invalidate agency determinations that fail to "examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation for its action including a 'rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.' when reviewing that determination , courts must "consider whether the decision was based on a consideration of the relevant factors and whether there has been a clear error of judgment. in general , the court noted , an agency decision is arbitrary if the agency has relied on factors which congress has not intended it to consider , entirely failed to consider an important aspect of the problem , offered an explanation for its decision that runs counter to the evidence before the agency , or is so implausible that it could not be ascribed to a difference in view or the product of agency expertise . given the broad scope of federal agency actions that are subject to judicial review , whether an agency decision is arbitrary and capricious is largely a situation - specific question . importantly , the supreme court has clarified that it is not arbitrary and capricious for agencies to change their policies .