cfpb . the cfpb has been one of the more controversial products of the dodd - frank act and would be subject to more fundamental revision under the fca than other regulators . since the cfpb was established , some have argued that the agency has too much independence and not enough accountability . critics point to structural issues , such as the presence of a director rather than a board and funding that is outside the traditional congressional appropriations process . supporters of the cfpb highlight other aspects that they argue provide sufficient transparency and accountability , including the cfpb director's biannual testimony before congress and the cap on the cfpb's non - appropriated funding . other structural characteristics , supporters argue , are important for ensuring that the cfpb is somewhat insulated from political pressures and can focus on the technical aspect of policymaking . the fca includes numerous sections that would modify the cfpb and its operations . most notably , the fca would replace the cfpb's director with a five - member commission ( see " leadership structure " ) and subject the cfpb to the traditional appropriations process ( see " appropriations " ) . in addition , the fca would rename the cfpb as the consumer financial opportunity commission ( cfoc ) and would alter the cfoc's mandate to require additional focus on "strengthening participation in markets by covered persons , without government interference or subsidies , to increase competition and enhance consumer choice. the fca includes numerous other modifications , including repealing the cfpb's authority to deem certain acts to be unlawful because they are "abusive" and raising the cfpb's supervisory threshold for depositories from $10 billion to $50 billion in assets . fed . the federal reserve is unique among financial regulators in that , in addition to its regulatory role , it is responsible for conducting monetary policy and operating parts of the payment system . to shield monetary policy from undue political influence , the federal reserve is more independent from congress and the administration than other financial regulators . nevertheless , it is still subject to congressional oversight . the fca contains 11 sections related to the fed , including the following: a provision that would remove statutory restrictions on government accountability office ( gao ) audits of monetary policy and would require an annual audit that is not subject to current statutory provisions , such as confidentiality requirements . effectively , this provision would expand gao's powers to allow it to evaluate the economic merits of fed policy decisions . a provision that would require the fed to formulate a mathematical rule ( called the "directive policy rule" ) that would instruct it how to set monetary policy so as to achieve its mandate of stable prices and maximum employment based on macroeconomic variables . the provision would also require the fed to calculate a traditional taylor rule ( called the "reference policy rule" in the bill ) and compare it to the directive policy rule . if the fed did not comply , it would trigger a gao audit and testimony by the fed chair before the committees of jurisdiction .