house appropriations committee - reported h.r . most of the fy2017 dhs appropriations request categorized its appropriations in this fashion . the exception was the coast guard , which was in the process of migrating its financial information to a new system . dhs has also proposed realigning its programs , project , and activities ( ppa ) structure — the next level of funding detail below the appropriation level — possibly trying to align ppas into a mission - based hierarchy . the house appropriations committee made its funding recommendation using the cas ( although it chose to implement it slightly differently than the administration had envisioned in title i ) , but the senate appropriations committee did not , instead drafting its annual dhs appropriations bill and report using the same structure as was used in fy2016 . cbp is responsible for security at and between ports of entry ( poe ) along the border . the u.s. secret service ( usss ) has two concurrent missions — protection of certain people , places , and events , and criminal investigations . the protection mission entails protecting current and former presidents , vice presidents , their spouses and minor children , as well as distinguished foreign visitors to the united states , and certain other individuals . the investigative work of the usss is enhanced by electronic crimes task forces and financial crimes task forces , which according to the usss , "combine resources from the law enforcement community , the private sector , and academia to combat threats to the nation's financial payment systems and critical infrastructures. cbp's major accounts in the legacy appropriations structure include border security inspections and trade facilitation , which encompasses risk - based targeting and the inspection of travelers and goods at poes ; border security and control between ports of entry , which includes the border patrol ; air and marine interdiction ; automation modernization , which includes customs and immigration information technology systems ; border security fencing , infrastructure , and technology ( bsfit ) ; facilities management ; and a number of immigration and customs user fee accounts . ice focuses on enforcement of immigration and customs laws within the united states . ice has two main components: homeland security investigations ( hsi ) and enforcement and removal operations ( ero ) . for more information on the missions of the usss , see crs report rl34603 , the u.s. secret service: history and missions , by [author name scrubbed] . for fy2017 , the administration requested just under $1.9 billion in discretionary budget authority for usss . this is $42 million ( 2.2% ) less than was provided in fy2016 . senate appropriations committee - reported s. 3001 included the overall requested level of discretionary budget authority for usss . however , in addition to not adopting the common appropriations structure for usss , the senate appropriations committee recommended shifting $15 million from the usss protection operations to its investigative operations . 5634 included over $1.9 billion in discretionary budget authority for usss . this is $41 million ( 2.2% ) more than was requested by the administration , and $1 million ( 0.1% ) less than was provided in fy2016 .