, engage in profit shifting ) . for more background on tax law regarding the territories , the status of federal legislation to encourage development in the territories , see crs report r43541 , recently expired community assistance - related tax provisions ( "tax extenders" ) : in brief , by sean lowry ( discussing the american samoa economic development credit ) ; internal revenue service ( irs ) , tax guide for individuals with income from u.s . the refundable portion of the ctc is known as the actc . the ctc is intended to reduce the financial burden that families incur when they have children . generally , bona fide residents of the territories do not meet the criteria to claim the federal eitc . mirror code residents ( guam , cnmi , and usvi ) and certain pr residents can claim the actc . congress could expand eligibility of the eitc and actc to more residents of non - mirror code territories , as president obama and others have called for in pr . the research surrounding the economic impact of these refundable credits in the united states may prove insightful to policymakers interested in expanding eligibility of these credits to the territories . in theory , the ctc and actc could provide subsidies for low - income families to work and have children . however , researchers have found it difficult to isolate the labor market effects of ctc and actc , particularly with the presence of the similarly - targeted , but larger , subsidy provided by the eitc . additionally , the ctc and actc are unlikely to have a significant impact on inducing families to have additional children , as the expenses associated with raising a child typically exceed the benefits associated the tax provisions . in comparison , studies have found that the eitc is effective in encouraging single mothers to enter the labor force , as was the original intention of the provision , but the credit is less effective in increasing the labor supply of secondary earners . there is no significant evidence that the eitc increases the labor supply of individuals without children , likely because so few childless taxpayers receive the childless eitc . the eitc also generally reduces poverty but only for recipients who have children . given these findings , expanding access for territorial residents to claim the eitc and actc could increase labor supply and reduce poverty in these areas to the extent that these issues are concentrated in populations where the proposals have shown to be effective . for example , a single man without children or an unemployed spouse might not benefit much from these policies compared to a single mother with children . there are several barriers that could prevent expanded eitc or actc from having the type of economic benefits claimed by the policies' proponents . most notably , many territorial residents currently do not file a u.s. tax return , particularly if their income comes only from territorial sources ( see table a - 1 ) .