these are discussed below . several bills have been introduced in the 114 th congress that would amend or otherwise address fatca . finally , the commission on americans living abroad act ( h.r . 3078 ) would establish a commission to study how federal laws and policies , including fatca , affect u.s. citizens living in foreign countries . the countries that have igas in effect — either because the iga is actually in force or because the country is treated as such — are listed in table a - 1 . as discussed above , treasury and the irs treat certain countries as having an iga in effect even though the country has not taken all the steps necessary to actually bring the agreement into force under two circumstances: ( 1 ) it has signed an iga and is taking steps to bring it into force within a reasonable time ; or ( 2 ) it has reached an agreement in substance with the united states on the terms of an iga prior to november 30 , 2014 , and it continues to demonstrate intent to sign the iga as soon as possible . in addition to providing such status information for each country , table a - 1 also notes whether each country uses a model 1 or model 2 iga and provides relevant dates . first , s. 663 , whose stated purpose is "[t]o repeal the violation of sovereign nations' laws and privacy matters," would repeal many of fatca's provisions , including the ffi reporting and withholding requirements . the stop tax haven abuse act ( h.r . 297 and s. 174 ) includes a provision with the stated purpose of "strengthening" fatca . among other things , the bill provision would expand the reporting requirement for passive foreign investment companies ; expand the definition of "financial account" to include transaction accounts ; expressly include entities engaged in investing in derivatives and swaps in the definition of "financial institution" ; and include beneficial owners within the definition of "substantial u.s . owner. the provision would also make it easier for information to be disclosed in certain circumstances . the law is now fully in effect . key among fatca's provisions is the requirement that foreign financial institutions ( ffis ) report information on their u.s. account holders to the internal revenue service ( irs ) . in order to implement this requirement , the united states has entered into bilateral agreements with numerous countries . under some of these agreements , ffis report the information to their home country , which then provides the information to the irs . for those ffis that are not covered by such an agreement , fatca generally requires they report the information directly to the irs . this report provides an overview of the ffi reporting requirements and examines the role of the intergovernmental agreements ( igas ) in implementing them . the report then discusses the confidentiality protections provided to the information reported by ffis and litigation in which plaintiffs have raised concerns about privacy and the use of igas . it ends with a summary of fatca legislation introduced in the 114 th congress .