the first , p.l . division f of p.l . 115-31 included $4.72 billion in net discretionary budget authority for fema . this is $602 million ( 14.0% ) above the level requested by the obama administration , and $58 million ( 1.2% ) above the enacted level for fy2016 . the act also included $6.7 billion for the cost of major disasters . on september 1 , 2017 , the trump administration requested $7.85 billion in supplemental funding for fy2017 , including $7.4 billion for the fema's drf . on september 6 , the house passed the relief package requested by the administration as an amendment to h.r . on september 7 , the senate passed an amended version , which included the house - passed funding as well as an additional $7.4 billion for disaster relief through hud's community development fund , a short - term increase to the debt limit , and a short - term continuing resolution that would fund government operations into fy2018 . the house passed the senate - amended version of the bill on september 8 , 2017 , and it became p.l . the disaster relief fund ( drf ) is the main account used to fund a wide variety of programs , grants , and other forms of emergency and disaster assistance to states , local governments , certain nonprofit entities , and families and individuals affected by disasters . the drf expends funds in response to current incidents , as well as to meet recovery needs from previous incidents . as a result , the drf is a no - year account — unused budget authority from the previous fiscal year is carried over to the next fiscal year . funding currently provided to the drf can be broken out into two categories . the first is funding for activities not directly tied to major disasters under the stafford act ( including activities such as assistance provided to states for emergencies and fires ) . this category is sometimes referred to as the drf's "base" funding . the second ( and significantly larger ) category is for disaster relief costs for major disasters under the stafford act . this structure reflects the impact of the budget control act ( p.l . 112-25 , hereinafter referred to as the bca ) , which allows these costs incurred by major disasters to be paid through an "allowable adjustment" to the discretionary spending caps , rather than having them count against the discretionary spending allocation for the bill . for fy2017 , the obama administration requested $7,348 million in discretionary budget authority for the drf . the requested amount for the base was $639 million , while $6,709 million was requested for the costs of major disasters . in addition , the administration requested a $24 million transfer from the drf to the dhs office of inspector general ( dhs oig ) for oversight of disaster relief activities . the requested amount is $26 million less than was provided in fy2016 . the house - and senate - reported bills included the amount requested by the administration for the drf ( $639 million for the base , and $6,709 million for disaster relief ) including the $24 million transfer to the dhs oig .