this is because it may be difficult for a challenger to show for whom those votes were given , or would have been given . the supreme court has referred to this as the "safe harbor" provision . new hampshire law does not appear to provide a specific statutory scheme for election contests relating to federal elections , but rather provides for a process for a recount and an appeal and hearing on such recount results . the new hampshire statutes provide that "any candidate for whom a vote was cast" may apply for a recount , which application is to be made to the secretary of state no later than the friday following the election . during the recount process , the candidates and their counsels and representatives may "protest" the counting or failure to count any ballot , and the secretary of state is to rule on such protest . an appeal of the recount results may be made within three days of the declaration of the results of the recount to the state ballot law commission , which may determine which candidate received the greatest number of votes . that determination may then be appealed to the state supreme court within five days of the board's decision . although there is no specific statutory grounds or cause of action for an election contest to be brought in the case of an election for federal office , the new hampshire statutes do recognize that nothing in their statutory scheme would necessarily prevent a common law cause of action and recourse "to the superior court on other questions , within the jurisdiction of such court , relating to the legality or regularity of general elections or the results thereof. north carolina provides that election contests are , as a general matter , to be filed with the county board of elections . however , because the county boards may rule that they cannot resolve the issue if an election is in more than one county , and because a petition may be taken up directly by the state board of elections , it would appear reasonable to file a petition directly to the state board of elections ( or at least concurrently with a filing to the county board ) with respect to irregularities or misconduct in the votes for presidential electors . the protest must state whether it concerns "the manner in which votes were counted and results tabulated," or whether it relates to some "other irregularity," and what remedy the protester is seeking . if the protest involves the manner in which votes were counted and results tabulated , then it must be filed before the beginning of the county board of election's canvass meeting ( or if good cause for delay is shown , it may be filed up to 5:00 p.m. on the second business day after the county board of elections has completed its canvass and declared the results ) . if the protest involves some other irregularity , then it must be filed before 5:00 p.m. on the second business day after the county board of elections has completed its canvass and declared the results .