congress has attempted to limit the penalty provisions of the mbta . in june 2015 , the house of representatives passed the fy2016 commerce , justice , science , and related agencies appropriations bill , which included an amendment sponsored by representative jeff duncan that would prohibit the use of department of justice funds to prosecute or hold liable any person or corporation for a violation of the mbta . the house appropriations bill was reported in the senate but was not brought to the floor for consideration . to address some of the uncertainty regarding incidental takes and compliance with the mbta , in may 2015 , fws announced that it was considering developing an mbta permitting program to authorize incidental takes of migratory birds . the notice stated that fws intended to prepare a draft environmental impact statement ( eis ) pursuant to nepa that would analyze alternatives for permitting incidental take under the mbta for certain industries , requesting public comment on regulatory options . the notice indicated that the eis will review various approaches to regulating incidental takes of migratory birds , including general incidental take authorizations for some types of hazards to birds associated with particular industry sectors such as oil and gas disposal pits , methane burner pipes at oil production sites , communication towers , electric transmission lines , and wind energy generation ; individual permits authorizing incidental take from particular projects or activities not covered under general or conditional authorizations ; development of memoranda of understanding with federal agencies authorizing incidental take from those agencies' operations and activities ( which may also address authorizing take by third parties regulated by the agencies ) ; and / or development of voluntary guidance for industry sectors regarding operational techniques or technologies that can avoid or minimize incidental take . fws received over 140 public comments on its notice of intent . some industries favor incidental take permits as a way to provide regulatory certainty and reduce inconsistent enforcement discretion . fws hopes to issue the draft regulations this winter before the end of the obama administration . if fws adopts incidental take regulations under the mbta , the final regulations are likely to be challenged in the fifth , eighth , and ninth circuits , where the courts have more narrowly construed fws authority and the scope of the mbta to regulate only direct and intentional takings of migratory birds and not the taking of migratory birds that occurs incidental to , and is not the purpose of , an otherwise lawful activity . there is a wide range of federal district and appellate court cases that have addressed this issue . below is a review of selected cases that provide examples of the major issues that courts have faced when determining the reach of the mbta . the legislative history of the mbta supports differing interpretations of the nature and scope of takings prohibited and types of migratory birds protected by the mbta . the courts that have limited the scope of the mbta prohibitions to direct and intentional actions have interpreted the legislative history to indicate that congress was primarily concerned with illegal hunting and poaching of migratory birds when it enacted the mbta .