marie . this project is primarily relevant to the transport of minnesota iron ore to steel mills within the great lakes . the purported need for a second lock is for redundancy in case the poe lock must be closed for emergency repairs . the corps of engineers has also cited sabotage from foreign ship crews as a risk . reportedly , an unofficial cost estimate for a second lock is in the neighborhood of $600 million . plans for a second lock have been studied by the corps since the early 1980s . in a 1984 study , the corps recommended that the project proceed , based on its forecast that tonnage through the lock would reach 134 million tons by 2010 . however , actual tonnage in 2010 was only 73 million tons , barely half the corps' forecast . in 2009 , the corps built cofferdams at the two smaller locks so that the locks could be drained as a first step in the construction of the new lock . two other capital needs also would require significant funding . one is dredging of harbors and channels to maintain their depths , a continuing necessity on the great lakes . the other is the disposal of the many lake - bottom sediments that are contaminated . these sediments are disposed of in "confined disposal facilities" rather than dumped without containment in open water or upland . many of the disposal facilities have reached their capacity , although new ones are planned . the current capitalization strategy regarding st. lawrence seaway infrastructure emphasizes preservation and maintenance rather than significant capacity expansion . this consensus , expressed in a 2007 binational study by several u.s. and canadian federal agencies , was achieved after studies of extending navigation capabilities through the winter and increasing the seaway's depths and lock dimensions . since that study , there have been no major efforts toward keeping the seaway open during winter months or expanding the locks . as discussed further below , past evaluations determined that these expansions were not worth the cost , economically or environmentally . as mentioned above , the pelletization of iron ore increased pressure for winter operations because pellets do not freeze into a solid block like iron ore rock and thus can be handled and shipped in freezing temperatures . while the seaway is closed in winter , portions of the western great lakes are kept open for navigation with icebreakers . iron ore pellets can be sourced from the upper peninsula of michigan and shipped from escanaba ( see figure 1 ) , thus avoiding interruption due to the annual closure of the soo locks . in the 1970s , congress funded demonstration projects over multiple winters to show the feasibility of extending navigation through the winter over the rest of the great lakes . the demonstration used air hoses designed to push warmer water to the surface , reducing the thickness of the ice , as well as deployment of more icebreakers . these experimental projects upset waterfront landowners such as coal - fired power plants because broken ice interfered with their intake pipes . other waterfront property owners complained that ice floes caused shoreline erosion and damaged piers and docks .