index . the index itself determines the changing value over time of the minimum wage ; different indices may vary in growth and volatility . the index also reflects the underlying purpose of an index . triggers . because an indexed minimum wage reflects changes in one variable , as opposed to multiple variables , indexation policies may include triggers that allow for the consideration of other factors not explicitly in the index . for example , an indexation policy may indicate that if the unemployment rate is above a certain threshold or economic growth below a certain level , then the minimum wage rate will not increase regardless of the change in the index value . periodicity . indexation of state minimum wages is typically structured on an annual basis . these include versions of the cpi or the pce . specifically , indices comprised of the cpi — the cpi - w , the cpi - u , and the cpi - u - rs — or the pce are discussed below . recent congressional proposals have included indexing the federal minimum wage to measures of hourly earnings . to examine this concept of linking the minimum wage to measures of wages rather than measures of prices , average hourly earnings for manufacturing workers and for production and nonsupervisory workers are also considered as indices . for each index in this section , a brief description is provided , followed by estimates of the federal minimum wage if it had been indexed to that measure at each statutorily set increase since it was enacted ( or at each point from which the index is available ) . data in table 1 show the indexed values of the federal minimum wage using the seven indices discussed in this section . the first two columns show the effective date and the nominal rate ( not indexed ) of the federal minimum wage for the original rate and the 22 increases that have occurred since 1938 . the remaining seven columns show the 2016 value , by index , of the minimum wage had the nominal wage been indexed at the time it was first enacted . for example , if the 1938 minimum wage of $0.25 per hour had been indexed to the cpi - u upon enactment , the federal minimum wage in 2016 would be $4.23 per hour ; if it had been indexed from its nominal rate of $1.60 in 1968 , it would be $10.98 in 2016 . each value in the index columns assumes that the minimum wage rates were not subsequently changed after enactment , but only increased due to inflation . as the data in table 1 and the figures below show , the inflation - adjusted value of the minimum wage would have varied greatly by 2016 depending on the choice of index and , importantly , the starting point of indexation . the following figures present indexation of the minimum wage in ways slightly different from traditional presentations . each figure shows the hypothetical value of the minimum wage in 2016 had the minimum wage been indexed to the relevant economic indicator from each of the 23 times its value was adjusted by congress .