underwriting may be more accurate . the application and underwriting processes may be faster , more convenient , and more aligned with certain customer preferences for financial - service delivery . proponents argue that these advantages will allow marketplace lending to continue to grow and transform the way individuals and small businesses acquire credit . furthermore , proponents assert that the changes will provide an opportunity for improvements in financial and societal outcomes: credit could become less expensive for individuals and small businesses . credit could become more available , especially for traditionally underserved or unserved market segments , such as small businesses and people with thin credit histories . returns for credit investors could be higher . this section analyses those arguments . some observers are concerned that a great deal of uncertainty surrounds the marketplace lending industry . skeptics argue that the industry is creating risks for borrowers , investors , and the financial system . the sources of potential risk include the following: underwriting accuracy and loan performance has not been tested by economic recession . some marketplace lenders — including a number of the largest — generate revenue from origination fees but do not hold the resultant loans and are not subject to risk - retention rules , possibly creating an incentive to make excessively risky loans . funding availability and demand for loans has been high during a period of economic expansion with low interest rates , but the ability to raise funds and attract borrowers in other economic conditions is unproven . servicing of loans in the event of a failure of a marketplace lender could be disrupted . these risks potentially threaten the borrowers of and investors in marketplace loans , marketplace lending companies themselves , and — if marketplace lending grows sufficiently in coming years — the financial system . the adverse outcomes could include the following: loan delinquency and default rates could grow to an unexpectedly high rate , harming borrowers' future credit availability and inflicting large , unanticipated losses on investors . credit determinations by marketplace lenders could disparately impact minorities and other protected groups . loan demand or funding for marketplace loans could contract to the point that marketplace lenders fail , potentially stopping the flow of payments to loan investors . if the industry grows sufficiently large in the future , bad underwriting , large losses on marketplace loans , or marketplace lender failures could create systemic stress . this section analyses those arguments . marketplace lending is subject to federal and state regulations and requirements . the rules are numerous but will be generally described here in three groups: securities registration and disclosure . consumer protection and fair - lending compliance . state - level regulatory requirements . although marketplace lending is subject to these rules and regulations , the existing regulatory system was designed prior to the advent of online marketplace lending . as a result , there is some uncertainty related to how regulation should be applied and how effective it can be . some issues include the following: potentially uncertain , inconsistent , or unnecessarily burdensome application of state regulation . potential lack of supervisory oversight . lack of risk - retention requirements .