figure 1 . russia and northeast asiasource: crs graphics . since the end of the cold war , russia has played a mostly quiet role in east asia , only intermittently focusing its attention on the pacific while primarily orienting its foreign policy toward europe and former soviet states . in the past few years , and particularly in the wake of russian aggression in ukraine in 2014 , russia's relations with the west have soured . in part as a consequence , moscow appears to be stepping up efforts to develop closer ties with countries in east asia , consistent with vladimir putin's 2012 presidential campaign promise to "turn to the east. as one european analyst put it , "originally , russia was simply attracted by the dynamic developments in asia and china ; however , since the ukraine crisis and the deterioration of the zapadny vektor ( 'western vector' ) in 2014 , its interest has turned into a necessity. in 2014 , putin signed legislation to offer a range of tax benefits and subsidies to businesses that establish operations in the russian far east , with an eye to expanding russia's trade with asia . china , japan , and south korea , all in need of energy supplies , offer commercial opportunities as the west imposes economic sanctions on russia and russia develops its oil and gas reserves . although most see a geostrategic alignment between moscow and tokyo as improbable , such an arrangement could offer a regional counterweight to beijing's rising stature . at the same time , russia's flirting with a partnership with china provides a retort to the u.s. "rebalance" to asia strategy . already tense , u.s. relations with moscow have frayed further since russia's intervention in ukraine in february - march 2014 and its initiation of military activities in syria in 2015 . the united states led an effort to impose multilateral sanctions on russia and isolate moscow diplomatically , encouraging its asian allies to do the same . ( see appendix . ) although its economic power is declining as energy prices fall , russia still has strength in terms of military capability , diplomatic capital by virtue of its permanent seat on the united nations security council , status as a nuclear state , and sheer geographic size . analysts believe leaders in moscow increasingly view the world through an anti - u.s. lens and hold many grievances against the west . from this mindset , russia may see asia as an area in which it is able to challenge u.s. interests . under president putin , russia's outreach to asia has been inconsistent , and at times contradictory . in 2015 , putin failed to attend the two largest east asia international meetings: the asia pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) forum and the east asia summit ( eas ) , although russia is a member of both groupings . while pursuing warmer relations with tokyo , russia has accelerated a military buildup on one of the disputed northern islands that japan also claims . after russia appeared to engage north korea , leader kim jong - un declined to attend a 2015 world war ii commemorative ceremony in moscow , and the relationship apparently faltered .