conversely , while on the d.c . circuit , justice kavanaugh wrote at length about heller 's meaning in his dissenting opinion in heller v. district of columbia ( heller ii ) , a ruling that evaluated several provisions of a comprehensive firearm scheme that the district of columbia had enacted in the wake of the supreme court's more - famous heller opinion . for self - defense in the home. because heller involved a challenged to a d.c. law , and because the district is generally not viewed as a state for purposes of constitutional law , a question beyond the scope of heller was whether the second amendment applies to the states . initially , the bill of rights was thought solely to restrict the power of the federal government . only after the fourteenth amendment's adoption did the supreme court contemplate whether the bill of rights applies to the states . with this minimal guidance from the supreme court , the circuit courts largely have been applying a two - step inquiry , drawn from the discussion in heller , to determine whether a particular law is constitutional . first , courts ask whether the challenged law burdens conduct protected by the second amendment . one law generally barred the registration of most handguns . another law required persons with registered firearms to keep them "unloaded and either disassembled or secured by a trigger lock , gun safe , locked box , or other secure device. and a third law prohibited persons within the district of columbia from carrying ( openly or concealed , in the home or elsewhere ) an unlicensed firearm . in 2003 , six d.c. residents challenged those three measures as unconstitutional under the second amendment , arguing that the constitution provides an individual right to bear arms . in particular , the residents contended that the second amendment provides individuals a right to possess "functional firearms" that are "readily accessible to be used . when the firearm restriction implicates core second amendment rights , the seventh circuit has suggested that the government must make a "rigorous showing" that may resemble something close to strict scrutiny . for less severe burdens , the court requires the government to make a "strong showing" that a firearm regulation bears a "substantial relation" to an important governmental objective — a standard that resembles the intermediate scrutiny standard of review . it is also worth noting that , although the d.c . circuit has applied the two - step approach when evaluating firearm legislation , the newest member of the supreme court bench — justice kavanaugh — advocated for a different approach while serving as a judge on the d.c . circuit , arguing that: "in my view," he stated , " heller and mcdonald leave little doubt that courts are to assess gun bans and regulations based on text , history , and tradition , not by a balancing test such as strict or intermediate scrutiny. heller largely left unresolved much of the "who , what , where , when , and why" of second amendment protections .