no u.s. fta has been terminated ; one has been suspended . the united states and canada agreed to suspend operation of the u.s. - canada fta when nafta entered into force on january 1 , 1994 . this report provides brief answers to frequently asked legal questions about withdrawal by the united states from an fta . subsequently , the president has issued proclamations altering tariff rates in the harmonized tariff schedule of the united states ( htsus ) to implement fta obligations in accordance with the terms of the delegation from congress . in order to adjust tariff rates on products imported from fta partner countries to what they would be in the absence of the fta ( generally , a higher most favored nation ( mfn ) rate in column 1 of the htsus marked "general" ) , the president would have to rely upon statutory authority . as noted above , many fta implementing laws contain provisions providing for automatic repeal of the implementing laws upon termination of ( and arguably , u.s. withdrawal from ) an fta . assuming such provisions are constitutional and that congress did not amend or repeal them , these provisions would repeal tariff modification authority granted to the president under the fta implementing bill , arguably rendering invalid presidential proclamations reducing tariffs under these authorities . generally speaking , tariff rates would then return to what they would be in the absence of proclamations issued by the president under the authority of the implementing law for that particular trade agreement . if the implementing law was not repealed upon termination of , or u.s. withdrawal from , the fta , on the other hand , then the president might rely on certain provisions in that law to adjust tariff rates to what they had been before the fta . in addition , section 125 ( e ) of the trade act of 1974 , which congress has made applicable to most ftas entered into by the united states , specifically addresses changes to tariff authority when an fta is terminated or the united states withdraws from it . that provision authorizes the president to proclaim the restoration of tariff rates to what they would be without the fta ( generally , the mfn rate ) , but states , in general , that the president must recommend to congress within 60 days of termination or withdrawal "appropriate rates of duty for all articles which were affected by the termination or withdrawal. the president cannot make laws , and thus repeal of federal statutory provisions implementing u.s. fta obligations requires action from congress . although provisions in fta implementing laws may delegate to the president the authority to effect the repeal of some federal statutory provisions implementing non - tariff trade agreement obligations , such provisions do not apply to all federal statutes implementing fta obligations . the report does not analyze other implications ( eg , economic ) of u.s. withdrawal from an fta .