none of these bills has been enacted . none of the bills introduced in the 114 th congress addresses the intellectual property implications of this so - called "parallel importation" or "re - importation. although debate surrounding the parallel importation of prescription pharmaceuticals has largely addressed the safety and efficacy of the imported medications , this practice may also raise significant intellectual property concerns . many prescription drugs are subject to patent rights in the united states . among the rights granted by an issued patent is the ability to exclude others from importing the patented product into the united states . as a result , even if a foreign drug is judged safe and effective for domestic use , brand - name firms may nonetheless be able to block the unauthorized importation of prescription drugs through use of their patent rights . the parallel trade of patented pharmaceuticals involves a fundamental trade - off within the intellectual property law: encouraging the labors that led to technological innovation , on one hand , and promoting access to the fruits of those labors , on the other . the patent system is built upon the premise that patents provide individuals with an incentive to innovate by awarding inventors exclusive rights in their inventions for a limited period of time . some observers believe that a diminishment of patent rights will decrease incentives to develop new pharmaceuticals in the future . yet there is growing concern that drug prices are too high in the united states as compared to other nations . some commentators believe that the patent system should not be used to regulate the movement of legitimate , lawfully purchased products through the global marketplace . this report explores the intellectual property laws and policies concerning the parallel importation of patented pharmaceuticals into the united states . it begins with a review of patent policy and procedures . the report then discusses the current legal framework for analyzing the permissibility of the parallel importation of patented pharmaceuticals , including both the domestic and international exhaustion doctrines . this report closes with a review of legislative issues and alternatives as they relate to intellectual property issues and parallel importation . in some circumstances , widely divergent drug prices between the united states and other nations have encouraged parallel importation . price disparities between the united states and other nations create incentives for individuals to purchase medications from abroad , and import them into the united states , in order to lower health care costs or undercut the u.s. distributor . in this context , the term "parallel imports" refers to patented products that are legitimately distributed abroad , and then sold to consumers in the united states without the permission of the authorized u.s. dealer . although these "grey market goods" are authentic products that were sold under the authorization of the brand - name drug company , they entered the u.s. market outside the usual distribution channels for that drug . two competing positions have arisen with respect to the use of patent rights to block parallel importation . one is that the exhaustion doctrine is not limited to domestic sales by the patentee or its representative , but to all sales regardless of their location .