for example , h.r . 601 stipulated that funding be continued at the rate provided in the applicable fy2017 appropriations bill , minus 0.6791% . while recent crs have provided that the funding rates for certain accounts are to be calculated with reference to the funding rates in the previous year , congress could establish a cr funding rate on any basis ( eg , the president's pending budget request , the appropriations bill for the pending year as passed by the house or senate , or the bill for the pending year as reported by a committee of either chamber ) . replanning and executing short - term contracting actions can be reduced by building a program schedule in which planned contracting actions are pushed to later in the fiscal year when it is more likely that a full appropriation would be enacted . additionally , managers can take steps to defer hiring actions , restrict travel policies , or cancel nonessential education and training events for personnel . these efforts by defense officials to prepare for the potential of a cr appear to have reduced some of the need to request that specific anomalies be included in the cr . however , former defense department comptroller mike mccord also held that no matter how the pentagon responds to these repeated cycles of crs , "there is no question that short - term funding creates enormous inefficiency.... . congress uses an annual appropriations process to fund the routine activities of most federal agencies . this process anticipates the enactment of 12 regular appropriations bills to fund these activities before the beginning of the fiscal year . former defense secretary ashton carter posited that crs put commanders in a "straight - jacket" that limits their ability to adapt , or keep pace with complex national security challenges around the world while responding to rapidly evolving threats like the islamic state . when this process is delayed beyond the start of the fiscal year , one or more continuing appropriations acts ( commonly known as continuing resolutions or crs ) can be used to provide funding until action on regular appropriations is completed . an interim continuing resolution ( cr ) typically provides that budget authority is available at a certain rate of operations or funding rate for the covered projects and activities , and for a specified period of time . the funding rate for a project or activity is based on the total amount of budget authority that would be available annually at the referenced funding level , and is prorated based on the fraction of a year for which the interim cr is in effect . in recent fiscal years , the referenced funding level has been the amount of budget authority that was available under specified appropriations acts from the previous fiscal year . for example , the first cr for fy2018 ( h.r . 115-56 ) provided , "... such amounts as may be necessary , at a rate of operations as provided in the applicable appropriations acts for fiscal year 2017. . while a blanket continuation of the prior year's spending levels is one option for establishing the cr's funding rate , other funding levels also have been used to provide the funding rate .