111-5 ) were classified as mandatory spending . the scale and growth of mandatory spending raises several challenges for congress , in addition to issues raised by the operation and design of programs funded by mandatory spending . if congress sought to address fiscal imbalances , it would be difficult to avoid either significant changes in mandatory spending programs or federal revenue policy . discretionary spending , according to current projections , is slated to continue shrinking as a share of the federal budget and as a share of gdp . further reductions in discretionary spending could help narrow fiscal imbalances , although those reductions are unlikely to be large enough to close fiscal gaps without other policy changes . net interest costs , the remaining portion of the federal outlays , reflect federal debt levels and interest rates . policymakers could impose higher tax rates or introduce new types of taxes , such as a federal vat , to support higher mandatory spending in the future . higher tax levels , however , could affect economic performance , unless measures were designed to enhance the efficiency of the tax system . policymakers could also pare back mandatory spending by restricting eligibility for benefits or lowering benefit levels , or through measures that limited excess cost growth in the health care and other sectors that supply goods and services that the government buys . limiting eligibility and benefits could affect some vulnerable households , while past efforts to control health care costs have had mixed success . some argue that providing higher levels of public support to the elderly is justified on equity grounds because future economic growth will raise living standards of younger generations . as economic growth rates have lagged below historical norms in recent years , such arguments may have become less compelling . discretionary spending was defined as budgetary resources provided in and controlled by appropriations acts . net interest payments , the final category of federal spending , are automatically authorized and are the government's interest payments on debt held by the public offset by interest income that the government receives . although net interest costs are typically reported separately in budgetary estimates and projections , as a formal matter they could be considered part of mandatory spending as they are paid on the basis of a permanent authorization . the budget categories of discretionary , mandatory / direct , and net interest are often referred to as bea categories . the evolution of social insurance and other mandatory programs reflects the influence of a complex array of social forces and events acting over the course of many decades , although many of the key policy responses were decided in the middle third of the 20 th century . some specific historical events , such as wars and severe economic depressions , can be linked to changes in some federal programs . more gradual social trends , such as urbanization , industrialization , higher rates of migration , rising incomes , labor conditions , the broadening of market ties across the national and world , expansions and contractions of electoral franchise , and improved longevity also played important roles in changing american society , as well as influencing the structure and role of the federal government .