see figure 2 . while the committees and subcommittees exercise jurisdiction over the legislation required to set policy , authorize actions , and provide the budget authority dod needs , they also usually provide opportunities for individual members of congress not assigned to the committees of jurisdiction to provide input regarding specific construction projects . during the period when legislation is being drafted , the committees may also issue guidance to members wishing to submit input to the committee in considering military construction matters . the guidance might suggest additional documentation that could prove helpful to the committee in its deliberations and may also set a deadline for submission of such information . often that deadline is set for late march , when the subcommittee staffs begin to prepare for markup of the necessary legislation . with congressional authorization and an appropriation , the responsibility for managing military construction projects typically falls to either naval facilities engineering command ( navfac ) for navy and marine corps projects , or the army corps of engineers ( ace ) for army and air force projects . army and air national guard headquarters bureaus manage their respective projects . construction encompasses several phases , including the planning and design of the project , the solicitation of bids from prospective general contractors , and the construction itself . normally , one of two general approaches , design - bid - build or design - build , will be used by the contracting officer in executing the project . this group is commonly referred to as a facilities utilization board . the result of these conferences―a prioritized list of construction needs― is presented to the installation's senior military commander , who then accepts or adjusts the priorities to create a final list of proposed projects for submission up the chain of command . the substance of that submission can be seen in a department of defense form 1391 ( dd 1391 ) , military construction project data sheet ( see an example dd 1391 at appendix c ) , created for each proposed project by the installation engineers . the dd 1391 includes a cost estimate , a description of the proposed construction , the specific requirement for the project ( eg , a change in mission or deterioration of facilities already in use ) , the current facility situation at the installation , the impact on installation mission if the project is not approved , and any other needed justification information . the dd 1391 form will accompany the construction request throughout the executive and legislative process . the highest - priority projects that will fit within the budgetary guidance provided by the office of management and budget ( omb ) will be included in the president's request . the approved projects assigned a lower priority are slated for funding in future years and are typically included in the future years defense program ( fydp ) , which is a catalogue that summarizes the forces , resources , and programs associated with dod operations over a five - year period . therefore , some construction projects may survive the screening process only to be placed in the budgeting queue for a future year's submission .