at present , five states require that vacancies can be filled only by a special election . the remaining 45 states provide some form of appointment by their governors to fill u.s. senate vacancies . following controversies that arose in connection with appointments to fill senate vacancies in 2008 and 2009 , particularly with respect to the illinois senate vacancy created by the election of senator barack h. obama as president , proposals to eliminate or curtail gubernatorial power to fill senate vacancies by appointment were introduced in the 111 th congress and in a number of state legislatures . as a result of these initiatives , connecticut and rhode island in 2012 , and north dakota in 2015 eliminated or limited the governor's authority to fill u.s. senate vacancies by appointment , while arkansas in 2017 confirmed the governor's appointment power and eliminated conflicting provisions between the state code and constitution . conversely , in 2009 , massachusetts changed its requirement from filling vacancies only by election to providing for temporary appointment by the governor followed by a special election . in addition , as noted earlier in this report , north carolina in 2013 , and maryland in 2016 , enacted legislation that required appointments to fill senate vacancies be from the same political party as the previous incumbent . since ratification of the seventeenth amendment in 1913 , most of the states , with few exceptions and little evident controversy , have empowered their governors to fill senate vacancies by appointment until a permanent replacement can be elected . the controversies surrounding appointments to fill senate vacancies that occurred in the context of the 2008 presidential election generated considerable interest , including media analyses and commentaries , and legislative and constitutional proposals for change on both the federal and state levels . interest in a response on the federal level , including proposals to revise senate vacancy procedures , appears to have receded — relevant bills and constitutional amendments introduced in the 111 th congress did not progress beyond hearings , and no similar proposal has been offered since that time . in the states , connecticut , massachusetts , north dakota , and rhode island took action between 2009 and 2015 to limit or eliminate their governors' role in filling senate vacancies , but the national conference of state legislatures reports no further legislation since then . the only other recent changes in the states , action in maryland and north carolina to establish "same party" requirements for appointments to fill senate vacancies , were arguably taken in the context of divided party control of the legislature and governorship in both states . beyond these developments , recent actions suggest that the traditional pattern of senate vacancies and appointments has reemerged: since 2009 , 10 vacancies in the senate have been filled by temporary appointments with little controversy as to the appointment process . this report discusses the latest developments in vacancies in the senate ; identifies state provisions to appoint or elect senators to fill vacancies ; and reviews the constitutional origins of the appointments provision and its incorporation in the seventeenth amendment .