some examples follow . in brazil , "specific information related to non - automatic import license requirements and explanations for rejections of non - automatic import license applications are lacking . the lack of transparency surrounding these procedures creates additional burdens for u.s. exporters.... u.s. companies continue to complain of burdensome documentation requirements for the import of certain types of goods that apply even if imports are on a temporary basis. in the european union ( eu ) , "not only are the customs code committee ( ccc ) and other eu - level institutions ineffective tools for achieving the uniform administration and application of eu customs law , but the eu also lacks tribunals or procedures for the prompt review and eu - wide correction of administrative actions relating to customs matters... . thus , obtaining corrections with eu - wide effect for administrative actions relating to customs matters is a cumbersome and frequently time - consuming process. in indonesia , "customs relies on a schedule of reference prices to assess duties on some imports rather than using actual transactions as required by the wto agreement on customs valuation . indonesia's director general of customs and excise makes a valuation assessment based on the perceived risk status of the importer and the average price of a same or similar product imported during the previous 90 days. "clearing goods through algerian customs is the single most frequently reported problem facing foreign companies operating in algeria . delays can take weeks or months , and in many cases are not accompanied by official explanations. modernizing customs and border processes can have benefits for both international businesses and exporters as well as domestic customers and government agencies . ( see south korea case study in text box . ) exporters and shippers can save time and money ; importing agencies can become more efficient , thereby sav ing money ( while also collecting fees and taxes faster ) ; and end customers can receive goods faster at lower costs if the seller passes along the related savings . in this way , customs and border reform efforts are of benefit to both importing and exporting countries , improving their terms of trade , transparency , and good governance . u.s. companies , from very small businesses to large multinational firms , face trade barriers that the tfa may alleviate . e - commerce platforms allow smes to easily reach a global customer base , but many may be hesitant to serve foreign markets because of the complexity of global shipping and delivery . compared with larger companies , smes have fewer resources to deal with the regulatory hurdles of international shipments , and trade costs represent a larger proportional burden for them . r eforms to reduce these costs could therefore boost sme willingness to participat e in international trade . for example , if each country post s customs information online , smes c ould more easily understand export and import processes and requirements . if tfa implementation efforts were to also establish a standardized international format or template for posting required information , it c ould further reduce the burden on buyers and sellers trying to export to multiple countries .