finally , p.l . 115-48 requires that the department of veterans affairs ( va ) notify affected individuals of imminent and actual school closures and notify them how such closure will affect their gi bill entitlement . gi bill participants must apply for benefit restoration and the housing allowance extension . how will they finance future postsecondary educational pursuits ? are they liable for repaying loans they may have borrowed to pursue a postsecondary credential that they were unable to obtain because of an ihe's closure ? this report provides an explanation of the options a postsecondary student may pursue in the event the ihe he or she attends closes , any financial relief that may be available to such students , and other practical implications for students following a school's closure . first , this report describes the academic options available to such students , such as participating in a teach - out or transferring to a new ihe . next , it discusses issues related to financing a postsecondary education , including the extent to which borrowers may have any loans borrowed to finance educational expenses discharged due to a school closure and whether future financial assistance , including federal student loans , pell grants , and gi educational benefits , may be available to students should they decide to continue their postsecondary education at another ihe . this report then describes additional relief that may be available to students who attended ihes that closed , such as the potential to have tuition paid reimbursed through a state tuition recovery fund . finally , this report describes some potential income tax implications for students when their ihe has closed , including the extent to which they may incur a federal income tax liability for loans discharged and whether higher education tax credits remain available to them in future years . the appendix provides a list of abbreviations used in this report . in the event of a school closure , currently enrolled students must consider their academic options , including whether they will continue pursuing their postsecondary education , and if so , where . two options that may be available to students include teach - outs and credit transfer . along with considering academic options in the event of a school closure , students may also need to consider the financial options available to them , as they may have received financial assistance to help finance their education at the closed school and may need to seek financial assistance should they decide to continue pursuing a postsecondary education . considerations for students who borrowed funds ( or parents who borrowed funds on behalf of a student ) to finance their education at a closed school include whether they are responsible for repaying any loans borrowed to attend the school . considerations for students who wish to continue their education at another ihe include the extent to which their eligibility for various forms of financial aid ( eg , direct loans , pell grants , gi bill educational benefits ) may be affected by their previous use of those benefits at the closed school .