these are the same data included in figure 1 . the figures display annual data since fy1995 on u.s. coast guard interdictions ( figure a - 1 ) and u.s. border patrol apprehensions between u.s. ports of entry ( figure a - 2 ) , and annual data since fy2004 on inadmissible cubans encountered at u.s. ports of entry ( figure a - 3 ) . as discussed , the recent increases in all three measures are widely attributed to cuban concerns that u.s. treatment of cuban migrants may soon change . the data , however , also reflect considerable variability in earlier years . observers have identified a number of factors that may have contributed to these annual changes . the november 2016 death of cuba's fidel castro may spur a broader reexamination of these policies . at the same time , concern among some in cuba about possible changes to current u.s. migration policy is seen as a key factor behind recent upticks in cuban arrivals to the united states . "normal" immigration from cuba to the united states has not existed since the cuban revolution of 1959 brought fidel castro to power . for more than 50 years , the majority of cubans who have entered the united states have done so through special humanitarian provisions of federal law . for example , between 1962 and 1979 hundreds of thousands of cubans entered the united states under the parole provision in the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) . the ina parole provision authorizes the attorney general ( now the secretary of homeland security ) "to parole into the united states temporarily under such conditions as he may prescribe only on a case - by - case basis for urgent humanitarian reasons or significant public benefit any alien applying for admission to the united states. although the cubans who arrived in the united states after the cuban revolution were paroled in , they were considered to be refugees fleeing persecution . at the time , the ina did not contain the current definition of a refugee or the provisions on refugee admissions and asylum ; these were added by the refugee act of 1980 . in 1980 , the ina parole provision was again used when a mass migration of asylum seekers — known as the mariel boatlift — brought approximately 125,000 cubans ( and 25,000 haitians ) to south florida over a six - month period . the carter administration described these arrivals as "cuban - haitian entrants. the ina parole provision continues to be used today by executive discretion to allow some cubans to enter the united states . steps taken by the obama administration to date to normalize relations with cuba have not changed u.s. policy toward cuban migrants . however , these efforts have raised questions about the potential for changed policies in the future through either executive or congressional action . much of this attention has focused on the caa , which , as discussed , grants dhs the discretionary authority to adjust the status of eligible cubans . generally speaking , the executive could be said to have some latitude under the caa to determine whether to exercise this discretion toward individual cuban migrants or classes of cuban migrants .