these efforts are briefly described below . to facilitate the electronic exchange of part 2 data , each patient's consent preferences specifying the type of information that may be shared , and the individuals or entities with whom the information may be shared , must be carefully managed . patient consent has to travel with the data in order to control access . in addition , a mechanism is required for segregating the data in a medical record to capture a patient's preferences . data segmentation allows a patient's record to be broken down into multiple categories , allowing certain protected data elements to be removed ( redacted ) if a patient has not consented to their disclosure . in recent years , samhsa has worked with the hhs office of the national coordinator for health information technology ( onc ) on its data segmentation for privacy ( ds4p ) initiative . through ds4p , federal and nonfederal stakeholders developed internationally accepted standards and guidelines for segmenting medical data and managing patient consent . based on the ds4p standards , samhsa designed consent2share , an open - source online tool for data segmentation and consent management . consent2share integrates with existing ehr systems and hie networks to manage the exchange of health information among providers . consent2share provides a patient portal where individuals can learn about and manage their consent options . they can complete and electronically sign consent forms if they wish to permit the disclosure of protected information , whether it is protected under part 2 or applicable state health privacy laws . using consent2share , patients can indicate the individuals and / or entities with whom they want to share information and select from a list of protected information the specific types of data that are allowed to be disclosed . prior to the exchange of patient information , consent2share receives a patient's record from an ehr or hie , confirms that the patient has consented to share information with the intended recipient , and applies the patient's consent choices — for example , redacting some or all of the part 2 data unless the patient has consented to its disclosure — before sending the modified record to the recipient . in 2015 , samhsa launched the otp service continuity pilot ( scp ) project to implement electronic health information exchange among otps in a way that is compliant with part 2 and state law and minimizes disruptions in treatment . it is critical that individuals receiving behavioral therapy and medications — methadone or buprenorphine — for their opioid addiction at an otp have consistent , uninterrupted access to treatment . however , otp patients may experience treatment disruptions when natural disasters or other unanticipated events temporarily close the otp and force them to seek treatment at another facility . patients also may have difficulty maintaining treatment continuity during vacations and business travel , or when they relocate . samhsa selected arizona health - e connection ( azhec ) , which operates the statewide hie , to run the scp project . azhec is working with three arizona - based behavioral health organizations , each of which operates otps connected to the hie . under the scp , azhec has successfully integrated consent2share with the arizona hie .