114-190 ) , expires on september 30 , 2017 . the technology , called automatic dependent surveillance - broadcast ( ads - b ) , allows aircraft to be identified and tracked by air traffic facilities more precisely than is possible with existing radar technology . annual faa expenditures have been in the range of $15 billion to $17 billion in recent years . the faa budget is divided into four major accounts: grants - in - aid for airports ( airport improvement program , or aip ) facilities and equipment ( f&e ) research , engineering , and development ( re&d ) operations and maintenance ( o&m ) ( partly supported by the trust fund , with the remainder coming from the general fund ) the first two accounts , aip and f&e , are considered "capital" accounts or programs because they deal with the development of airport and airway infrastructure . the aip provides federal grants for projects such as new runways and taxiways ; runway lengthening , rehabilitation , and repair ; and noise mitigation near airports . the f&e account provides funding for the acquisition and maintenance of air traffic facilities and equipment , and for the engineering , development , testing , and evaluation of technologies related to the federal air traffic system . it funds the technological improvements to the air traffic control system , including installation of a satellite - based air traffic control system referred to as the next generation air transportation system ( nextgen ) . accelerated spending could have the effect of reducing the total cost through 2030 by completing projects at less inflated prices and also by potentially reaping anticipated nextgen benefits earlier . the impacts of nextgen acceleration on the aatf , however , would depend on the continued availability of uncommitted balances that can be tapped for such purposes . moreover , accelerating nextgen funding may not be feasible if faa is unable to obligate funds for such purposes at these earlier dates because of administrative or technical constraints that could limit its ability to expedite specific nextgen projects . to the extent that congress or faa deems acceleration of nextgen feasible and seeks to speed up nextgen activities , funding needs for nextgen projects could increase demand for aatf funds . although dedicated funding accounts for nextgen have been proposed in the past as a means to avoid potential strain on the aatf , these proposals have proven controversial , as airspace users , particularly business and general aviation interests , have balked at proposals to impose per - flight user fees to fund nextgen . user fees as an alternative to traditional aatf revenue sources have also been discussed in the context of funding day - to - day air traffic control operations , particularly in conjunction with proposals to reform air traffic control services by creating a stand - alone air traffic corporation separate from faa . in the 114 th congress , the aviation innovation , reform , and reauthorization act of 2016 ( h.r . 4441 ) included language that would have created a not - for - profit government - chartered air traffic control corporation , wholly funded by user fees , to run the air traffic system .