all members of the same family have the same poverty status . poverty estimates are obtained using household surveys . the census bureau releases data from the official poverty measure every september for the previous full calendar year , based on the current population survey annual social and economic supplement ( cps asec ) . "resources" in this measure are defined as money income before taxes , and they do not include the valuation of noncash benefits like the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) and housing subsidies . these are different from the census bureau's poverty thresholds shown in table 1 . unlike the measures discussed in this report , the poverty guidelines are not used to count the number of people or families in poverty . rather , they are used for administrative purposes , such as determining whether an individual or a family qualifies for programmatic assistance . programs sometimes use different multiples of the poverty guidelines for determining eligibility . for instance , under the national school lunch program , a child qualifies for free lunch if his or her household's income is less than 130% of ( that is , 1.3 times ) the poverty guidelines , and qualifies for a reduced - price lunch if his or her household income is 185% of ( that is , 1.85 times ) the poverty guidelines . these poverty guidelines are referenced in the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1981 . the hhs poverty guidelines are not used to measure the poverty population , and therefore this report does not refer to them as a poverty "measure. because both the poverty guidelines and the poverty thresholds are issued by federal agencies , either set of dollar amounts could conceivably be called the "federal poverty level" ( fpl ) , and thus that term is ambiguous . which dollar amounts are to be used depends on the context: thresholds for obtaining counts of the population in poverty ; or guidelines for administrative use , particularly with regard to an individual's or family's program eligibility . to clarify , the official poverty measure discussed in this report is based on the poverty thresholds that are computed and published by the census bureau , and are used for statistical purposes . as explained earlier , the official poverty thresholds were based on empirical measures of dietary need , the amount that a family in economic distress might need to spend on food in order to attempt to meet its dietary needs , and the spending patterns of families across the income distribution ( to determine what percentage of an average family's budget was spent on food ) . however , this method yielded dozens of thresholds that were not evenly stepped by family size . as the war on poverty developed , a set of dollar amounts was needed for practical administrative use . the hhs poverty guidelines serve that purpose . the hhs poverty guidelines do not directly reflect family needs as measured by food cost and family spending data because they were simplified for administrative use .