governance . greater inequality could be associated with poorer governance or political instability , and those factors reduce growth . greater inequality might increase ( or be the by - product of ) rent seeking behavior and undermine the legitimacy of political institutions . for example , in the extreme , coups , civil war , corruption , and graft have significantly negative effects on growth . redistribution and taxation . some researchers posit that greater inequality leads to pressure for redistributive policies that lower growth . those polices could lower growth if incentives to work , save , or invest are reduced by the policies themselves or by higher taxes that are required to fund those policies , all else equal . however , asserting that redistributive policies reduce growth may be an overgeneralization that is only true in some cases , as some redistributive policies , such as greater access to public education or health , could have the opposite effect and boost growth . alternatively , channels that predict higher inequality would be associated with higher growth include the following: incentives . greater inequality could increase growth because it increases incentives to work , acquire skills , innovate , and save . for example , a greater wage gap between high school and college educated workers increases the incentives to go to college , which would raise the productivity of the workforce . concentrated savings . since high - income households have higher saving rates on average and saving is necessary for long - term growth ( because it finances capital investment ) , greater inequality might induce more saving that spurs more growth . as these channels illustrate , it may not be inequality per se that has a negative or positive effect on growth , but other phenomena that tend to be associated with inequality , such as lack of income mobility or opportunity for individuals at the bottom of the income distribution . inequality may be an easily measurable and well - correlated proxy for these true drivers of growth , and so these distinctions would not significantly change research results . but from a policy perspective , if the policy goal were to boost growth , it could be more effective to tackle the root causes than the inequality associated with them . the next section discusses empirical evidence of the relationship between inequality and growth based mainly on cross - country studies . in evaluating these studies , identifying which of these theoretical channels dominates is not as important when trying to estimate the average effect of inequality across a large number of countries as it is when trying to estimate the effect on an individual country . each of these channels works differently and is of relatively different importance in any given country . political instability is an example of a channel that could be a dominant determinant of growth in some countries , but of limited relevance to the united states . if , say , the cross - country results were being driven by political instability , those findings could be robust and would still arguably not be particularly relevant to the united states .