thus , under h.r . 25 / s. 122 , the current federal tax system , based on taxing income , would have been replaced with a system that taxes consumption . which tax provisions should be modified or eliminated ? how far should rates be lowered ? should the reformed tax system be income - based or consumption - based ? what are the objectives regarding federal deficits and the debt ? to assist congress as it continues to debate tax reform options , this report provides a review of recent legislative proposals introduced since the 113 th congress . policymakers often speak of the goal to achieve comprehensive reform of the entire tax code . if comprehensive tax reform is not deemed feasible , congress could choose to consider reforms to certain parts of the code as an alternative . for example , the corporate tax system could be reformed first and the individual tax system , and perhaps payroll tax system , at a later date . similarly , congress could choose to reform only portions of the corporate system , such as just the international aspects of the corporate system . alternatively , congress could choose to evaluate business - only options , which would involve changes to the corporate system and portions of the individual system under which "pass - through" business income generated by sole proprietors , partnerships , limited liability companies , and s corporations is taxed . before reviewing recent reform proposals , it may be helpful to review the three criteria by which economists often evaluate tax policy — equity , efficiency , and simplicity . equity concerns the fairness of a particular tax system . economists rely on two concepts of equity — horizontal equity and vertical equity . efficiency relates to the degree to which the tax system distorts economic decision making . low marginal tax rates applied to a broad tax base , with few exclusions or exemptions , tend be more economically efficient . s implicity considers the amount of resources that must be committed to administering , enforcing , and complying with the tax system . tradeoffs may exist between these three objectives . tax reform continues to be actively debated in the 115 th congress . although no comprehensive tax reforms have been introduced into legislation yet in the 115 th congress , two 2016 reform proposals appear to be at the forefront of current congressional debates — the house gop's "a better way" tax reform proposal , released in june , 2016 , and president trump's campaign reform proposal , released in september 2016 . the house gop's tax reform proposal is intended to be revenue neutral . on the individual side , the proposal , also referred to as the tax reform "blueprint," calls for consolidating the current seven tax rates on individual labor income into three: 10% , 20% , and 25% . the proposal also would reduce taxes on active pass - through business income , dividends , and capital gains ; increase the standard deduction ; repeal the affordable care act ( aca ) - related tax provisions ; and repeal the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) .