a quorum of three members is required to be present to transact business . under eoa section 401 ( e ) , "... a quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of at least three members present . each member of the commission , including the chairman , shall have one vote . actions of the commission shall be decided by a majority vote of the members present. the commission generally has three members from the party of the incumbent president , and two from the minority party . however , republican commissioner philip moeller left ferc in october 2015 , and fellow republican tony clark left the commission following the expiration of his term on june 30 , 2016 . president obama did not nominate replacements for either commissioners moeller or clark , meaning that ferc was operating with only three democratic commissioners since september 2016 . commissioner honorable's current term expires on june 30 , 2017 , and commissioner lafleur's term expires on june 30 , 2019 . a quorum will not be restored until at least one new member is seated . the absence of a quorum limits ferc's authority to issue orders concerning projects or rate and tariff issues as discussed below . on february 3 , 2017 , anticipating that the lack of quorum would continue for an indefinite period , the commission chose to issue an order ( while it still had a quorum ) delegating authority to staff for certain agency functions . ferc stated that the order was issued to assure that the commission's regulatory obligations would be carried out "in an effective and efficient manner consistent with the public interest. this is not the first time the commission has issued a delegation order following a loss of quorum . ferc took similar action to delegate authority to its staff to act in the absence of a quorum in 1993 . ferc recognizes in the current delegation order that , in the absence of ferc authority , certain rate filings ( for example , under the fpa and nga ) may take effect under operation of law "without suspension , refund protection , or the ability of contesting parties to appeal. thus , ferc states that the delegation order is intended to "ensure that staff has the authority to prevent such filings from going into effect by operation of law during the period in which the commission lacks a quorum. ferc summarized the delegation of agency authority as follows: rate and other filings: the director of the office of energy market regulation ( oemr ) can accept and suspend rate filings , and make them effective subject to refund and further order of the commission , or accept and suspend them , make them effective subject to refund , and set them for hearing and settlement judge procedures . for initial rates or rate decreases submitted under section 205 of the fpa , for which suspension and refund protection are unavailable , ferc staff is granted authority under section 206 to institute proceedings in order to protect the interests of customers . extensions of time: ferc staff can extend the time for action on matters where it is permitted by statute .