the composite plan proposal addresses these concerns . an employer's future contributions to a db pension plan may unexpectedly increase as a result of investment losses or other decreases in a pension plan's funding ratio . the policy considerations for some of these stakeholders are summarized in table 1 . employer concerns with existing multiemployer plans include ( 1 ) uncertainty over future contribution increases and ( 2 ) withdrawal liability . these concerns may cause employers in multiemployer db plans to consider leaving their db plans and establishing dc plans . in addition , these concerns make it difficult for existing multiemployer db plans to attract new employers to the plan . the composite plan proposal does not include mandatory employer contribution increases in the event of decreases to a plan's funding ratio . employer contributions could remain fixed , which could be an attractive feature to prospective employers that might consider joining the plan . investment losses and other changes that negatively affect a plan's funding ratio would be addressed by the realignment program which includes proposed but not mandatory contribution increases and mandatory benefit decreases . concerns about withdrawal liability might be a factor that deters employers from joining an existing multiemployer db plan . when a plan has insufficient assets from which to pay 100% of promised benefits , employers that leave the plan are assessed an amount equal to their share of unfunded benefits . withdrawal liability raises several concerns among employers: ( 1 ) the amount of the withdrawal liability can sometimes be very large , which might place a burden on the employers in the plan ; and ( 2 ) the disclosure of withdrawal liability might prompt concerns among lenders and other creditors to a company , even for companies that have no intention of withdrawing from a plan . employers would likely find the absence of withdrawal liability an attractive feature of composite plans . plan sponsors that adopt composite plans would not pay per participant annual premiums to pbgc . in a composite plan , participants would ( 1 ) not be subject to the longevity risk associated with dc plans , ( 2 ) be exposed to investment risk if the value of plan assets decreases , and ( 3 ) be exposed to other risks that might increase the value of plan liabilities . one of the concerns with dc plans is that participants could spend all of their assets while alive and thus not have their dc account as a source of income for some of their retirement . an april 2013 survey indicated that about 43% of u.s. investors were concerned with outliving their retirement savings . although participants in dc plans have options to purchase annuities ( either in their plan , if that is an option , or separately from an insurance company ) , a june 2016 survey by tiaa ( a large provider of annuities ) found that only about 14% of individuals had purchased an annuity . the composite plan proposal would provide monthly income in retirement for the life of the participant ( and spouse , if married ) . participants' benefits in composite plans would not be insured by pbgc .