9646 to the house . floor debate representative vinson reported h.r . 9646 , together with a committee report , back to the house during the afternoon house session . following a confirmation hearing held on september 19 , 1950 , the senate voted to confirm general marshall's nomination to the office of secretary of defense on september 20 , 1950 , by a vote of 57-11 , with 28 senators not voting . what is the role of congress in the civilian - military relationship ? debates and discussions on civil - military relations have tended to focus on the military's relationship with civil society broadly , or with the commander - in - chief and their political appointees . yet the constitution , by ensuring that key responsibilities for the raising and maintenance of u.s. armed forces were granted to the legislative branch , arguably intends for congress to also play a role in exercising civilian control of the military which , in turn , can influence the overall health of civil - military relations . indeed , as some policymakers and observers have noted , the manner and process through which congress considers this appointment may have a bearing on whether the principle of civilian control of the military is upheld . as the 115 th congress convenes , one of the first matters it will likely need to take up concerns whether to allow general mattis's nomination to the position of secretary of defense to be considered by the senate . this section details the current state of play and highlights several possible legislative courses of action . section 179 of the further continuing and security assistance appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l . 114-254 ) , establishes special "fast track" procedures governing senate consideration of a bill or joint resolution which would suspend the seven - year restriction contained in 113 ( a ) of title 10 of the u.s. code . it does so for the first person nominated to be secretary of defense after enactment of p.l . 114-254 who has been retired at least three years . in order to qualify for the expedited procedures , waiver legislation must be introduced during a 30-calendar day period which begins on the date that the 115 th congress convenes . the legislation may be introduced by the senate majority leader or the minority leader , or their respective designees , or by the chair or ranking minority member of the committee on armed services . both the title of the legislation and the matter after the enacting ( or resolving ) clause are stipulated . once introduced , the legislation is to be referred to the senate committee on armed services . if the committee has not reported the waiver legislation within five session days after the date of its referral , it is automatically discharged of the further consideration of the measure . once pending on the senate calendar of business ( either by being reported or by the committee being discharged ) it is in order to make a non - debatable motion to proceed to consider the legislation . this motion may be repeated if it has previously been disagreed .