by itself , such legislation does not provide funding for such purposes . instead , the authority to obligate payments from the treasury is left to separate appropriations measures . the holman rule then is intended to apply only when an obvious reduction of funds in a general appropriations bill is achieved by the provision in question , such as the cessation of specific government activities , or through a specific reduction of total appropriations in the bill . in the following congress ( 25 th congress , 1837-1839 ) , language was added to house rules that stated: no appropriation shall be reported in such general appropriation bills , or be in order as an amendment thereto , for any expenditure not previously authorized by law . since the period immediately after the initial adoption of the rule in the 19 th century , the house has interpreted it through precedents that have tended to incrementally narrow its application . this rule was applied broadly on occasion to exclude legislative provisions authorizing new expenditures as well , such as a case in 1838 when it was used to exclude an amendment that included a provision for refurnishing the white house . gradually , the rule "became construed through a long line of decisions to admit amendments increasing salaries but as excluding amendments providing for decreases. as a consequence of this , in 1876 , the language was expanded ( at the suggestion of representative william holman of indiana ) to further state: nor shall any provision in any such bill or amendment thereto , changing existing law , be in order except such as , being germane to the subject matter of the bill , shall retrench expenditures . as described by one scholar , this provision effectively granted the appropriations committee authority to include virtually any legislative provision in an appropriations measure so long as it reduced the number and salary of federal officials , the compensation of any person paid out of the treasury , or the amounts of money covered in an appropriation bill . according to one contemporary account , a broad initial construction of the rule by the house resulted in "putting a great mass of general legislation upon the appropriation bills. the rule was retained in this form until 1880 ( 46 th congress ) , when it was modified to define retrenchments as the reduction of "the number and salary of officers of the united states , the reduction of compensation of any person paid out of the treasury of the united states , or the reduction of the amounts of money covered by the bill. that form of the rule remained a part of house rules until the 49 th congress eliminated it in 1885 . it was reinserted in the rules for the 52 nd and 53 rd congresses ( 1891-1895 ) but was again dropped for the 54 th through 61 st congresses ( 1895-1911 ) before being readopted in the 62 nd congress . although the holman rule has remained a part of house rules since that time , its language was amended at the start of the 98 th congress ( 1983-1984 ) .