appendix a . the tanf work participation standard the tanf work participation standard serves two purposes: ( 1 ) it is a measure of how a state is performing in engaging recipients in work or work activities , and ( 2 ) it reinforces the notion that participation in work or work activities in return for receiving welfare assistance is a policy goal of tanf . this appendix describes the detailed rules of the tanf work participation standard . it also provides data ( for fy2015 ) on the number of families included in the participation rate calculation , their engagement in countable work activities , and their hours of engagement . as discussed above in " what rate of engagement can be expected ? , there is no recent research to inform what participation rate a state could or should be able to achieve . tanf's track record indicates that setting an arbitrary , national standard without consideration of what a state might reasonably achieve could lead to dysfunctional responses , rather than having states raise engagement in activities . congress could consider alternate program structures that might create more incentives for states to serve non - employed cash assistance recipients . for example , it could create a separate program , with dedicated funding , to provide employment services and / or work opportunities for non - employed recipients . separate funding streams dedicated to work or a limited range of activities have been added to tanf in the past . the welfare - to - work grant program , enacted by the balanced budget act of 1997 ( p.l . 105-33 ) , added dedicated funding for work activities for hard - to - serve tanf recipients and related populations for fy1998 and fy1999 . while the evaluation of that program lacked an examination of program impacts , it did show results in increased service capacity , find a new focus on serving non - custodial parents , and provide some lessons for other welfare - to - work efforts . as noted above , the ecf was added to tanf by arra . its funding for fy2009 and fy2010 was limited to basic assistance , non - recurrent short - term benefits , and subsidized employment . this led to the creation of the tanf subsidized employment programs and the current interest in that type of program intervention . the numerical participation standard tanf sets a minimum work participation standard that a state must meet . the standard includes performance measures that apply in the aggregate for each state . they require that a specified percentage of families be considered engaged in specified activities for a minimum number of hours . the tanf statute stipulates that 50% of all families and 90% of two - parent families must be engaged in work to meet the standard . however , few states have ever had to meet the full standard because the percentages are reduced for caseload reduction or state spending in excess of what is required under the tanf moe . the caseload reduction credit lowers a state's 50% and 90% standards based on caseload reduction measured from fy2005 , reducing it by one percentage point for each decline of 1% in the caseload .