circuit . later , he served two supreme court justices , newly retired justice byron white and justice anthony kennedy , during the october 1993 term . this report provides an overview of judge gorsuch's jurisprudence and discusses how the supreme court might be affected if he were to succeed justice scalia . in a particularly pointed passage in van deelan , judge gorsuch wrote broadly about the underlying dangers of suppression of speech by government officials: when public officials feel free to wield the powers of their office as weapons against those who question their decisions , they do damage not merely to the citizen in their sights but also to the first amendment liberties and the promise of equal treatment essential to the continuity of our democratic enterprise . with this backdrop , the nominee rejected the county's argument that the plaintiff's tax assessment challenges did not amount to "constitutionally protected activity" because they were not a matter of "public concern," concluding that the first amendment "extends to matters great and small , public and private. the van deelan decision and judge gorsuch's reluctance to distinguish between types of speech protected by the constitution may align him with the majority of the roberts court that has , in recent years , rejected the argument that the first amendment does not protect certain "low value" speech . in addition to van deelan , judge gorsuch has written or joined a number of opinions that promote the rights of the press at the expense of plaintiffs in certain state tort actions . for example , in bustos v. a&e television network , judge gorsuch wrote an opinion holding that a prisoner who "merely conspired with" the aryan brotherhood could not sustain a defamation lawsuit resulting from a history channel television series describing the plaintiff as a member of that gang . noting that the first amendment requires a plaintiff pursuing a defamation claim to prove the underlying falsehood of the statement at issue , the bustos decision held that the plaintiff had failed to show the history channel's statement had a significant impact on his reputation . likewise , judge gorsuch joined a panel opinion in cory v. allstate insurance , which dismissed a defamation lawsuit on the ground that "minor inaccuracies will not preclude" the defense of substantial truthfulness . similarly , in two other cases brought against television stations — anderson v. suiters and alvarado v. kob - tv , l.l.c . — judge gorsuch joined opinions that dismissed privacy tort claims on first amendment grounds , reasoning that the underlying reported events involved protected speech on matters of public concern . nonetheless , the nominee should not be viewed as a free speech absolutist , as a number of judge gorsuch's opinions have recognized limits to the first amendment's speech protections . for example , in mink v. knox — a 2010 case that concluded that the first amendment precludes defamation actions aimed at parody , even when involving a private figure on a matter of private concern — judge gorsuch authored a concurring opinion that raised ( without answering ) the question of whether constitutionalizing the protections for such parodies was necessary or wise .