yes . the fees , which most recently totaled $495 , consisted of a form i - 765 filing fee of $410 and biometric services fee of $85 . there were limited fee exemptions available . an individual must have requested and received a fee exemption before submitting a daca request without a fee . yes . the biographic and biometric information submitted by applicants is checked against databases maintained by dhs and other federal agencies . according to dhs , information provided in a daca request generally "will not be proactively provided to other law enforcement entities ( including ice and cbp ) for the purpose of immigration enforcement proceedings unless the requestor poses a risk to national security or public safety" or meets certain criteria . at the same time , dhs maintains the following: this policy , which may be modified , superseded , or rescinded at any time without notice , is not intended to , does not , and may not be relied upon to create any right or benefit , substantive or procedural , enforceable by law by any party in any administrative , civil , or criminal matter . uscis's decision on a daca request is discretionary . the period has closed . uscis stopped accepting initial daca requests as of september 5 , 2017 . however , the agency will reportedly adjudicate initial requests for daca accepted by that date . individuals granted deferred action may receive work authorization if they can demonstrate an economic necessity for employment . previously , an individual granted deferred action under daca who wanted to travel outside the united states could apply to uscis for advance parole . advance parole is permission for a foreign national to re - enter the united states after temporarily traveling abroad . uscis , however , is no longer approving advance parole requests associated with daca . at the same time , the september 2017 dhs memorandum stated that dhs "will generally honor the validity period for previously approved applications for advance parole. daca recipients , like other foreign nationals without lawful immigration status , are barred from receiving federal public benefits with the exception of certain forms of short - term , emergency assistance . daca recipients are not granted a lawful immigration status and are not put on a pathway to a lawful immigration status . during the period of deferred action , however , the daca recipient is in a period of stay authorized by dhs . this legislation sought to establish a process for eligible unauthorized individuals who entered the united states as children to obtain lpr status . dream act provisions were introduced both as stand - alone bills and as parts of larger immigration reform bills . although dream act legislation has never been enacted , some measures have seen legislative action . for example , in the 111 th congress , the house approved dream act language as part of an unrelated bill , the removal clarification act of 2010 ( h.r . in the 113 th congress , the senate passed the border security , economic opportunity , and immigration modernization act ( s. 744 ) , which incorporated dream act language in its legalization provisions . presumably , yes .