it remained a portuguese colony until 1975 . most cabo verdeans are of mixed portuguese and african descent and speak a portuguese - african creole . cabo verde's location in an 18 th - and 19 th - century whaling zone made it a key ship resupply and sailor recruiting center for u.s. vessels and gave rise to a long - standing tradition of emigration to the united states and friendly u.s. ties , which both endure . there is a large cabo verdean population in new england . cabo verde's political system takes into account its large expatriate population , whose remittances are a key source of private investment and hard currency . expatriates may vote in national elections , although in presidential elections their collective vote may constitute no more than a fifth of all votes cast within the national territory . foreign nationals resident in cabo verde are eligible to vote in local elections . formerly a one - party state ruled by the former independence movement , the socialist - oriented african party for the independence of cabo verde ( paicv ) , cabo verde became a democracy in 1991 . this followed increasing demands for a multi - party political system by civil society activists and the movement for democracy ( mpd ) , which had recently been created . in response to this pressure , in 1991 , the paicv government organized multi - party elections , in which the mpd won a large parliamentary majority , the presidency , and multiple municipal elections . seven political parties have run in legislative polls since 1993 , but the paicv and the mpd strongly dominate politics . expatriate voters in africa , the americas , and europe elect six parliamentarians ( two from each region ) of the 72-member legislature . cabo verde's transition to democracy is widely seen as successful and enduring , and as having engendered a generally consensus - based polity . while in power in the 1990s , the mpd pursued an economic reform - focused agenda , seeking to privatize state - owned firms , reform public spending , alleviate poverty , boost social services , and promote exports . it also sought to promote political pluralism and increase and diversify cabo verde's trade and development relations with other countries . this policy agenda continues to define the mpd and is broadly shared with the paicv , although the political and policy rhetoric of the latter tends to emphasize a more social democratic agenda . in the most recent parliamentary elections , in march 2016 , the mpd won 40 seats , the paicv 29 , and the small independent and democratic cabo verdean union three . the mpd victory ended 15 consecutive years of paicv parliamentary majorities . in april , the parliament selected mpd leader ulisses correia e silva to serve as prime minister . the new government has prioritized economic expansion and job growth ; poverty reduction ; infrastructure and business environment enhancements ; expanded foreign direct investment ( fdi ) ; crime reduction measures ; and national security , in part by countering drug trafficking .