are these potentially a threat to u.s. interests ? how do they relate to india's strategic interests ? congress may choose to reevaluate u.s. assistance programs toward sri lanka as the new administration develops its policy and as events unfold in sri lanka . events in sri lanka may also affect congressional decisionmakers' attitudes toward funding decisions as progress is , or is not , made in a number of areas of importance to members . the new administration may , or may not , seek funding for policy objectives which may differ with current policy objectives . should the united states continue to provide democracy assistance ? government debt was also 76% of gdp in 2015 . gdp growth is projected to be 5.1% in 2016 and average an annual rate of 5.2% for the period 2016-2020 . approximately one - quarter of sri lanka's total migrant workers are employed in saudi arabia . sri lanka is situated near strategically important sea lanes that transit the indian ocean . these sea lanes link the energy - rich persian gulf with the economies of asia . the inaugural united states sri lanka partnership dialogue in february 2016 discussed sri lanka's "pivotal geo - strategic location within the indian ocean region and how to strengthen cooperation on issues of regional importance. more than 60,000 ships carrying 66% of the world's oil and 50% of the world's container shipments transit the sea lanes near sri lanka and the maldives each year . members of congress and their staff have a range of interests related to sri lanka , both general and specific . generally , members' interests may include consideration of foreign operations budget requests related to sri lanka ; potential hearings on bilateral relations , democratic reforms , and trade and investment ; the house democracy partnership with sri lanka ; the congressional caucus for ethnic and religious freedom in sri lanka ; ambassadorial confirmation hearings ; and meetings with sri lankan delegations . more specifically , congress may be interested in exercising oversight in a number of areas including the administration's policy toward sri lanka with regard to support for democratic reform , ethnic reconciliation , human rights and transitional justice , geopolitics related to india and china in the indian ocean region , trade and investment , military - to - military relations , and the environment . the united states has indicated its support for sri lanka's "unity , territorial integrity and democratic institutions" and is a "strong supporter of ethnic reconciliation. the united states has also provided over $2 billion in development assistance to sri lanka since 1948 . the state department described sri lanka's 2015 presidential election as having "ushered in a new political era and opportunity for renewed u.s. diplomatic and development engagement. secretary of state john kerry visited colombo in may 2015 and congratulated sri lanka for continuing steps toward reconciliation at the u.s. - sri lanka partnership dialogue in february 2016 . during his visit , secretary of state john kerry stated ... true peace is more than the absence of war . true and lasting peace , especially after a civil conflict , requires policies that foster reconciliation , not resentment .