the report is organized by energy commodity . crs has incorporated the most recent data available at the time of this analysis . however , data from the numerous sources we cite are often time - lagged and subject to frequent revision and updates . therefore , our analysis should be viewed as an estimate of the u.s. cross - border trade relationships over the last 18 months , but not necessarily a precise accounting of trade . although the subject of this report is linked to a number of related energy policy considerations — such as environmental policy , infrastructure regulation , trade agreements , and economic growth — examination of those issues is outside its scope . crude oil is a key resource linking the canadian , mexican , and u.s. economies . the oil markets of both the united states and canada are characterized by free enterprise , while constitutional restrictions historically have limited access by private firms to the mexican industry . recent reforms in mexico may lead to an opening of the mexican oil industry to private firms , however , potentially expanding north american oil market linkages . while no single north american country is likely to become independent of the world oil market , the emerging north american market is likely to provide increased opportunity for cross - border trade and greater energy independence for the continent . natural gas trade in north america is in a state of rapid transformation and growth . together , the united states , mexico , and canada account for just under 7% of the world's natural gas reserves , with the united states comprising the bulk of those reserves — over 80% of north america's contribution . despite the limited reserve estimates in canada and ( especially ) mexico today , the two countries have great potential for future production based on estimates of undiscovered , technically recoverable resources from the energy information administration ( eia ) as shown in figure 9 . natural gas liquids ( ngls ) have taken on a new prominence in the united states' energy trade as shale gas production has increased and natural gas prices have fallen . "ngl" is a general term for a class of liquid products separated from natural gas at a gas field processing plant , including ethane , propane , butane , and pentanes . when ngls are present with methane — the primary component of natural gas — the natural gas is referred to as either "hot" or "wet" gas . once the ngls are separated from the methane the natural gas is referred to as "dry" gas , which is what most consumers use . each type of ngl has its own market and its own value depending upon the application in which it is consumed , such as for heating or as a chemical feedstock . when the price for dry gas has dropped due to changes in the supply - demand balance ( eg , during the warm winter of 2011 when gas demand dropped for heating ) , the natural gas industry has turned its attention to producing more wet gas in order to bolster the value it receives for a given level of methane production .