transaction. 238 , if the cftc were not to make such a determination ( of noncomparability ) , then "a non - united states person or a transaction between two non - united states persons shall be exempt from united states swaps requirements" as long as it is in compliance with any of the eight permitted foreign jurisdictions . effectively , the bill appears to substitute as a default , for trades that involved a non - u.s. person , the swaps requirements of the eight largest foreign swaps markets ( which would encompass most of the world of swaps trading , particularly if countries in the european union were treated as one swaps jurisdiction ) for u.s. requirements — unless the cftc found a foreign jurisdiction to be lacking . one question that would presumably be left to the cftc to determine in a rulemaking would be how widely to apply this provision to "a non - united states person or a transaction between two non - united states persons," were the provision enacted . for instance , would any swap in which a non - u.s. person was at least one counterparty potentially be encompassed ? can you provide any assurance that a 188 percent increase will guarantee there will not be another financial crisis ? 238 would expand a number of factors for the cftc to consider in cost - benefit analysis and would include the need for quantitative as well as qualitative analysis , among other changes . this section of the report first examines the existing requirements for the cftc to conduct cost - benefit analysis . it then surveys the changes in h.r . lastly , it discusses the academic research on cost - benefit analysis . s. 2917 , the 114 th congress's senate cftc bill , did not have a similar provision on cost - benefit analysis . the cftc already has certain requirements to perform cost - benefit analysis in its rulemakings under the cea . the cftc and other independent regulatory agencies ( such as the sec ) are not subject , however , to the general requirements that apply to other government agencies to conduct cost - benefit analysis under executive order ( e.o. ) for the cftc , section 15 ( a ) of the cea requires that "before promulgating a regulation under this chapter or issuing an order ( except as provided in paragraph ( 3 ) ) , the commission shall consider the costs and benefits of the action of the commission. in addition , the costs and benefits of the proposed commission action shall be evaluated in light of: ( a ) considerations of protection of market participants and the public ; ( b ) considerations of the efficiency , competitiveness , and financial integrity of futures markets ; ( c ) considerations of price discovery ; ( d ) considerations of sound risk management practices ; and ( e ) other public interest considerations . the cftc also may have additional required considerations when issuing a particular rule . section 15 ( a ) of the cea applies more broadly than e.o .