no board is chaired by a federal employee . however , the three foundations have important differences in their missions and approaches , reflecting the various missions and histories of the three federal agencies . these projects have governmental and nongovernmental partners . when a taxable nonfederal entity provides matching funds to nfwf , a 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organization , the funds are tax - deductible to the extent allowed by law . the following examples illustrate various donors and types of partnerships and are quoted from nfwf's most recent annual report . when damage has been sustained to public fish and wildlife resources and a legal settlement for remediation involves monetary damages , these damages are sometimes awarded to nfwf . nfwf then manages the award , often with additional partners , to address habitat restoration in the area of the damage . by far the largest instance of such an award occurred after the deepwater horizon oil spill in the gulf of mexico in 2010 . pursuant to the criminal settlements between bp and the department of justice ( doj ) and between transocean and doj in early 2013 , nfwf is to receive more than $2.54 billion for gulf coast restoration over the five - year period from 2013 to 2017 , for disbursal in each succeeding year . ( see table 1 . ) the funds are placed in the gulf environmental benefit fund ( gebf ) . both criminal plea documents direct nfwf to use the gebf funds in the following manner: 50% ( approximately $1.27 billion ) of the funds are to support the creation or restoration of barrier islands off the coast of louisiana and the implementation of river diversion projects to create , preserve , or restore coastal habitats . these projects will "remedy harm to resources where there has been injury to , or destruction of , loss of , or loss of use of those resources resulting from the [ deepwater horizon ] oil spill. ( the louisiana project cited in " state partner ," above , was supported by these funds. ) 50% of the funds are to support projects that "remedy harm to resources where there has been injury to , or destruction of , loss of , or loss of use of those resources resulting from the [ deepwater horizon ] oil spill. nfwf will support such projects in the other gulf states based on the following proportions: alabama , 28% ( $356 million ) ; florida , 28% ( $356 million ) ; mississippi , 28% ( $356 million ) ; and texas , 16% ( $203 million ) . of these funds , the vast majority are expected to be made available to nfwf in the fourth and fifth years ( 2017 and 2018 ) . the payment schedule and allocations to individual states are shown below in table 1 . for both the bp and transocean settlement allocations , nfwf is directed to consult with "appropriate state resource managers , as well as federal resource managers that have the statutory authority for coordination or cooperation with private entities , to identify projects and to maximize the environmental benefits of such projects.