it would cause the government to default on its legal obligations. the treasury secretary of the time , alexander dallas , referred to "every sort of embarrassment. that linkage , however , could also have been severed in a way that could have mitigated losses of owners of bonds that contained gold clauses . on the other hand , expressions of fiscal constraint , such as promises to balance federal budgets , were not sufficient to prepare the federal government to address fiscal emergencies . in the years preceding each episode , policymakers had expressed a strong commitment to budgetary and fiscal discipline . breaking the linkage between gold and the dollar enabled the federal government to implement a more modern monetary policy that helped promote economic recovery . claims that payment delays to small investors holding treasury securities in the spring of 1979 constituted a default or a "technical default" appear weaker . delays affected only a relatively small proportion of treasury securities and the federal government responded to mitigate the inconvenience suffered by those investors . the legal document setting out terms for treasury securities contained no default clause . claims that such payment delays increased federal borrowing costs appear weak , if not implausible , in the face of stronger explanations reflecting shifts in monetary conditions and policy . delays to holders of treasury securities might also be put in context of delays to other federal payees . federal statutes provide no clear basis for prioritizing payment of one obligation over another . in an organization as complex as the federal government , delays in meeting some financial obligations may be inevitable , and bondholders affected by the so - called 1979 mini - default represent a small fraction of those affected by federal payment delays . analysis of available evidence suggests that the federal government's ability to borrow did not suffer lasting damage from any of the events discussed in this report . after the war of 1812 concluded , belated collections from internal revenue measures came into the treasury and the resumption of international trade and higher tariff rates led to a rebound in customs revenues . federal revenues in the following decades were strong enough to retire the federal debt in 1835 . recent research , discussed above , indicates that the u.s. treasury faced little or no observable difficulty in borrowing after the 1933-1934 suspension of the gold standard . in 1979 , as noted above , a major shift in monetary policy and conditions can explain changes in market yields on treasury securities . financial markets exhibited no discernable reaction to newspaper reports of the treasury payments delays to some small investors . the u.s. experience accords with broader research on sovereign default . countries that defaulted in the 19 th century or 1930s , but not since , have suffered no credit market consequences . that the u.s. treasury's ability to borrow on reasonable terms was not hindered by events in the 19 th century or 1930s does not suggest that the consequences of a treasury default in the present day would be minor .