but now the question is what the actions will be . and we'll start to know when they make loans . the more they partner with the multilateral institutions that have high standards , the more likely they are to operate in a way that's consistent with the kinds of norms that are good for a growing , global economy and other values that we pursue in the multinational space . turning to potential u.s. participation , the aiib maintains that it is open to u.s. membership . some analysts argue that the u.s. government should reconsider its position and consider joining the aiib . david dollar , a former world bank economist and senior official in president obama's department of the treasury , has emerged as one of the aiib's main boosters in washington , dc , and has argued that joining would be a "good investment" for the united states . the establishment of aiib raises several political and economic issues for congress as it examines the aiib's activities and considers potential u.s. involvement with the bank . typically , congress exercises its influence over mdb policy through its control over authorizations and appropriations , as well as through oversight . the authorizing committees have included in mdb authorizing legislation many directives which affect the goal and direction of u.s. policy . congress has also used its control over the funding process — its "power of the purse" — to set priorities and encourage the administration and mdbs to consider changes in their policies or procedures . congress has used hearings and required reports to get information about u.s. policy and the mdbs into the public record and to draw the treasury department's attention to issues of pressing concern . since the administration knows it must come to congress for future authorizations and mdb funding , the views expressed by congress through hearings have often had an impact on the focus and direction of u.s. policy regarding particular concerns . while the united states is not a member of the aiib , and thus will not be authorizing and appropriating financial contributions , there are several avenues through which congress can shape u.s. policy toward the institution . these include oversight of the aiib's operations and shaping the evolving relationship between the aiib and the mdbs where the united states is a member . members of congress may want to follow the aiib's initial group of projects to gain a better understanding of whether and to what extent china is using the aiib to finance its political and economic priorities in the region . chinese officials see economic development in the region as helping to guard against regional instability ( eg , in afghanistan , pakistan , and central asia ) and to deepen regional political and economic linkages to beijing . members may also consider looking at the possible impact of aiib financing for regional infrastructure , interconnectivity , and trade relations . the strategic or security issues raised by greater economic linkages between china and developing countries in central and south asia may are also worth considering . for example , members may consider how the aiib may facilitate a reordering of asian trade and investment relations toward china .