independence . in 1943 , lebanon gained independence from france . lebanese leaders agreed to an informal national pact , in which each of the country's officially recognized religious groups were to be represented in government in direct relation to their share of the population , based on the 1932 census . the presidency was to be reserved for a maronite christian ( the largest single denomination at that time ) , the prime minister post for a sunni muslim , and the speaker of parliament for a shia . lebanon has not held a census since 1932 , amid fears ( largely among christians ) that any demographic changes revealed by a new census — such as a christian population that was no longer the majority — would upset the status quo . civil war . in the decades that followed , lebanon's sectarian balance remained a point of friction between communities . christian dominance in lebanon was challenged by a number of events , including the influx of ( primarily sunni muslim ) palestinian refugees as a result of the arab - israeli conflict , and the mobilization of lebanon's shia muslim community in the south — which had been politically and economically marginalized . these and other factors would lead the country into a civil war that lasted from 1975 to 1990 and killed an estimated 150,000 people . while the war pitted sectarian communities against one another , there was also significant fighting within communities . foreign intervention . the civil war drew in a number of external actors , including syria , israel , iran , and the united states . syrian military forces intervened in the conflict in 1976 , and remained in lebanon for another 29 years . israel sent military forces into lebanon in 1978 and 1982 , and conducted several subsequent airstrikes in the country . in 1978 , the u.n. security council established the united nations interim force in lebanon ( unifil ) to supervise the withdrawal of israeli forces from southern lebanon , which was not complete until 2000 . in the early 1980s , israel's military presence in the heavily shia area of southern lebanon began to be contested by an emerging militant group that would become hezbollah , backed by iran . the united states deployed forces to lebanon in 1982 as part of a multinational peacekeeping force , but withdrew its forces after the 1983 marine barracks bombing in beirut , which killed 241 u.s. personnel . taif accords . in 1989 , the parties signed the taif accords , beginning a process that would bring the war to a close the following year . the agreement adjusted and formalized lebanon's confessional system , further entrenching what some described as an unstable power dynamic between different sectarian groups at the national level . the political rifts created by this system allowed syria to present itself as the arbiter between rivals , and pursue its own interests inside lebanon in the wake of the war . the participation of syrian troops in operation desert storm to expel iraqi forces from kuwait reportedly facilitated what some viewed as the tacit acceptance by the united states of syria's continuing role in lebanon .