these roles are described below . the executive order encourages educational institutions receiving veterans and military educational benefits , to the extent permitted by law , to abide by the principles of excellence . schools that agree to abide by the principles may be perceived by veterans and servicemembers and their families as providing a more supportive environment compared to other institutions and thus may experience higher enrollments . the principles encourage educational institutions to "provide meaningful information to service members , veterans , spouses , and other family members about [the institution's] financial cost and quality" ; end fraudulent , abusive , deceptive , and aggressive recruiting practices of potential gi bill participants and dod tuition assistance recipients ; gain accreditation for new programs of education before enrolling students ; provide high - quality academic and student support services to veterans and servicemembers and their families ; readmit and accommodate servicemembers forced to suspend their studies or be absent while fulfilling service obligations ; establish an institutional refund policy for course withdrawals aligned with that required for department of education student financial aid programs ; provide a timeline and education plan for graduation ; and designate a point - of - contact for academic and financial advising and career services . as of fy2015 for those institutions that voluntarily agree to abide by the principles , the saa will review their voluntary compliance during any initial approval , compliance visit , or other visit . if the institution is not in compliance , the saa will notify the va to remove the institution from the list of schools adhering to the principles of excellence . the va also reviews institutions' voluntary compliance during compliance surveys that it conducts and takes action , as required . among the efforts to strengthen compliance mechanisms , the executive order required the va to use the saas to improve information sharing among educational stakeholders that oversee institutional and program quality . specifically the va was required to institute uniform procedures for receiving and processing complaints across saas ; provide a coordinated mechanism across saas to alert the va to any complaints that have been registered at the state level ; and create procedures for sharing information about complaints with the appropriate state officials , accrediting agency representatives , and the secretary of education . the va was also tasked with establishing procedures for targeted risk - based program reviews of institutions to ensure compliance with the principles . saa personnel must meet the qualification standards established in the contract with the va. as an example , the standard language in the fy2016 contracts describes the minimum qualification standards for personnel approving and supervising courses offered by job training establishments as a bachelor's degree with two years of related experience ( or the equivalent ) in education and / or related work experience totaling six years . however , there are several opportunities for new and continuing saa employees to receive training on their responsibilities . the saas indicate that new employees benefit from mentoring and job shadowing . contractually , the only training required of saa employees is the annual privacy and information security awareness training required of federal employees .