the corps is responsible for maintaining these projects . additionally , the corps constructed , usually with nonfederal participation , roughly 9,000 miles of the estimated 100,000 miles of the nation's levees , but the agency operates and maintains only 900 miles . the remaining levees are operated by nonfederal entities , often local governments or special districts . the natural resources conservation service in the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) also facilitates water resources development , primarily for flood control in small watersheds and for soil and water conservation purposes . for more information on usda conservation programs and policies , see crs report r40763 , agricultural conservation: a guide to programs , by megan stubbs . many other federal agencies have water - related programs ( eg , epa , the u.s. geological survey , the national oceanographic and atmospheric administration , national aeronautics and space administration , federal emergency management agency [fema] , and energy - related agencies such as the federal energy regulatory commission and power marketing administrations ) . however , the remainder of this report focuses on the projects , programs , and policies of the corps and reclamation . for more information on federal water projects and programs — including types of financing and financial assistance — see crs report rl30478 , federally supported water supply and wastewater treatment programs , coordinated by claudia copeland . for more information on other federal water activities , see crs report r42653 , selected federal water activities: agencies , authorities , and congressional committees , by betsy a. cody et al . in addition to issues related to federal projects , the 115 th congress faces a number of broad water resource policy issues , including financing investment in new and aging water resource infrastructure ; changing federal partnerships ; funding and authorizing projects and earmark policies ; restoring aquatic ecosystems ; and improving drought and flood preparedness and response . u.s. water infrastructure is aging ; the majority of the nation's dams , locks , and levees are more than 50 years old . failure of these structures could have significant effects on local communities as well as regional and national impacts . major capital investments in these structures have been limited in recent years , and repairing these facilities would cost billions of dollars . congressional funding largely has been at the project level and has remained essentially flat , while funding needs have increased over time . to date , no comprehensive federal funding solutions have been enacted . some propose funding mechanisms that might be more conducive to major capital investments in these projects , such as the authorization or modification of loan programs for some infrastructure types or the inclusion of water resource infrastructure among the eligible recipients of funding from an infrastructure bank . others have proposed using revenues from project beneficiaries ( eg , hydropower revenues , increased user fees ) to fund project repairs and upgrades or even de - authorizing and / or transferring projects to nonfederal entities , such as state or local governments . still others think that congress requires more uniform information on the extent of this issue before it considers major funding solutions .