farm payments flow down through these arrangements to individual recipients . despite their longevity , payment limits are not universal among programs . payment limits are enforced differently for different types of legal entities ( as mentioned earlier and summarized below ) . for example , certain program limits may be expanded depending on the number of participants , or they may be subject to exceptions , or may not exist . the major categories of farm program support and the applicability of annual payment limits , if any , are briefly discussed below . theoretically , market prices — based on relative supply and demand conditions and assuming competitive market conditions hold — provide the most useful signals for allocating scarce resources . subsequent levels of attribution are related to those legal entities in which an individual has an ownership share . if a person meets his or her payment limit at the first level of attribution ( i.e. , on his or her own personal farming operation ) , then any payments to legal entities at lower levels of attribution are reduced by that person's pro rata share . when the eligibility criteria — including aef , agi , and others — are met , the cumulative benefits across certain farm programs are subject to specific annual payment limits ( detailed in table 1 ) that can be received by an individual or legal entity . explicit payment limits date back to the 1970s . in other words , in a situation where no policy support is available , most producers would make production decisions based primarily on market conditions . if these conditions hold , then tighter payment limits ( i.e. supporters of payment limits use both economic and political arguments to justify tighter limits . economically , they contend that large payments facilitate consolidation of farms into larger units , raise the price of land , and put smaller , family - sized farming operations and beginning farmers at a disadvantage . even though tighter limits would not redistribute benefits to smaller farms , they say that tighter limits could help indirectly by reducing incentives to expand , thus potentially reducing upward price pressure on land markets . this could help small and beginning farmers buy and rent land . politically , they believe that large payments undermine public support for farm subsidies and are costly . in the past , newspapers have published stories critical of farm payments and how they are distributed to large farms , non - farmers , or landowners . limits increasingly appeal to urban lawmakers , and have advocates among smaller farms and social interest groups . critics of payment limits ( and thus supporters of higher limits or no limits ) counter that all farms are in need of support , especially when market prices decline , and that larger farms should not be penalized for the economies of size and efficiencies they have achieved . they say that farm payments help u.s. agriculture compete in global markets , and that income testing is at odds with federal farm policies directed toward improving u.s. agriculture and its competitiveness . in addition to these concerns , this section briefly reviews other selected payment - limit issues and eligibility requirements .