in this case , a letter would have been counted as a member letter . there is variation by party in who sends "dear colleague" letters through the e - "dear colleague" system . the data also suggest two additional trends . first , the data in figure 1 that show a decline in the number of "dear colleague" letters sent during election years , especially presidential election years , suggest that the flow of internal communications declines when congressional workload declines . as figure 2 further shows , the average number of "dear colleague" letters declines when congress is in a traditional district work period . the analysis in this and subsequent sections uses the second dataset of "dear colleague" letters: those sent in the 111 th and 113 th congresses using the e - "dear colleague" system . while members , house officers , committees , and house commissions may send "dear colleague" letters , members accounted for the vast majority of all letters sent in both the 111 th and 113 th congresses , followed by committees , officers , and commissions . additionally , in the 113 th congress , house leaders ( eg , the speaker of the house or the minority leader ) sent letters from their leadership office though the dataset reflected only small numbers of letters from these offices . the dataset for the 111 th congress did not include categories for senders from leadership offices ( eg , majority leader , minority leader ) . table 1 shows the breakdown by sender of "dear colleague" letters in the 111 th and 113 th congresses . as table 1 shows , members send an overwhelming majority of "dear colleague" letters . this finding is expected , as the majority of "dear colleague" letters are sent to request legislative cosponsors . while committees account for between 3.5% and 5.0% of "dear colleague" letters , it is possible that the number of "dear colleague" letters dealing with committee activities is greater , since committee members may have sent "dear colleague" letters in their own name rather than under a committee's banner . in the 111 th congress , 82.5% of all member letters were sent by democrats compared with 17.5% by republicans . at that time , these numbers were not descriptively representative of the overall house membership for the 111 th congress , which was 59% democrats and 41% republicans . the party breakdown for member "dear colleague" letters is similar for the 113 th congress , with democrats sending 73% of letters compared with 27% for republicans . for the 113 th congress , however , the republicans were the majority party ( 54% of seats ) and the democrats were the minority party ( 47% of seats ) . "dear colleague" letters are often used to encourage others to cosponsor , support , or oppose a bill , resolution , or amendment . "dear colleague" letters concerning a bill or resolution generally include a description of the legislation along with a reason or reasons for support or opposition . for example , a "dear colleague" letter send during the 111 th congress solicited cosponsors for h.r . 483 , the victims of crime preservation fund act of 2009 , and h.r .