appendix a . the 2010 public use file and the individual income tax system in 2010 much of the analysis in this report relies on data from the irs soi public use file . the most recent public use file available at the time this report was written was for tax year 2010 . this appendix provides additional information on the irs soi public use file and the individual income tax system in 2010 , highlighting differences between the system in 2010 and the current system . the 2010 irs soi public use file contains 159,791 records designed to provide statistical information for the 142.9 million individual income tax returns filed in 2010 . the focus of this report is on the 2010 tax year . table b - 4 contains information on the income levels in the income deciles for each of the family types included in figure 8 and figure 9 in the body of the report . for example , are employee - provided fringe benefits taxable ? the rules created in response to this and similar questions make for a complex tax system . other sources of complexity include various tax incentives designed to address social and economic issues , including but not limited to tax benefits for families , children , education , housing , and charitable giving . temporary tax provisions , as well as frequent changes in tax policy , also contribute to a complicated individual income tax system . while there is ample room for simplification in tax reform , consolidating and reducing the number of tax brackets alone does little to achieve this objective . second , evaluations of equity should consider differences in tax burdens both across and within income groups . the extent to which the tax system is proportional , progressive , or regressive can be evaluated by looking at the average tax burden across income groups . however , as illustrated in this report , under the current individual income tax system , there is substantial variation in tax burdens within income groups . policymakers might consider whether this variation is desirable , perhaps because it makes adjustments for family size or other ability - to - pay considerations ( in other words , makes adjustments to enhance horizontal equity ) . third , low effective marginal tax rates do more than low statutory rates to promote economic efficiency ( that is , they introduce fewer distortions in real economic activity ) . in an uncomplicated tax system , effective marginal rates are equal to statutory rates . under the current system , however , a taxpayer's effective marginal tax rate often differs from the statutory rate . phaseouts of various tax benefits , limiting the benefits of certain provisions to low - and moderate - income taxpayers , results in marginal tax rates that exceed the statutory rate . thus , there is a tradeoff between equity and efficiency objectives . if a reformed tax system includes provisions to reduce the tax burden for low - and moderate - income taxpayers without extending those benefits to higher - income taxpayers , policymakers might consider the marginal tax rate effects of phaseouts associated with those policies .