merchant nuclear power plants are the focus of this report . in addition to the nuclear ptc for new plants mentioned above , two specific energy tax credits currently available to renewable energy technologies are ( 1 ) the renewable electricity production tax credit , and ( 2 ) the investment tax credit for renewable energy . in march 2015 the nuclear energy institute ( nei ) , along with other industry groups , announced a joint effort to pursue market and price reforms in competitive electric power markets . the groups sent a letter to the federal energy regulatory commission outlining a set of principles for price formation reforms . generally , the primary market reform argument is that clearing prices do not include all costs ( eg , start - up and uplift ) associated with operating an electric power system . as a result , lmps may be lower than they otherwise would be if all costs were included . ferc has an ongoing energy price formation initiative to evaluate electricity price formation in rto and iso markets . in june 2016 ferc issued a rule requiring rtos / isos to change their settlement procedures and shortage pricing triggers in order to more accurately compensate generation resources . ferc is also evaluating other price formation issues ( eg , uplift payments ) ; future rules could potentially impact electricity price formation in wholesale markets . congressional action in this area could include oversight of how ferc's energy price formation initiative might impact nuclear power generators . this effort is consistent with the future of nuclear power task force recommendation referenced above . a federal production tax credit ( ptc ) is currently available for the generation of electricity by new , advanced nuclear power facilities during their first eight years of operation . however , no federal tax incentives are available for existing nuclear power plants . generally , currently available energy tax credit incentives are designed to encourage construction and operation of new energy production facilities and are based on either energy / electricity production ( i.e. , production tax credit or ptc ) or investment ( i.e. , investment tax credit or itc ) . legislation making existing nuclear power generation eligible for either of these existing tax credit incentives would provide some financial value and could potentially support continued operation of at - risk plants . however , since the financial condition across the entire u.s. nuclear fleet is not uniform there would likely be plants that capture the tax credit value as a windfall , without actually needing it to justify continued operations . because of the low - carbon attributes of nuclear - generated electricity , a price on carbon emissions could potentially benefit existing nuclear power plants if the carbon price were reflected in wholesale electricity prices . however , the design of such a carbon price policy could determine whether or not existing nuclear power would be financially advantaged . a carbon price policy could take many forms , including a carbon tax , a cap - and - trade approach , or an environmental regulatory approach such as the clean power plan ( cpp ) .