will u.s. and colombian drug control objectives continue to align ? and to what degree will counternarcotics appropriations by the 115 th congress for the departments of state and defense , as well as usaid , synchronize with and support a newer colombian counterdrug strategy ? the success of colombia's new national drug strategy may depend on how the peace accord with the farc is enacted . peace or post - conflict efforts involve a broad spectrum of development programs and other activities which could influence , in turn , political stability , economic growth , and management of drug trafficking and other crime . although some observers maintain that the scale of farc trafficking will decline in post - accord colombia , it is uncertain how many former farc combatants will defect or decline to participate in post - accord programs . the farc and other armed groups in the country financed themselves with drug profits and other illicit businesses , and the colombian drug trade likely will continue to meet large international — and particularly u.s. — drug demand . key questions remain: will there be a violent battle of succession among criminal groups ? to what degree can and should colombia's role in regional counternarcotics efforts be expanded ? as discussed , other colombian drug traffickers have aggressively sought to supplant the farc , which is estimated to have once controlled roughly 60% to70% of colombia's coca - growing areas and lucrative trafficking routes , according to government statements and recent studies . some analysts have estimated that the process of executing programs related to post - accord and post - conflict development could take more than a decade and cost as much as $42 billion . the country faces steep challenges to underwrite the post - accord peace programs in an era of declining budgets as it seeks to address reparations and land restitution for more than 8 million conflict victims ; modernize and expand colombia's justice system ; and effectively carry out transitional justice ( including full confessions , punishment , and reparations to victims and communities ) for crimes by both the farc and the colombian security forces , as required by the peace accord . the informal campaigning and positioning for the 2018 national elections in colombia may result in the government's drug policy being critically evaluated by those who continue to oppose the peace process with the leftist guerillas and may be profoundly affected by the president who is to take office in august 2018 . colombia is working to achieve peace with low government reserves , a weakened currency , and the unknowns of future external foreign aid or assistance . the cost and challenge of bringing social services to vulnerable , often - isolated parts of the country that are subject to violence and drug - crop production include effectively removing land - mines in the second - most land - mine - affected country in the world , and overcoming a historic dearth of transportation and other infrastructure . many observers contend that these legal , security , and social conditions must be addressed for viable crop substitution and sustainable alternative livelihood programs to succeed .