member states . resolution 2231 appears to contain a combination of nonbinding recommendations and binding decisions . through an instrument communicated to the other parties . if the instrument is not signed by the head of state , head of government or minister for foreign affairs , the representative of the state communicating it may be called upon to produce full powers . under this rule , a notice of withdrawal issued by the president ( i.e. , the "head of state" for the united states ) would effectively withdraw the united states from the international agreement as a matter of international law , provided such notice complied with applicable treaty withdrawal provisions . paragraph 2 of resolution 2231 states that the security council: calls upon all members states . in this regard , the withdrawal process under international law may not account for the unique constitutional and separation of powers principles related to withdrawal under u.s. domestic law , discussed below . political commitments are not legally binding between nations , and thus a party can withdraw at any time without violating international law regardless of whether the commitment contains a withdrawal clause . although such withdrawal may not constitute a legal infraction , the withdrawing party still may face the possibility of political consequences and responsive actions from its international counterparts . under domestic law , it is generally accepted among scholars that the executive , by virtue of its role as the "sole organ" of the government charged with making official communications with foreign states , is responsible for communicating the united states' intention to withdraw from international agreements and political commitments . the degree to which the constitution requires congress or the senate to participate in the decision to withdraw , however , has been the source of historical debate and may differ depending on the type of pact at issue . and in those cases when the president's authority to terminate an international pact has been challenged in court , discussed below , courts have declined to answer the underlying separation - of - powers question . instead , the executive and legislative branches largely have been left to resolve disagreement over the termination power through political processes rather than through judicial settlement . the legal framework for withdrawal from an international agreement may also depend on whether congress has enacted legislation implementing its provisions into the domestic law of the united states . some provisions of international agreements are considered self - executing and have the force of domestic law without the need for subsequent congressional action . but for non - self - executing provisions or agreements , implementing legislation from congress may be required to provide u.s. agencies with legal authority to carry out functions contemplated by the agreement or to make them enforceable by private parties . certain political commitments have also been incorporated into domestic law through implementing legislation . under supreme court precedent , the repealing of statutes generally must conform to the same bicameral process set forth in article i that is used to enact new legislation .