a report by the u.s . fish and wildlife service states climate change presents pacific islands with unique challenges including rising temperatures , sea - level rise , contamination of freshwater resources with saltwater , coastal erosion , an increase in extreme weather events , coral reef bleaching , and ocean acidification . projections for the rest of this century suggest continued increases in air and ocean surface temperatures in the pacific , increased frequency of extreme weather events , and increased rainfall during the summer months and a decrease in rainfall during the winter months . some areas of the region lie only 15 feet above sea level , and if sea levels continue to rise as projected , kiribati , tokelau , and tuvalu may be uninhabitable by 2050 . some experts predict that many pacific islanders face displacement over the coming decades . kiribati reportedly is buying land in fiji in case its population needs to relocate . much of the republic of the marshall islands is less than six feet above the sea , and some experts say that rising sea levels may make many areas of the country unfit for human habitation in the coming decades . bikini islanders , with the support of the u.s. department of the interior , have asked to be allowed to resettle in the united states . they claim that kili and ejit , the islands to which bikini islanders were relocated before and after the nuclear tests of the 1940s and 1950s and where about 1,000 of them currently live , can no longer sustain them , due to a lack of resources and a greater frequency of bad weather . recurrent flooding from storms and high tides has disrupted water supplies and destroyed crops . the department of the interior has proposed that the u.s. resettlement fund set up for bikini islanders help to support their relocation to the united states . new caledonia , a territory of france , and bougainville , which is part of papua new guinea , are to hold referenda on independence in 2018 and 2019 . issues and areas of possible concern to congress include u.s. assistance for the administration of free and fair elections , the building of political institutions , and the mitigation of potential conflict . developments in bougainville also may affect u.s. relations with papua new guinea . the french overseas territory of new caledonia , annexed by france in 1853 and formerly used as a penal colony for french convicts , may become the world's next state . an estimated 39% of new caledonia's 260,000 people are kanaks while 27% are european , with the balance composed of "mixed race" persons and others from elsewhere in the asia - pacific . in the 1980s , the indigenous kanaks clashed with pro - france settlers . in a referendum in 1987 , which was boycotted by local independence groups , new caledonians voted to remain with france . under the noumea accord of 1998 , signed by france , the kanak socialist liberation front , and the territory's anti - independence rcpr party , a referendum on independence must be held by the end of 2018 .