ยง 1373 as "sanctuary jurisdictions. this section further provides that the u.s. attorney general and the secretary must "ensure," "in their discretion and to the extent consistent with law," that these "sanctuary" jurisdictions are ineligible to receive federal grants funds , with the exception of grants that are deemed "necessary for law enforcement purposes. each of these limitations on the exercise of the spending power is discussed in more detail below . the issuance of president trump's january 25 , 2017 , executive order that could render "sanctuary jurisdictions" ineligible for federal grants has prompted renewed interest in the federal government's legal authority to impose conditions on federal funds . lawsuits that have already been filed against the executive order ( or similar legal challenges that may be brought in the future ) could address some of the questions about the spending power that have been left unanswered by the supreme court . for example , the dole court expressly declined to "define the outer bounds of the 'germaneness' or 'relatedness' limitation on the imposition of conditions under the spending power. similarly , neither the controlling opinion in nfib nor the majority opinion in dole identified precisely when a financial inducement offered to states by congress crosses the line between "mild encouragement," which is permissible , and "impermissibl[e] coercion. the remaining sections of this report briefly describe ( 1 ) the particular provisions of the executive order that relate to sanctuary jurisdictions and ( 2 ) the arguments advanced by the plaintiffs in the lawsuits filed to date challenging the order that could help to clarify spending clause jurisprudence . among other things , executive order 13768 ( eo ) raises the prospect of withholding federal grant money to state or local government entities that have adopted so - called "sanctuary" laws , policies , or practices that limit their cooperation with federal immigration authorities in identifying and apprehending "unauthorized aliens" within the state or locality's jurisdiction . entitled "enhancing public safety in the interior of the united states," the eo declares that "[i]t is a policy of the executive branch to ensure , to the fullest extent of the law , that a state , or a political subdivision of a state , shall comply with 8 u.s.c . this federal immigration statute , enacted in 1996 , bars state and local governments and officials from adopting any restriction on the sharing of information regarding "immigration or citizenship status. section 9 ( a ) of the eo directs the secretary of homeland security ( secretary ) to designate , "in his discretion and to the extent consistent with law," jurisdictions that willfully refuse to comply with 8 u.s.c . the attorney general is also ordered to "take appropriate enforcement action against any entity that violates 8 u.s.c . 1373 , or which has in effect a statute , policy , or practice that prevents or hinders the enforcement of federal law. finally , section 9 ( c ) of the eo instructs the director of omb "to obtain and provide relevant and responsive information on all federal grant money that currently is received by any sanctuary jurisdiction.