the same was true in 2010 . long - form data — detailed data that formerly were collected from a population sample in conjunction with the decennial census — now are gathered by the american community survey ( acs ) . the bureau conducts the acs separately from the census and at more frequent intervals . the following discussion focuses on repeated calls for cost containment in the decennial count and the sociodemographic factors tending to drive up census costs as well as impede a complete , accurate enumeration . as the census bureau prepares for the next enumeration , it is focusing on cost - control innovations in the four key areas discussed below . the bureau estimates that these innovations , if successful , could "save approximately $5.2 billion compared to repeating the 2010 design in the 2020 census. the estimated cost to repeat the 2010 design is $17.5 billion , compared with $12.3 billion for a reengineered census . the bureau's overarching census enterprise data collection and processing ( cedcap ) initiative dates from 2014 . cedcap , in the bureau's words , "will create an integrated and standardized system of systems that will offer shared data collection and processing across all censuses and surveys," including , prominently , the 2020 census . the initiative is intended to "consolidate costs by retiring unique , survey - specific systems and redundant capabilities" and bring a much larger share of the bureau's total information technology ( it ) expenditures under one "centrally managed program. the bureau's plan is to "put in place a solution that will be mature and proven for the 2020 census. gao testified to congress in 2016 that the 2020 census "relies heavily on cedcap to deliver key systems to support its redesign. the census could receive greater congressional attention as 2020 approaches ; the bureau requests larger appropriations leading up to the count ; and issues like house apportionment , within - state redistricting , federal funds distribution , and other uses of the decennial data gain prominence . the bureau is asking congress to make substantial investments in census operations , particularly those related to information technology , which could invite increasing scrutiny of them . the discussion below notes concerns raised thus far about it and it security for the census , the status of census testing and findings from tests of nonresponse follow - up operations in two sites , and funding for census preparations . in congressional testimony toward the end of 2016 , gao observed that 2020 census operations will depend on about 50 it systems , including 11 cedcap "enterprise systems. with respect to cedcap , the bureau "developed several pilot systems to provide and test different capabilities" but in may 2016 decided to acquire six of them "from a vendor , using a commercial - off - the - shelf it platform , rather than continue to develop the capabilities in - house. gao questioned whether the bureau would be ready for the 2018 end - to - end census test , which , as previously mentioned , is scheduled to begin in august 2017 .