nonetheless , the challenges facing the au are profound . securing the financial resources to strengthen the au's institutional , technical , and staff capacities is one key obstacle . in recent years , while member states have funded all or nearly all of the auc's organizational operational budget ( eg , headquarters staff costs ) , with a handful of member states funding the bulk of such costs , roughly 95% of the au program budget has been funded by external donors . congressional appropriation and oversight activity has regularly focused on such aid . in recent years , some members of congress have met with au leaders or traveled to au headquarters to discuss with au leaders common concerns and interests regarding the region . still , little substantive recent legislation or congressional oversight activity has focused specifically on the au . there is arguably considerable potential for expanded u.s. - au ties and cooperation — and for expanded congressional engagement with the organization — given the au's diverse program and policy activity , the limited extent of u.s. - au development cooperation compared to some other au development partners ( eg , the european union ) , and a dovetailing of some u.s. - au policy goals and interests . current and prospective areas of cooperation include such issues as peace and security ; trade and investment ; and socioeconomic and infrastructure development ; and science and technology cooperation . some u.s. policymakers may also seek to leverage engagement with the au to counter what they may see as objectionable efforts by individual au member states' leaders to use the au to advance or preserve these leaders' parochial interests or political power . actions that interested u.s. policymakers might seek to counter through engagement with au institutions include efforts by some african governments to withdraw from the international criminal court or limit the scope of its efforts to achieve judicial accountability for human rights abuses in africa ; ensure u.s. financial support for au military operations while limiting u.s. input into such missions' operational goals and conduct ; subvert democratic processes and related constitutional measures at the national level ; and limit the rights of lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender persons . other members may wish to more closely tie any u.s. aid to the au to its pursuit of programs that comport with u.s. objectives , given that many in congress may be leery of providing aid to multilateral institutions absent the ability of the united states to strongly influence decisionmaking by such institutions . in addition , given that the au is an arguably bureaucratically cumbersome and technically weak entity , and presents a potentially politically challenging venue through which to pursue u.s. interests , some in congress may prefer to approach relations with africa primarily through a bilateral lens , and generally minimize u.s. - au engagement . such a strategy , however , risks reducing the ability of the united states to bargain with the region as a whole on such issues as climate change , trade , and action on other global issues in multilateral forums . the african union is an intergovernmental grouping that includes as members all countries in africa except morocco .