, are subject to taxes ) . employees cannot contribute to a sehra directly or via salary reduction agreement . payments and reimbursements from the sehra cannot exceed $4,950 per year for self - only coverage or $10,000 per year for coverage that includes family members . prohibition on annual limits: group health plans are prohibited from having dollar limits on the amount the plan will spend for covered health benefits during a plan year . preventive services requirement: group health plans must provide coverage for certain preventive health services without imposing cost sharing . employers that offer group health plans that do not comply with one or both of these requirements — including an hra that is not integrated with a non - hra group health plan — could be subject to an excise tax of $100 per day per employee covered under the noncompliant arrangement . a salient aspect of the guidance ( and subsequent follow - up guidance ) is that it specifically addresses hras that pay or reimburse employees for health insurance coverage purchased in the non - group , or individual , market . in general , the guidance provides that an hra that can be used for such purposes may not be integrated with a non - hra group health plan and therefore is not in compliance with the prohibition on annual limits and the preventive service requirement . the guidance issued in september 2013 was effective for plan years beginning january 1 , 2014 ; however , transition relief was provided for small employers in guidance issued by the internal revenue service ( irs ) in april 2015 . under the transition relief , a small employer is one with fewer than 50 full - time - equivalent employees . employers eligible for the transition relief did not have to comply with the requirements of the september 2013 guidance until after june 30 , 2015 . section 18001 ( a ) ( 1 ) creates qualified small employer health reimbursement arrangements ( sehras ) . a sehra is an arrangement offered by an eligible employer that pays or reimburses employees for substantiated medical expenses . a sehra can only be funded by an employer . ( these dollar amounts are prorated for part - year employees and are indexed for inflation in future years. ) prior to passage of p.l . an employer must provide a sehra "on the same terms" to all "eligible employees. a sehra does not fail the test of "on the same terms" simply because employees' permitted benefits vary in accordance with permitted variations for age and family size in the price of insurance policies available in the non - group market . 114-255 , health care professionals not included in that list were nonphysicians under the medicare program and therefore were unable to serve locum tenens .