the other is software development . these nonphysical inputs may be produced within the manufacturing firm itself , or may be purchased from other firms . because many manufactured products are unique , understanding of the role of nonmanufactured inputs in manufactured goods has come principally from case studies . these studies seek to disentangle the complex supply chains used to produce many of the final goods that are sold to consumers , firms , and governments . one such study of nokia's n95 mobile phone found that the cost of final assembly — that is , the physical manufacture of the product sold to end users — came to only 2% of the final pretax sales price ; the value of the physical inputs nokia purchased to manufacture the phone , such as processors , cameras , and integrated circuits , was estimated to be less than the value of its intellectual property , in - house services , and profit connected with the phone . another study found the cost of assembling computers and music players to be only 3% to 5% of the selling price . an analysis of an italian manufacturer's chinese - made shoes found that design , quality control , logistics , sales , and administration , all of which occurred in europe , accounted for about half the wholesale cost of the shoes and three - quarters of the value added . the value of embedded software represents a substantial and growing share of the value of many manufactured products , from pacemakers and washing machines to cars and airplanes . a recent study asserts that semiconductor manufacturers are "shifting their focus from hardware" to software embedded in their products . similarly , according to a recent article , "a premium class car now ... runs on 100 [million] lines of software code," implying that a significant albeit uncertain share of the car's value is created by coders in offices rather than assembly workers on a factory floor . a 2016 consultant study projects that providers of software and digital services will capture a growing share of the automotive sector's profits as autonomous vehicles come into use . the organisation for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) , which seeks to harmonize economic data internationally , estimates that services produced in the united states contributed around one - third of the total value added in products sold by the u.s. manufacturing sector in 2011 . this share varies considerably among manufacturing industries ( table 1 ) . the oecd figures likely understate the role of nonphysical activities in manufacturing production , as the underlying data generally do not capture services and software produced within manufacturing establishments rather than purchased from external suppliers . the difficulty of defining manufacturing activity and identifying manufacturing work has direct implications for efforts to encourage manufacturing in the united states as a matter of u.s. government policy . the national identity of manufactured products has been a matter of congressional concern since at least the 1930s .