figure 1 . dod share of federal r&d source: crs analysis of fy2017 data from analytical perspectives , budget of the united states government , fiscal year 2019 . the department of defense ( dod ) receives nearly 40% of all federal research and development ( r&d ) appropriations , and more than 43% that of the next largest federal recipient , the department of health and human services . the work funded by these appropriations plays a central role in the nation's security as well as an important role in u.s. global leadership in science and technology . this report provides an introduction to the structure of dod's research , development , test , and evaluation ( rt&e ) budget for staff attempting to understand dod rdt&e appropriations . in its annual budget request to congress , dod presents its rdt&e by organization and program and by the character of the work to be performed . the rdt&e request is summarized in a supporting budget document titled "research , development , test , & evaluation programs ( r - 1 ) ," which is often referred to simply as the r - 1 . dod rdt&e appropriations are provided annually through the defense appropriations act , one of the 12 regular appropriations acts that provide most of the discretionary funding for operation of the federal government . generally , dod rdt&e funding is provided in four of the act's titles ( see box ) . more than 95% of dod's rdt&e funding is appropriated in title iv ( research , development , test , and evaluation ) , which includes rdt&e appropriations for the army , navy , air force , a defense - wide rdt&e account , and the director of operational test and evaluation . within each of these accounts are dozens of program elements ( pes ) that specify funding for particular activities ( eg , night vision technology , aviation survivability , cyber operations technology development ) . rdt&e funds are also appropriated for programs in other parts of the act . for example , rdt&e funds are appropriated as part of the defense health program and the chemical agents and munitions destruction program , and sometimes as part of the national defense sealift fund . the defense health program ( dhp ) supports the delivery of health care to dod personnel and their families . dhp funds ( including any rdt&e funds ) are appropriated in title vi . the program's rdt&e funds support congressionally directed research on breast , prostate , and ovarian cancer ; traumatic brain injuries ; orthotics and prosthetics ; and other medical conditions . the chemical agents and munitions destruction program supports activities to destroy the u.s. inventory of lethal chemical agents and munitions . funds for this program are requested through the defense - wide procurement appropriations request . congress appropriates funds for this program in title vi ( other department of defense programs ) . the national defense sealift fund supports the procurement , operation and maintenance , and research and development of the nation's naval reserve fleet and supports a u.s. - flagged merchant fleet that can serve in time of need .