appendix a . medical research on marijuana approved drugs and ongoing research the food and drug administration ( fda ) has approved two drugs containing synthetic thc: nabilone and dronabinol . nabilone is fda - approved as an antiemetic ( to reduce nausea or prevent vomiting ) for patients receiving chemotherapy for cancer . dronabinol is fda - approved as both an antiemetic for patients on chemotherapy and an appetite stimulant for patients with aids - related weight loss . in addition , drugs containing plant - derived thc and / or cannabidiol ( cbd , a nonpsychoactive chemical component of marijuana ) are in the drug development and approval process . the uk - based gw pharmaceuticals has plant - derived cannabinoid drug products in trials with the goal of fda approval . its drug sativex® , which is composed primarily of plant - derived thc and cbd , has already gained approval in 30 other countries for the treatment of spasticity due to multiple sclerosis . in 2014 , the company announced that the fda had granted "fast track" designation to sativex as a potential pain reliever for patients with advanced cancer ; however , in 2015 , three trials of sativex failed to show superiority over a placebo . the company continues to seek approval of sativex and other plant - derived cannabinoid products for treatment of various conditions ( eg , childhood epilepsy ) . scientific evaluations of marijuana recent evaluations conducted separately by the fda and the national academies of sciences , engineering , and medicine ( the national academies ) illustrate the challenge of meeting the required standard of evidence . while taking different approaches to their evaluations , both the fda and the national academies have found that the current evidence base falls short . fda evaluation . the fda evaluated only marijuana , not drugs containing a plant - derived chemical constituent of marijuana or drugs containing synthetic thc . its analysis of marijuana's potential therapeutic effects is limited to 11 published studies that met criteria for inclusion in the review ( eg , that the study must be a randomized controlled trial ) . the studies examined marijuana's use to treat neuropathic pain ( five studies ) , stimulate appetite in patients with hiv ( two studies ) , treat glaucoma ( two studies ) , treat spasticity in multiple sclerosis ( one study ) , and treat asthma ( one study ) . the evaluation also assessed potential risks of marijuana use ( see text box , "risks associated with marijuana use" ) . the evaluation , called an eight - factor analysis , was conducted by the fda pursuant to a request by the dea . the dea requests such scientific and medical evaluations from the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) in response to petitions asking the dea to reschedule marijuana administratively . national academies evaluation . the national academies evaluated cannabis , its constituents , and drugs containing synthetic thc .