in a series of cases , the supreme court has evaluated disputes over redistricting maps . a federal statute requires that apportionment occurs every 10 years . accordingly , in order to comport with the constitutional standard of equality of population among districts , discussed below , at least once every 10 years , most states must draw new congressional district boundaries in response to changes in the number of representatives apportioned to the state or shifts in population within the state . in addition to various state processes , the legal framework for congressional redistricting involves constitutional and federal statutory requirements . these rulings and evolving jurisprudence have significantly affected how congressional districts are drawn and the degree to which challenges to redistricting plans may succeed . this jurisprudence can be seen to address four general areas: ( 1 ) the constitutional requirement of population equality among districts ; ( 2 ) the intersection between the voting rights act and the equal protection clause ; ( 3 ) the justiciability of partisan gerrymandering ; and ( 4 ) the constitutionality of state ballot initiatives providing for redistricting by independent commissions . in addition to various state processes , congressional redistricting is governed by the limits and powers of the constitution and requirements prescribed under federal statutes . interpreting such requirements , in a series of cases and evolving jurisprudence , the u.s. supreme court has issued rulings that have significantly shaped how congressional districts are drawn and the degree to which challenges to redistricting plans may be successful . as a result , the court's case law has had a significant impact on the process of congressional redistricting . for example , while the supreme court has held that each congressional district within a state must contain approximately the same number of people , the court has also held that the standard does not require congressional districts to be drawn with precise mathematical equality if population deviations are justified with "legitimate state objectives. in addition , although the voting rights act may require the creation of majority - minority districts , the court has interpreted the equal protection clause to require that if race is the predominant factor in the drawing of district lines , above other traditional redistricting considerations , then a strict scrutiny standard of review is to be applied . to withstand strict scrutiny in this context , the state must demonstrate that it had a compelling governmental interest in creating a majority - minority district and the redistricting plan was narrowly tailored to further that compelling interest . during its current term , the court has decided one case regarding the degree to which racial considerations are permitted to impact how district lines are drawn and is considering another such case . furthermore , the supreme court is currently considering a direct appeal from a three - judge federal district court ruling involving partisan gerrymandering . this case presents the court with an opportunity to establish a standard for determining what constitutes unconstitutional partisan gerrymandering if it so chooses . finally , a 2015 supreme court ruling held that the elections clause of the constitution permits states to create , by ballot initiatives and referenda , nonpartisan independent commissions for drawing congressional districts .