unlike h.r . 900 would permit mainlanders ( or others ) of puerto rican descent to participate in the referendum . the bill specifies voting eligibility for those "born in puerto rico" or those who "[have] a parent who was born in puerto rico. status was not a major component of debate in the 114 th congress . status was , however , a contextual issue as congress considered legislation related to the island's ongoing economic crisis . the 114 th congress did not enact any legislation directly affecting puerto rico's political status , but committees held hearings that partially addressed the topic . one bill devoted to puerto rico's political status was introduced in the 114 th congress . the puerto rico oversight , management , and economic stability act ( promesa ; p.l . 114-187 ) establishes a process for restructuring the island government's public debt . promesa also establishes a federal oversight board , formally known as the financial oversight and management board for puerto rico , with "broad powers of budgetary and financial control over" the island . status was not a central component of the congressional deliberation over promesa , although some members addressed status in testimony or floor statements . some hearings also addressed the topic . perhaps most consequentially for the status debate , some of those who opposed promesa , including some members of congress , characterized the broad powers provided to the oversight board as undemocratic . in particular , opponents objected to the board's powers to approve fiscal plans submitted by the governor and to approve territorial budgets , among others . although not necessarily addressing the oversight board explicitly , proponents generally argued that , in the absence of bankruptcy protection for territories , promesa was necessary to help the island's government to restructure its debts in an orderly fashion . critics , on the other hand , contended that the oversight board undermines the mutually agreed status relationship established in 1952 . connections between promesa and status also were a component of the 2016 puerto rico elections ( discussed previously ) . one brief section of promesa explicitly addresses status . section 402 of the law states that "[n]othing in this act shall be interpreted to restrict puerto rico's right to determine its future political status , including" through another plebiscite as authorized in the fy2014 omnibus appropriations law ( p.l . a december 2016 report released by a congressional task force established in promesa ( devoted primarily to economic issues ) recommended that if such a plebiscite is held , congress "analyze the result ... with care and seriousness of purpose , and take any appropriate legislative action. just as status provides context for debates about other areas of public policy , status also can arise in legal cases that primarily concern other topics . in june 2016 , the supreme court of the united states issued an opinion in puerto rico v. sanchez valle . this report does not provide a legal overview of the case , which concerned the application of the u.s. constitution's double jeopardy clause to criminal prosecutions in puerto rico .