the question is one that has been debated from the very beginnings of the country . in its 1803 decision in marbury v. madison , the supreme court held that the logic of having a written constitution that enumerates the legal limits imposed on the federal government , coupled with the tenure protections provided to the federal judiciary under the constitution , confirmed the supreme court's role in interpreting the constitution and invalidating acts of other branches of government that contravene this document in the context of a live case or controversy . pursuant to marbury ' s famous command , it is "the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is. ( the amendment does not pertain to concurrent or simple resolutions. ) the constitutional authority statement ( cas ) rule , found at house rule xii , clause 7 ( c ) , was subsequently adopted in the 113th , 114th , 115th , and 116th congresses . as the cas rule begins its ninth year , the requirement continues to be a topic of congressional debate and inquiry , as members of the house contemplate how to comply with the rule prior to every submission of a bill or joint resolution . this report aims to aid in understanding the cas requirement . it begins by providing a broad overview of ( 1 ) congress's powers under the constitution and ( 2 ) congress's role in interpreting this document . the report then specifically addresses house rule xii , clause 7 ( c ) , discussing its key requirements and limits , the legal effect of a cas , and the debate over the rule's value . the report concludes by discussing trends with regard to the house's recent cas practices and by providing considerations for congressional personnel drafting cass . the report contains two tables: table 1 identifies the constitutional provisions most commonly cited in cass during the last six months of the 114 th and 115 th congresses , and table 2 lists suggested constitutional authorities for various types of legislation . understanding the purpose and logic of the cas rule first requires an understanding of both the powers provided to the congress under the constitution and congress's role in interpreting the constitution . the framers of the constitution feared tyranny as the result of the "accumulation of all powers" of government "in the same hands" and , thus , "sought to guard against it by dispersing federal power to three interdependent branches of government. reflecting this fear , the federal constitution divides the government's power among the legislative , executive , and judicial branches , with the congress exercising the legislative power , the president exercising the executive power , and the federal courts exercising the judicial power . "it is a breach of the national fundamental law" if congress "gives up its legislative power" to one of the other branches or if congress "attempts to invest itself or its members with either executive power or judicial power. while only congress may exercise the legislative power , this power , like those belonging to the other branches of the federal government , is cabined by the terms of the constitution .