estimates. as in the united states , international surveys indicate that the most significant sources of illicit proceeds are generated through white collar crime ( i.e. , fraud , identity theft , and tax evasion ) and organized crime , particularly drug trafficking . smaller sums , which are nevertheless significant for political and security reasons , are associated with public corruption and international terrorism . in seeking to clean dirty money , launderers wield a wide range of methods to conceal from authorities the true origins , ownership , and volume of illicit proceeds . particularly attractive are methods that preserve anonymity ( eg , use and movement of cash ) , avoid aml - related recordkeeping and reporting requirements ( eg , structuring bank deposit and withdrawal ) , and involve techniques that are hard for authorities to detect ( eg , trade - based money laundering ) . money laundering may involve the use of complicit individuals ( eg , nominees , corrupt officials , banking insiders , front company business owners ) and illegal financial service providers ( eg , unregistered money services businesses ) . money laundering may also involve the exploitation of legal off - shore corporate structures that obscure beneficial ownership ( eg , shell companies ) and permissive foreign jurisdictions , including those accessible by correspondent banking relationships and business sectors with potentially lax aml controls . "beneficial owner" refers to the natural person who , directly or indirectly , controls or manages a legal entity and its assets . according to the financial action task force ( fatf ) , an international aml standard - setting body , the lack of available information on the legal and beneficial ownership of corporate vehicles increases their vulnerability to exploitation for the purposes of laundering illicit proceeds . the treasury department describes money laundering as "a necessary consequence of almost all profit generating crimes and can occur almost anywhere in the world. as a global issue , the effectiveness of international aml efforts is often described as dependent on the international community's weakest links: countries or jurisdictions that fail to establish appropriate aml safeguards . unchecked money laundering can have global consequences ; it can: undermine the integrity of the international financial system , reduce consumer confidence in the financial system , and damage the reputation of financial regulatory bodies . introduce economic distortions that affect economic growth , international trade , business competitiveness , money demand , capital flows , foreign investments , exchange rates , and securities markets . violate border and customs controls through the facilitation of bulk cash smuggling and trade - based laundering methods that evade duties , tariffs , and taxes — legitimate sources of government revenue that become unavailable for public expenditure . contribute to and exacerbate state fragility by rewarding illicit behavior at the expense of transparency , good governance , the rule of law , and accountability of public and private institutions . enable criminals to sustain their networks and realize profits generated by their illicit activities , including political corruption . facilitate the financing of terrorism .