it generally expires at the end of fy2018 . from a budgetary perspective , many of these programs are assumed to continue beyond their authorization ; in fact , such continuing programs were estimated in 2014 to cost $468 billion for the extended fy2019-fy2023 period . that is , they have a "baseline" beyond the end of the farm bill that may be used to pay to continue those programs . however , a subset of programs that received mandatory funding does not have a baseline beyond the end of the farm bill . these are referred to as "farm bill programs without a baseline. the 2014 farm bill contains 39 programs that received mandatory funding that do not have a baseline beyond fy2018 . these programs received $2.8 billion during fy2014-fy2018 . for these programs to continue , they would need to be allocated new budgetary authority . funding for farm bill programs is provided in two ways: 1 . by the authorization in the farm bill ( ma ndatory spending ) . a bill pays for this spending with multiyear budget estimates when the law is enacted . by subsequent appropriations ( d iscretionary spending ) . these programs are authorized for their scope but are not funded in the farm bill . mandatory programs often dominate farm bill policy and the debate over the farm bill budget . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) baseline is a projection at a particular point in time of what future federal spending on mandatory programs would be under current law . this baseline is the benchmark against which proposed changes in law are measured . when a new bill is proposed that would affect mandatory spending , the impact ( score ) is measured in relation to the baseline . changes that increase spending relative to the baseline have a positive score ; those that decrease spending relative to the baseline have a negative score . having a baseline essentially gives programs built - in future funding if policymakers decide that the programs should continue ; straightforward reauthorization would not have a scoring effect . however , programs without a continuing baseline beyond the end of a farm bill do not have assured future funding ; reauthorization would have a positive score that increases the bill's cost . this funding issue — and the difficult budget dynamics that it can cause for writing a new farm bill — was identified at least as early as 2009 by the former chief economist of the house agriculture committee . it was raised in agriculture committee hearings as early as 2010 , was an issue when writing the 2014 farm bill , and continues to be mentioned . cbo develops the budget baseline under various laws and following the supervision of the house and senate budget committees . generally , a program with estimated mandatory spending in the last year of its authorization will be assumed to continue in the baseline as if there were no change in policy and it did not expire . this is the situation for most of the major , long - standing farm bill provisions such as the farm commodity programs or supplemental nutrition assistance .