hsas are established and owned by individuals . eligible individuals can establish and fund hsas when they have a qualifying high - deductible health plan ( hdhp ) and no other health plan , with some exceptions . to be hsa - qualified , the hdhp must have a minimum deductible , it must limit out - of - pocket expenditures for covered benefits to no more than a certain maximum level , and only preventive care services can be covered prior to the deductible being met . the minimum deductible amounts and out - of - pocket limits are set by statute and adjusted for inflation . for 2017 , the minimum deductible is $1,300 for single coverage and $2,600 for family coverage . the out - of - pocket limit is $6,550 for single coverage and $13,100 for family coverage . contributions to hsas are subject to an annual limit , which is adjusted for inflation . in 2017 , the contribution limit is $3,400 for account holders enrolled in self - only coverage and $6,750 for account holders enrolled in family coverage . hsa contributions are either deductible as an above - the - line deduction or excluded from an account holder's gross income . section 215 would increase the hsa annual contribution limits for self - only and family coverage to match the out - of - pocket limits for hsa - qualified hdhps for self - only and family coverage . the change would go into effect beginning in tax year 2018 . irc section 223 established hsas , which are tax - exempt trusts or custodial accounts established for paying the health - related expenses of the account beneficiary . eligible individuals can establish and contribute to hsas when they have a qualifying hdhp and no other health plan , with some exceptions . contributions to hsas may be made by eligible individuals , as well as by other individuals or entities on their behalf . thus , individuals may contribute to accounts of eligible family members , and employers may contribute to accounts of eligible employees . hsa contributions are deductible as an above - the - line deduction if made by individuals . contributions made by employers , including through salary - reduction agreements , are excluded from income , social security , and medicare taxes . the aggregate contributions to hsas are subject to an annual limit , which is adjusted for inflation each year . in 2017 , the contribution limit is $3,400 for self - only coverage and $6,750 for family coverage . individuals aged 55 and older who are not yet eligible for medicare are allowed to contribute an additional $1,000 each year . this "catch - up" contribution is not adjusted for inflation . irc section 223 ( b ) ( 5 ) established contribution rules for married couples . in the case of a married couple , if either spouse has hsa - qualified family coverage and both spouses have their own hsas , then both spouses are treated as if they have only one family plan for purposes of the hsa contribution limit . in other words , the spouses' aggregate contributions to their respective hsas cannot be more than the annual contribution limit for family coverage .