these limitations take several forms . for example , some states and localities have sought to restrict police cooperation with federal immigration authorities' efforts to apprehend removable aliens , sometimes called "don't enforce" policies . other measures may restrict certain state officials from inquiring about a person's immigration status , sometimes referred to as "don't ask" policies . still others restrict information sharing between local law enforcement and federal immigration authorities , sometimes described as "don't tell" policies . the following sections discuss some state and local restrictions on law enforcement activity in the field of immigration enforcement along those lines , including the relationship between these restrictions and federal law . over the years the federal government has enacted measures designed to counter certain sanctuary policies . notably , in 1996 congress enacted section 434 of the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act ( prwora ) , and section 642 of the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act ( iirira ) , to curb state and local restrictions on information sharing . most recently , the president issued executive order 13768 , "enhancing public safety in the interior of the united states," which , as relevant here , seeks to encourage state and local cooperation with federal immigration enforcement and disincentivize state and local adoption of sanctuary policies that hinder federal immigration enforcement . these federal initiatives — and related legal issues — are described below . shortly after taking office , president trump issued executive order ( eo ) 13768 , "enhancing public safety in the interior of the united states," which , in section 9 , addresses sanctuary jurisdictions . specifically , section 9 ( a ) of the eo seeks to encourage state and local cooperation with federal immigration enforcement and disincentivize — by threatening to withhold federal grant money — state and local adoption of sanctuary policies . although eo 13768 did not explicitly define "sanctuary jurisdiction," later interpretive guidance from the department of justice ( doj or justice department ) defined the term , as it is used in the executive order , as a jurisdiction that willfully refuses to comply with 8 u.s.c . § 1373 ( iirira § 642 ) . this section discusses recent litigation concerning efforts by the trump administration to deter the implementation of state or local "sanctuary" policies . it begins by providing a brief description of section 9 ( a ) of eo 13768 and the doj's implementation of its requirements . next , it discusses ongoing litigation involving challenges to section 9 ( a ) . several of these cases involve direct challenges to the executive order . other lawsuits involve challenges to the justice department's decision , in implementing the executive order , to attach new conditions for grant eligibility under the edward byrne memorial justice assistance grant ( byrne jag ) program and community oriented policing services ( cops ) program , all of which are designed to encourage state and local law enforcement cooperation with federal immigration enforcement . finally , this section discusses a lawsuit filed by the united states against california , claiming that three new state laws obstruct the federal government's immigration enforcement efforts and , as a result , violate the constitution's supremacy clause .