judges of the supreme court. the process of appointing justices has undergone changes over two centuries , but its most basic feature — the sharing of power between the president and senate — has remained unchanged . to receive a lifetime appointment to the court , a candidate must first be nominated by the president and then confirmed by the senate . the most recent vacancy on the court was created by the death of justice antonin scalia on february 13 , 2016 . in response , president barack obama on march 16 , 2016 , nominated merrick b. garland , a sitting judge on the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia , to replace justice scalia . it was the 161 st nomination made by a president to the u.s. supreme court . on the day of justice scalia's death , majority leader mitch mcconnell ( r - ky ) stated that the "american people should have a voice in the selection of their next supreme court justice . therefore , this vacancy should not be filled until we have a new president. additionally , senator chuck grassley ( r - ia ) , chairman of the senate judiciary committee , stated "given the huge divide in the country , ... it only makes sense that we defer to the american people who will elect a new president to select the next supreme court justice. in response , minority leader harry reid ( d - nv ) stated that "the president can and should send the senate a nominee right away... . failing to fill this vacancy would be a shameful abdication of one of the senate's most essential constitutional responsibilities. president obama also weighed in on whether the garland nomination should be considered by the senate , asking that the senate "give him a fair hearing and then an up or down vote," while also stating that "i have fulfilled my constitutional duty . now it's time for the senate to do theirs. the garland nomination was not acted upon by the senate ( receiving neither a committee hearing nor a floor vote ) and was not withdrawn by the president — making it the first supreme court nomination since 1866 for which no formal senate action was taken and which was not subsequently withdrawn or resubmitted by a president . the nomination was ultimately returned to president obama at the end of the 114 th congress , on january 3 , 2017 . on february 1 , 2017 , president donald trump nominated neil m. gorsuch , a sitting judge on the u.s. court of appeals for the tenth circuit , to fill the scalia vacancy . the gorsuch nomination , the 162 nd to the court , is currently pending before the senate . this report provides analysis and historical information related to several of the prominent issues or questions surrounding the scalia vacancy .