appendix a . satellite size compariso . the commercial space industry has distinct subsectors . most commercial payloads are placed in orbits around earth by launch vehicles that have the thrust to escape earth's gravity . typically , the firms that provide commercial launch services also design and assemble the rockets they launch . the payloads , such as satellites and manned space capsules , are manufactured by other firms . service providers ( such as television broadcasters ) may design and build their own satellites , or purchase them from third - party manufacturers . the space industry workforce includes employees in private - sector firms as well as those working at nasa , dod , and other government agencies . the increasing public attention given to the commercial space industry belies a dichotomy: the commercial and civil space workforces are declining , while national security workforces remain steady . commercial employment in the space industry peaked in 2006 at about 267,000 employees and has declined steadily since then . the termination of nasa's space shuttle program in 2011 resulted in the loss of many private - sector jobs . other major reasons for the decline in space industry employment may be many skilled workers reaching retirement age and difficulties in recruiting young talent . jobs in this industry generally require advanced skills , such as engineering , differentiating them from the average u.s. manufacturing or service - industry job . the space foundation has identified six industry sectors that collectively approximate the space industry . bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) data show that employment in these six sectors dropped by 16% in the 10 years from 2005 to 2015 ( t a ble 2 ) . these data do not show the full scope of the space industry workforce . the categories listed in table 2 include both space and nonspace activity , while employees in other sectors who are working on space - related tasks are excluded because most of the employment in the sector is not related to space . an alternative approach to assessing the size and breadth of the space industry workforce is the 2012 space industry report by the u.s. department of commerce ( doc ) , based on a survey of 3,780 respondents in 16 different manufacturing and service segments of the space economy , including spacecraft and launch vehicles , communications systems , ground systems , electronic equipment , and software . this survey , conducted once and covering the years from 2009 to 2012 , shows a somewhat larger workforce of 254,179 employees in 611 commercial companies that viewed themselves as dependent on federal space programs . in addition to commercial employment , doc identified 13,897 space - related jobs in the u.s. government , 19,630 in nonprofit organizations , and 60,533 at universities , for a total of 348,239 workers dependent on space - related programs . the report shows shrinkage of nearly 7% in employment at companies dependent on commercial space programs from 2009 to 2012 . wages in the commercial space industry are higher than average u.s. wages . the average space industry salary of $111,000 ( in 2014 ) is double what the average private - sector employee receives .