these are summarized below . this provision expands eligibility in calendar year 2017 for an existing multiemployer health care plan for united mine workers of america retirees . the newly eligible retirees are those whose employers were part of a bituminous coal industry wage agreement and whose health benefits would be reduced or eliminated as a result of a bankruptcy that commenced in 2012 or 2015 . the health care plan has two sources of funds: ( 1 ) contributions from employers and ( 2 ) transfers from the federal government if the contributions from employers are insufficient to cover benefits . the provision transfers funds from the federal government from january 1 , 2017 , to april 30 , 2017 , for both existing and the newly eligible participants in the plan . in addition , the provision requires the transfers of funds from a voluntary employee beneficiary association that covers the newly eligible workers to the multiemployer health plan . this provision establishes expedited parliamentary procedures governing senate consideration of legislation that would waive a legal restriction related to the prior military service of the secretary of defense . section 113 ( a ) of title 10 of the u.s. code establishes that an individual "may not be appointed as secretary of defense within seven years after relief from active duty as a commissioned officer of a regular component of an armed force. unless waived , this restriction would bar retired marine corp general james n. mattis , who has been selected by president - elect donald j. trump to be secretary of defense , from serving in that capacity . general mattis retired from active duty in 2013 . in order to qualify for the expedited procedures , waiver legislation must be introduced during a 30-calendar day period that begins on the date that the 115 th congress convenes . the legislation may be introduced by the senate majority leader , the minority leader , or their respective designees or by the chair or ranking minority member of the committee on armed services . both the title of the legislation and the matter after the enacting ( or resolving ) clause are stipulated . once introduced , the legislation is to be referred to the senate committee on armed services . if the committee has not reported the waiver legislation within five session days after the date of its referral , it is automatically discharged of further consideration of the measure . once pending on the senate calendar of business ( either by being reported or by the committee being discharged ) , it is in order to make a non - debatable motion to proceed to consider the legislation . this motion may be repeated if it has previously been disagreed to . all points of order against the waiver legislation and its consideration are waived . if the senate adopts the motion to proceed , the waiver legislation would be pending and the senate would consider the measure until it has disposed of it . there would be up to 10 hours of debate , divided and controlled by the party floor leaders or their designees . a non - debatable motion to further limit debate is in order . amendments and potentially dilatory motions are barred .