these projectiles are filled with submunitions . during flight , the base of the projectile is blown off and centrifugal force disperses submunitions at an optimum altitude and distance from the desired target for area coverage . there are both anti - armor and antipersonnel submunitions with some types designed for delayed action or to impede mobility ( mines ) . the air - to - surface variety of this kind of munition is better known as a cluster bomb . dpicms are generally considered cluster munitions . explosive reactive armor ( era ) : era typically consists of a layer of high explosive between two metallic armor plates . when a penetrating weapon strikes the armor , the explosive detonates in order to damage the penetrator . fire control system ( fcs ) : a fire control system is essentially the "brain" of the weapon system , orchestrating the sighting by means of a variety of sensors , in order to facilitate accurate aiming of weapons . forward looking infrared radar ( flir ) : forward looking infrared radar consists of forward - looking infrared cameras and other thermal imaging devices that detect infrared radiation , typically emitted from a heat source ( thermal radiation ) . these sensors create a "picture" or video depiction of an object . flir can be can be used to help drivers navigate vehicles at night , in fog , snow , or in other low visibility conditions as well as to aim the vehicle's weapon systems . high explosive ( he ) : explosives that typically detonate at the speed of sound and are primarily used for military applications . heavy machine gun ( hmg ) : large caliber machine guns generally .50 caliber or greater . gmlrs: guided mlrs unitary rocket ( note: unitary munitions do not contain submuntions ) . nbc: nuclear , biological , and chemical ( refers to chemical , biological , and nuclear weapons ) . rpgs: rocket propelled grenades ( anti - personal and anti - vehicle grenades fired from the shoulder by a single soldier ) . tacms: tactical missile systems ( a ground to ground missile employed by u.s. mlrs systems ; also referred to as atacms or army tactical missile systems ) . tow: tube - launched , optically tracked , wire - guided anti - tank missile developed and used by the u.s. military . uas: unmanned aerial system ( also referred to as drones or unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) ) . tied in with the initiative will be four years of analysis and a focused science and technology effort . this approach suggests that for almost the next two decades , the army will continue to rely on legacy upgraded cold war ground combat systems . in the meantime , other nations could potentially develop and field multiple iterations of new advanced ground combat systems while a number of factors , including limited funding and the constraints of the u.s. defense acquisition process precludes similar u.s. developmental efforts .