what a job it is. what an amazing thing it is to harmonize them . and , naturally , he'll deal with you . it responds to events , issues , and crises in different ways and speeds . the point is that it is often difficult to define what constitutes a filibuster . as former senator robert c. byrd , d - wv , the longest serving senator in history , once said: "i will be able to perceive [a filibuster] , because i know one when i see it. the reformers noted their "catch - 22" dilemma: how can the senate amend rule xxii when the practical effect of that rule is to prevent its amendment ? opponents reject the so - called constitutional option . they point out that the senate has adopted rules , and the constitution says nothing about the vote required to adopt those rules . they also emphasize that the senate is a continuing body with continuing rules ( the "continuing body" doctrine ) . their argument is essentially that a senate majority ( even a simple majority ) can always amend the chamber's rules at any time during the two - year life of a congress so long as the existing rules are observed , such as rule xxii . proponents of reform stress that the constitution supersedes senate rules . while they agree that a majority can amend senate rules at any time , their concern is rule xxii's two - thirds requirement to bring debate to a close on amendments to the chamber's standing rules . such a high threshold has been viewed by some as an unconstitutional infringement on the right of a majority to amend senate rules . to bolster their contention , reformers sometimes cite a 1957 advisory opinion by the president of the senate , vice president richard nixon . in response to a parliamentary inquiry , nixon said: any provision of senate rules adopted in a previous congress which has the expressed or practical effect of denying the majority of the senate in a new congress the right to adopt the rules under which it desires to proceed is , in the opinion of the chair , unconstitutional . the chair emphasizes that this is only his opinion , because under senate precedents , a question of constitutionality can only be decided by the senate itself , and not by the chair . [u]ntil the senate at the initiation of a new congress expresses its will otherwise , the rules in effect in the previous congress in the opinion of the chair remain in effect , with the exception that the senate should not be bound by any provision in those previous rules which denies the membership of the senate the power to exercise its constitutional right to make its own rules . given what appears to be renewed interest among a number of current lawmakers to amend senate rules with only majority support at the start of a new congress , it might be useful to proponents and opponents of this approach to review several considerations that suffused many of the earlier attempts ( 1953-1975 ) . consider the filibuster and rule xxii , and how each has changed over time .