however , there are limits as to what can be considered official time . in afge local 2761 , the flra concluded that an official time proposal that would have allowed designated union representatives to attend employee funerals was not negotiable . circuit maintained that its decision required only that the parties negotiate such a proposal . the court noted that an agency "has no obligation to abandon what it conceives to be the best interests of the agency merely because it must negotiate on an official time proposal. the flra explained: "the union does not show , and it is not apparent to us , that the use of official time to attend an employee's funeral relates to any labor - management activities under the [fslmrs]. in 2002 , the office of personnel management ( opm ) began requiring federal agencies to report the number of official time hours used by their employees in the preceding fiscal year . until recently , opm produced annual reports on the government - wide use of official time . opm's most recent report , however , was published in 2014 and includes official time statistics for fiscal year 2012 . opm officials have reportedly maintained that the agency is not required to report official time , and that it plans to issue future official time reports on a biannual basis . legislation that would require opm to submit official time reports to congress has been introduced in the 115 th congress . 1293 would amend section 7131 to require opm to report , for the previous fiscal year , the total amount of official time granted to employees , the specific types of activities for which official time was provided , and the total amount of compensation afforded to employees in connection with their official time activities . this information would have to be provided cumulatively , as well as for each individual agency . executive order 11491 also identified unfair labor practices that were prohibited for management and labor organizations . in 1978 , the right to engage in collective bargaining became recognized in statute through the fslmrs , which codified many of the concepts included in the executive orders . in addition to providing for the right to engage in collective bargaining , the fslmrs also established the flra , which , among other duties , supervises union elections , adjudicates unfair labor practice complaints , and resolves questions concerning the negotiability of bargaining proposals . under the fslmrs , a labor organization becomes the exclusive representative of a collective bargaining unit following a secret ballot election in which a majority of the employees in the unit vote favorably for the union . once selected , the union is responsible for representing the interests of all employees in the bargaining unit , even if an individual has chosen not to join the union . unlike organized employees in the private sector , federal employees are also prohibited from engaging in a strike . according to the bureau of labor statistics , in 2016 , 27.4% of all federal employees were members of a union .