prior to enactment of p.l . 114-255 , samhsa's office of policy , planning , and innovation , which was not explicitly authorized in statute , facilitated the adoption of evidence - based policies and practices to improve behavioral health services outcomes . it specifies application procedures , defines the requirements of a database of inpatient beds , and requires an evaluation . it authorizes to be appropriated $13 million ( rounded ) for the period of fy2018-fy2022 to carry out the program . subtitle a ( section 9009 ) authorizes the asmhsu to award five - year grants to eligible entities as described for suicide prevention efforts amongst adults aged 25 and older , as specified . it requires the asmhsu to evaluate grant activities and provide appropriate information , training , and technical assistance to grantees . it authorizes to be appropriated $30 million for the period of fy2018-fy2022 to carry out the program . subtitle a ( section 9015 ) adds a new phsa section 520m requiring the asmhsu to award grants to support assertive community treatment programs for individuals with serious mental illness . assertive community treatment is designed to support community living for individuals with the most severe functional impairments associated with mental illness . such individuals tend to need services from multiple providers ( eg , physicians and social workers ) and multiple systems ( eg , social services , housing services , and health care ) . in the assertive community treatment model , a multidisciplinary team is available around the clock to deliver a wide range of services in an individual's home or other community settings . subtitle a ( section 9015 ) specifies the entities eligible for these grants and required "additional activities," including a report to congress and technical assistance for grantees . it authorizes to be appropriated $5 million for the period of fy2018-fy2022 , of which no more than 5% of funds are to be used for carrying out the specified "additional activities. prior to enactment of p.l . 114-255 , phsa section 520j authorized a grant program that had not been funded . it required the hhs secretary to award grants to train emergency services personnel to identify and appropriately respond to individuals with mental illness ( among other purposes ) . it authorized appropriations through fy2003 . subtitle a ( section 9010 ) makes a number of changes to phsa section 520j , including expanding the permissible uses of funds to include recognizing mental illness , resources available for individuals with mental illness , and safely de - escalating crisis situations involving individuals with mental illness . it authorizes to be appropriated $15 million ( rounded ) annually for each of fy2018-fy2022 .