the agricultural act of 2014 ( p.l . 113-333 ) , referred to here as the "2014 farm bill," is the most recent omnibus farm bill . it was enacted in february 2014 and generally expires in 2018 . it succeeded the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( p.l . 110-246 , "2008 farm bill" ) . the 2014 farm bill contains 12 titles encompassing farm commodity revenue supports , agricultural conservation , international food aid and agricultural trade , nutrition assistance , farm credit , rural development , agricultural research , forestry , bioenergy , horticulture and organic agriculture , crop insurance and disaster assistance , and livestock issues . provisions in the 2014 farm bill reshaped the structure of farm commodity support , expanded crop insurance coverage , consolidated conservation programs , reauthorized and revised nutrition assistance , and extended authority to appropriate funds for many u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) discretionary programs through fy2018 . since 2014 , the u.s. farm economic outlook has changed dramatically . bountiful u.s. crop harvests and fading international demand prospects have put downward pressure on commodity prices , farm incomes , and asset values while raising farm sector debt and debt - to - asset ratios . usda projects that u.s. net farm income — a key indicator of u.s. farm well - being — will fall to $62.3 billion in 2017 , down 9% from 2016 and down 50% from 2013's record of $123.7 billion . the 2017 forecast would represent the third year of decline and would be the lowest national net farm income since 2002 . the omnibus nature of the bill can create broad coalitions of support among sometimes conflicting interests for policies that individually might not survive the legislative process , but it can also stir competition for available funds , particularly among producers of different commodities or between those who have differing priorities . such competition often results in farm state lawmakers seeking urban legislators' backing for commodity price supports in exchange for votes on domestic food assistance programs — and vice versa . the federal government provides support for u.s. agricultural exports through two types of programs: export market development and export credit guarantees . the 2014 farm bill repealed the dairy export incentive program , thereby eliminating the use of direct export subsidies for u.s. agricultural products . legislative authorizations for agricultural trade programs are included in the trade title of the 2014 farm bill . usda's export promotion programs are administered by usda's foreign agricultural service ( fas ) and generally funded using mandatory monies . one of the larger programs , map , was targeted for cuts or elimination in a number of deficit reduction proposals but was retained intact in the 2014 farm bill . the united states has led global funding support for international food assistance for over 60 years . these programs originated with blended goals to support the domestic agricultural safety net , agricultural trade goals , and the maritime industry in addition to supporting efforts to alleviate hunger abroad .