it established the types of fees to be paid by the manufacturer . the first two fees listed below are paid at the time of filing or application submission ; the facility fees are annual fees for each establishment: application fee for an anda , application fee for a prior approval supplement ( pas ) to an anda , drug master file fee , facility fee for the facility making the api , and facility fee for the facility producing the fdf . the law also specified the proportion that each type of fee contributes to the total collected and provided a methodology for the calculation of an annual inflation adjustment for the remaining four fiscal years under gdufa i , fy2014 through fy2017 . like pdufa , the first gdufa agreement included limitations , often referred to as triggers , designed to ensure that user fees supplement , rather than replace , congressional appropriations . the limitations require that budget authority ( appropriations minus fees ) go no lower than the fy2009 amounts , adjusted for inflation , for ( 1 ) fda salaries and expenses overall and ( 2 ) human generic drug activities . again similar to pdufa , but different from the narrower medical device ( mdufa ) and biosimilar ( bsufa ) definitions , gdufa defined human generic drug activities to include the review of submissions and drug master files , approval letters and complete response letters , letters regarding deficiencies , inspections , monitoring or research , postmarket safety activities , and regulatory science . other provisions under the original gdufa agreement include risk - based biennial inspections , parity of domestic and foreign inspection schedules by fy2017 , a $15,000-$30,000 higher inspection fee for a foreign facility than for a domestic facility to reflect cost differences , streamlined hiring authority , and required annual performance and financial reports . the fy2017 fee rates under gdufa are shown in table 1 . the fda provides information on the amount of gdufa fees collected each fiscal year and how the fees are spent in the annual financial reports . annual performance reports provide data on fda's progress in meeting gdufa performance goals and commitments . fda has made a number of changes to its generic drug program following the enactment of gdufa i , according to a may 2017 analysis by the government accountability office ( gao ) . in december 2013 , fda reorganized the office of generic drugs ( ogd ) within the center for drug evaluation and research ( cder ) , creating four subordinate offices within ogd . in january 2015 , fda also established a new office of pharmaceutical quality "to provide better alignment among all drug quality review functions , including application reviews , inspections and research. in addition , fda surpassed its gdufa goal of hiring 923 new staff by the end of fy2015: the agency hired 1,176 staff over the first three fiscal years ( fy2013 through fy2015 ) and 346 new staff in fy2016 . in the area of information technology , fda established a new informatics platform to track the applications review process as well as facility inspection decisions .