global partnership . results - oriented . the ppd emphasized the use of metrics by which to measure development progress and the accountability of recipients for achieving results . the initiatives were established with specific goals and , except for the global climate change initiative ( perhaps due to the longer time frames required to return accurate environmental assessments ) , specific performance indicators . this was not a new concept , but reaffirmed an ongoing whole - of - government effort stemming from the government performance and results act ( gpra ) of 1993 , updated in 2010 , which established unprecedented statutory requirements for all u.s. government agencies regarding the establishment of goals , performance measurement indicators , and submission of related plans and reports to congress . the obama administration emphasized tracking results and impacts of foreign aid generally , updating the evaluation policies of usaid , state and mcc between 2010 and 2012 to require more frequent and methodologically rigorous evaluation of aid programs . congress supported this effort as well , passing legislation in 2016 , the foreign aid transparency and accountability act , that codified many of the new evaluation and reporting requirements . nevertheless , measuring outcomes that can be attributed to u.s. aid interventions remains a significant challenge . much of the results information reported for the initiatives is selective and is not the product of evaluations using control groups to identify impact . whole of g overnment . each initiative , as described in its roll - out and strategy documents , involves several u.s. government agencies beyond the primary international development actors ( the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , the state department , and the mcc ) . the obama administration emphasized that this "whole of government" approach was intended to bring the full range of u.s. expertise and resources to the challenges addressed by the initiatives , as well as to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of existing , but often uncoordinated , international activities . the whole of government approach may also be a way to identify a broader range of ongoing u.s. government funding that can be attributed to these objectives and related international commitments . in practice , this approach has faced coordination challenges , caused in part by varying congressional committee jurisdictions and lack of legislative or executive authority to compel cross - agency coordination and cooperation . the fractured oversight and lack of coordinating authority has also presented challenges for tracking initiative spending . all of the initiatives sprang from multilateral efforts such as the g8 food security summit or the u.n framework convention on climate change , and all have multilateral components , including the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis and malaria , the global agriculture and food security fund , and the green climate fund , among others . furthermore , each initiative emphasizes working with private sector partners to bring greater resources and expertise to development challenges , a foreign assistance trend that predated the obama administration . the obama administration made efforts to expand the multilateral aspects of the initiatives , arguing that u.s. resources can be leveraged for greater impact through partnership with other donors and entities , including private sector actors .