this is the report for division a of the law . division a of the law provides funding for biomedical research — including the precision medicine initiative ( pmi ) and the cancer moonshot initiative — and for the opioid crisis response ; modifies food and drug administration ( fda ) pathways for the approval of regulated medical products ; and makes a number of reforms to the national institutes of health ( nih ) . division a of the law also includes and builds on provisions from both the previously passed house bill , h.r . 6 ( the 21 st century cures act , passed in july 2015 ) , and a package of senate medical innovation bills that were considered in the early part of 2016 . as noted , both the house and the senate considered previous legislation to support medical innovation , primarily through reforms to the nih and changes to the drug , biologic and device approval pathways at the fda . on february 3 , 2015 , senators lamar alexander and patty murray , chairman and ranking member of the committee on health , education , labor and pensions , announced the start of a bipartisan initiative to "examine the process for getting safe treatments , devices and cures to patients and the roles of the [fda] and the [nih] in that process. 1 this initiative culminated in a package of 19 bipartisan bills that were reported out of the senate health , labor , education , and pensions ( help ) committee in a series of three executive sessions held on february 9 , 2016 ; march 9 , 2016 ; and april 6 , 2016 . one of these 19 bills , the adding zika virus to the fda priority review voucher program act ( s. 2512 ) , subsequently was passed by both chambers and signed into law on april 19 , 2016 ( p.l . the senate's medical innovation package was that chamber's companion effort to the house's 21 st century cures initiative , which resulted in the house passage of h.r . 6 , the initial version of the 21 st century cures act , on july 10 , 2015 , on a vote of 344 to 77 . 6 was the result of a series of hearings and roundtable meetings hosted by the house energy and commerce committee dating back to spring 2014 . the hearings and roundtables focused on a broad range of topics , including modernizing clinical trials , incorporating patient perspectives into medical research and regulatory processes , precision / personalized medicine , digital health care , and more . while it consisted of many different provisions , h.r . 6 was primarily focused on efforts to increase strategic investments in medical research at nih and change some aspects of how the fda executes its regulatory oversight mission with regard to the review and approval of new drugs , biologics , and medical devices . this report provides a brief summary of each provision of the 21 st century cures act ( division a of p.l . 114-255 ) , by title , subtitle , and section .