both measures had similar changes for hispanics . because the essa accountability requirements apply to both the total student body within schools as well as specified subgroups , states must report the acgr for several subgroups including low - income students , english language learners , students with disabilities , and various racial / ethnic categories . the data spanning 2011-2016 indicate progress among all three of these subgroups: graduation rates among low - income students increased more than seven percentage points , english language learners increased nearly ten percentage points , and students with disabilities increased six and a half percentage points . the rate of on - time high school completion varies widely across the country . for the class of 2016 , the acgr in 27 states was above the national average ( 84.1% ) and below the national average in 23 states . new mexico had the lowest acgr ( 71% ) and iowa had the highest ( 91.3% ) . figure 2 displays the acgr for the class of 2016 by state . four states graduated fewer than 76.1% of their students , nineteen states graduated 76.2% - 84.1% , seventeen states graduated 84.1% - 87.7% , and ten states graduated 87.8% or more . as shown in table 2 , graduation rates have increased or remained the same in every state between the graduating classes of 2011 and 2016 . the largest increase occurred in alabama , which saw an increase from 72% ( which was below the national average ) , to 87.1% ( which was above the national average ) . four states — alaska , georgia , nevada , and west virginia — had increases of more than ten percentage - points . three states — indiana , south dakota , and vermont — saw increases of less than one percentage point over this same period . essa provisions require that , beginning with the 2017-2018 school year , each state must use the acgr as an indicator in their accountability systems and in calculating long - term and interim goals . analysis of school - level data for the class of 2015 reveals 2,512 high schools — 16% of schools nationwide — had an acgr of less than 70% ( table 3 ) . [note that , due to privacy protections imposed on publically available data , this analysis uses 70% ( instead of 66.7% ) as the cutoff for schools to be identified for intervention . these limitations only apply to published data ; states would not face such constraints as they have access to the complete data of actual rates reported for every school. because this analysis uses 70% instead of 66.7% , it likely overestimates the number of schools that may be identified for intervention due to low graduation rates . this analysis may further overestimate the number of schools that may be identified for intervention because the accountability provisions do not take effect until the 2017-2018 school year and graduation rates have been improving . even with these caveats , this analysis suggests that there are potentially thousands of high schools that may be identified for improvement due to failure to graduate more than one - third of their students .