this was followed by oil at 28% . in contrast , natural gas accounted for 7% of india's energy consumption . the goi expected demand for natural gas to grow from 71 bcm in 2011-2012 to 170 bcm in 2016-2017 . instead , india consumed just under 51 bcm in 2015 . one likely explanation is the lack of growth in adequate infrastructure ; the proliferation and integration of compressed natural gas into urban areas has not occurred as quickly as anticipated . india's domestic consumption of natural gas is dominated by the fertilizer ( 34% ) , electric power ( 23% ) , refining ( 11% ) , local distribution ( 11% ) , and petrochemical ( 8% ) industries ( see figure 3 ) . in recent years the goi has undertaken initiatives to make imported lng more attractive , especially to the power and fertilizer industries . for electricity generation , the ministry of power , along with the ministry of petroleum and natural gas , directed natural gas pipeline companies to reduce their tariffs to support greater natural gas use in electric power generation . in 2015 , the goi instituted a gas pooling policy to provide natural gas at a uniform price for all fertilizer plants . the goi hopes that increasing the country's natural gas consumption will help meet the goi's objective of reducing dependency on crude oil by 10% by 2022 . in 2010 , india already had the fifth - largest natural gas vehicle fleet in the world , with over 2.8 million natural gas vehicles . the iea forecasts that india will constitute the third - highest growth in natural gas vehicles through 2040 , after the united states and china . indian companies are currently experimenting with ways to integrate natural gas into the transport industry . for example , petronet and ioc are running a trial program of long - haul buses that run on lng . natural gas consumption varies widely by region across india . for example , the states of gujarat and maharashtra in the west and uttar pradesh in the north consume more than 65% of the india's natural gas , while making up only 31% of the population . the goi is currently supporting initiatives to better balance the distribution and consumption of natural gas across the other regions of the country . expanding india's use of natural gas is constrained by lack of infrastructure , particularly pipelines to move natural gas throughout the country . india currently has 15,000 km ( roughly 9,320 miles ) of domestic natural gas pipelines . the petroleum and natural gas regulatory board ( pngrb ) has recently tendered bids for the planning and construction of another 15,000 km ( see figure 4 ) . comparatively , the united states has approximately 484,826 km ( 301,257 miles ) of natural gas pipelines as of 2015 . india also lacks a broad network of distribution pipelines to move natural gas to consumers , especially residential users for heating and cooking . the goi has recognized this shortcoming and has introduced plans to address it , but achieving their plans remains a goal . india is undertaking a concerted effort to bring low - carbon fuel sources to rural communities .