these requirements are described in table 1 . the secretary or secretaries ( as appropriate ) may grant a request for a state innovation waiver if a state's application meets the requirements . in making this determination , the secretaries will "consider favorably" any waiver that incorporates some or all of the following principles: provide increased access to affordable private market coverage , encourage sustainable spending growth , foster state innovation , support and empower those in need , and promote consumer - driven health care . in guidance , hhs and the treasury note that their assessment of a state's waiver application considers changes to the state's health care system that are contingent only upon approval of the waiver . their assessment does not consider policy changes that are dependent on further state action or other federal determinations . all of these waivers were considered and approved under the initial state innovation waiver guidance , and all but one of the approved waivers implement a variant of a statewide individual market reinsurance program . massachusetts , ohio , and vermont received notification from hhs and the treasury that their applications were incomplete , and it does not appear that any of these states has modified its application in response to the notification . if one of these three states does take action , any further review of its waiver application would be under the updated state innovation waiver guidance . california , iowa , and oklahoma have withdrawn their applications . see table 2 for more details . for example , the secretary's or secretaries' ( as appropriate ) assessment of a state innovation waiver application would not consider changes to medicaid or the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) that require approval outside of the state innovation waiver process , and savings accrued as a result of changes to medicaid or chip would not be considered when determining whether the state innovation waiver meets the deficit - neutrality requirement . hhs and the treasury indicate that this is the case regardless of whether a state's application for a state innovation waiver is submitted alone or in coordination with another waiver application . ( for more information about the coordinated waiver process , see " may states submit state innovation waiver applications in coordination with other federal waiver applications ? " although not possible initially , hhs and the treasury indicated in the updated guidance released in october 2018 that technical enhancements have made it feasible for cms to support some federally facilitated health insurance exchange ( ffe ) variation . for example , waivers that would require a state to create its own website to replace the consumer - facing aspects of healthcare.gov also can incorporate cms's enrollment functionalities ( eg , account creation , application , enrollment and coverage maintenance experience for consumers ) . states are asked to work with hhs early in the waiver application process to determine whether specific modifications can be accommodated . states are responsible for funding all ffe modifications and associated operational support . therefore , these costs are not considered when determining whether a waiver application satisfies the deficit neutrality requirement ; however , any other changes to cms administrative processes are taken into account .