in most regions . of the country without rtos , vertically integrated companies under state public utility commission ( puc ) regulation provide electricity services . congress's introduction of competition in the electricity industry eventually led ferc to establish rtos ( as discussed in the following sections ) . congress has followed the development of electricity markets , and gave ferc additional authority to ensure market transparency with the passage of the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact05 ; p.l . the efficient functioning of rto electricity markets may be an issue for congress to consider in the context of the fpa and ferc's regulatory authority . in 2009 , rtos managed 60% of the power supplied to load - serving entities ( lses ) . the history of rto development under ferc is discussed in the sections that follow . in epact05 , congress established an interagency task force to study competitive markets , since "under competitive markets , prices are expected to guide consumption and investment decisions , leading to more economically efficient investments and lower prices than under traditional cost of service monopoly regulation. the supreme court has recently examined the scope and reach of ferc's jurisdiction under the fpa . in two cases , the court was tasked with reconciling ferc's role in regulating wholesale interstate electricity transactions with state regulatory efforts to address companies and rates under their jurisdiction . congress may want to consider whether ferc's authority under the fpa is , or is not , adequate to ensure the economic and reliable functioning of electricity markets , without unduly infringing on the authority of states over retail electricity markets , and the ability of lses to economically serve end - use customers . competitive electricity market services have arisen to provide transaction flexibility , and to manage ( or hedge ) the risks of various transactions . rto markets have enabled a variety of products and services including derivatives and hedges for market participants , ostensibly to reduce risks from volatile prices . financial instruments were added to rto markets essentially to increase liquidity . however , the addition of financial instruments encourages speculation in the electricity markets . some purchasers of electricity as a commodity do so solely for financial gain . the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact05 ; p.l . 109-58 ) attempted to address some of the concerns associated with these derivative products and speculative trading by prohibiting "any entity" from using "manipulative or deceptive device or contrivance" in connection with the purchase or sale of natural gas or electric energy ( or the purchase or sale of related transportation or transmission services ) in transactions subject to ferc jurisdiction . the 2000-2001 western energy crisis showed that electricity markets were ( and are still ) susceptible to market manipulation . ferc's staff investigation of the western energy crisis concluded that specifically enron ( and several other companies ) had engaged in market manipulation . ferc views market manipulation as a "significant threat" to energy markets since energy consumers are likely to bear the burden of losses from such activity . with the passage of epact05 , congress gave ferc new authority to prevent manipulation in natural gas and electricity markets .