, "grandfathered" them ) . states determine the size and weight limits for vehicles using roads not subject to the federal limits . calls to loosen these limits typically come from industry , and are typically motivated by the desire to increase productivity by enabling a driver to haul larger or heavier loads . these efforts are typically opposed by highway safety groups , which assert that larger or heavier vehicles will pose a greater danger to other motorists . calls for heavier vehicles are also often opposed by highway agencies concerned about the costs of increased wear and tear on highways and bridges . freight rates and other economic matters are not subject to federal regulation . although crashes involving unsafe trucks or drivers often lead to public outrage , regulatory efforts to improve truck safety are often controversial . drivers may have financial incentives to exceed the speed limit or the number of hours they are allowed to drive in order to drive more miles , and thus earn more income , in a day . federal and state efforts to regulate vehicle speeds and commercial drivers' time behind the wheel are thus in conflict with the basic incentive drivers face . one way to address this issue is to change the driver's incentive . truck safety laws and regulations directly affect the profitability of hundreds of thousands of companies , most of them small , and the livelihoods of millions of commercial drivers . trucking regulations may also affect the cost of freight to shippers and alter the competitive balance between the trucking industry and its railroad and barge competitors . the crash rate for large trucks , measured as the number of crashes involving fatalities , injuries , or property damage per million vehicle miles traveled , has declined over time . both government and private - sector analysts have forecast significant increases in trucking activity over the coming decades , reflecting expected growth in the u.s. economy and the role of trucks in moving freight . for example , dot projects a 43% increase in freight ton - miles carried by truck between 2012 and 2040 . greater truck mileage could result in increasing numbers of truck crashes . some say various safety technologies now under development , culminating in "self - driving" trucks , may eventually make truck crashes less common . this report briefly reviews heavy truck safety trends , then looks at fmcsa's role in promoting safety in the heavy truck industry . it then divides heavy truck safety issues into three categories , and addresses each in turn: issues related to motor carriers ( the companies that make up the industry , the majority of which have only a handful of vehicles ) ; issues related to the vehicles themselves ; and issues related to commercial drivers . crash rates typically drop significantly during recessions and then rise as economic growth resumes ; this dynamic was evident during the 2010-2014 period , as truck crash rates rose from their historic lows during the 2007-2009 recession ( figure 1 ) . nonetheless , the crash rate in 2014 , the most recent year for which data are available , was still below the pre - 2007 level .