, the means of execution. the following describes a few such challenges . in u.s. cane sugar refiners' association v. block , an association of sugar refiners brought a challenge to a presidential proclamation that imposed quotas on the importation of sugar into the united states . the proclamation was issued under section 201 of the trade expansion act of 1962 . the government argued that the cit lacked jurisdiction over the challenge because the association had not followed the statutory scheme of the tariff act , which requires that parties exhaust their options at the administrative agency level before turning to the courts . the cit found , however , that such an exercise would require the plaintiff "to attempt to import over - quota sugar simply in order to obtain a protestable exclusion of the merchandise ... before seeking judicial review of the validity of the proclamation imposing the quota in a suit for injunctive and declarative relief. determining that exhaustion was an unreasonable requirement in light of the need for "expeditious resolution" of this case , the court exercised jurisdiction after concluding the association had no other remedy reasonably available to it . on appeal , the former customs court affirmed the cit's exercise of jurisdiction over the case in a footnote: respecting jurisdiction ... , we note the provision of injunctive powers to the [cit] in the customs courts act of 1980 and the special circumstances of this case which , absent that provision , would have required association to present its case to the district court . we are persuaded that in this case , involving the potential for immediate injury and irreparable harm to an industry and a substantial impact on the national economy , the delay inherent in proceeding under [the usual route requiring the exhaustion of remedies at the administrative level] makes relief under that provision manifestly inadequate and , accordingly , the court has jurisdiction in this case under [19 u.s.c. more recently , however , the cit declined to exercise its jurisdiction over a challenge to a presidential proclamation . in michael simon design , inc. v. united states , the plaintiffs challenged a presidential proclamation adopting the international trade commission's ( commission's ) recommended modifications to the harmonized tariff schedule of the united states pursuant to powers delegated to him by the omnibus trade and competitiveness act of 1988 . the plaintiffs brought their challenge under the administrative procedure act ( apa ) . because the commission's recommendations were not final agency action for purposes of the apa , but were merely advisory in nature , the cit held the final action was the presidential proclamation itself , which is not subject to apa review because the president is not an "agency" whose actions constitute "agency action . the federal circuit affirmed on the same grounds . to reconcile the outcome of these cases , it is important to note that the u.s. cane sugar refiners' association's challenge sought declaratory and injunctive relief under the jurisdictional statute of the cit itself , while the michael simon design case challenged the presidential proclamation under the apa .