a similar sentiment has been expressed by some members of congress . for example , in a 2016 subcommittee hearing , a few members raised concern that federal laws , regulations , and reporting requirements are creating a situation where too much time and resources are spent on complying with federal requirements . legislation passed by the 114 th congress to address many of the long - standing issues raised in recent reports has had broad support from the scientific community , though challenges and uncertainties remain . academic institutions can help maximize federal efforts to streamline and harmonize requirements by working to improve their own internal policies and procedures . as prior assessments have noted , no one regulation or policy is the major cause of stakeholder concern ; rather , it is the cumulative impact across a range of requirements . congressional oversight may be an important part of monitoring the progress of implementing the provisions enacted in the 114 th congress in a holistic way and evaluating their overall effectiveness . further , congress may broadly consider the appropriate balance between supporting the nation's academic research enterprise through efforts to streamline regulations and maintaining mechanisms for oversight , transparency , and accountability . forthcoming assessments from such efforts as the revised common rule , final guidance from payroll certification pilot programs , and omb review of ug components , may help to inform any future efforts to optimize federal research policies . in a 2014 subcommittee hearing , the nsf inspector general highlighted the importance of maintaining accountability in efforts aimed at reducing investigators' administrative workloads , stating: as accountability professionals , my office and the ig community are committed to striking the appropriate balance between reducing burden and maintaining proper accountability . federal funds are provided through grants and other mechanisms by more than two dozen federal agencies . federal funds provide more than half of the total amount u.s. universities and colleges spend on r&d each year . institutional funds from u.s. universities and colleges are the next largest source of support , providing approximately one - quarter of the total r&d funds spent each year . while this report focuses on federal requirements , academic institutions also develop internal policies for managing awards more broadly , including federal , state , and nonprofit awards . requirements set by the institution facilitate compliance with federal regulations but may also add to the administrative workload . institutional requirements vary depending on such factors as the size and focus of the institution and its research program , as well as the availability , or lack of , a sponsored research office . the following subsections describe a selection of the overarching federal laws , regulations , and guidance pertaining to academic research awards . numerous evaluations have looked at the impacts of federal grant regulations on academic research . in 2016 , the gao and the national academy of sciences ( nas ) each released reports evaluating federal regulations and administrative requirements placed on research grant recipients .