bush . in april 1989 , president bush issued an executive order establishing the council "in order to provide a coordinated process for developing a national space policy and strategy and for monitoring its implementation. the executive order stated that the council would be chaired by the vice president ( dan quayle ) and would include the secretaries of state , treasury , defense , commerce , and transportation , the director of the office of management and budget , the president's chief of staff , the assistant to the president for national security affairs , the assistant to the president for science and technology , the director of central intelligence , and the administrator of the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) . the following year , congress passed three acts affecting the operation of the council . the national space council authorization act of 1990 ( p.l . 101-328 ) made several provisions regarding staff and funding and requested a review of u.s. space launch policy . section 104 of the global change research act of 1990 ( p.l . 101-606 ) directed that certain aspects of the national global change research plan shall be developed "in consultation when appropriate with the national space council. section 121 of the national aeronautics and space administration authorization act , fiscal year 1991 ( p.l . 101-611 ) directed the council to establish a users' advisory group of "non - federal representatives of industries and other persons involved in aeronautical and space activities. it is unclear whether the users' advisory group was ever established , but the april 1989 executive order had provided for the council to have an advisory committee , the space policy advisory board , consisting of private citizens appointed by the vice president . the space policy advisory board was activated in mid - 1992 and issued three policy reports later that year: the future of u.s. space launch capability , the future of the u.s. space industrial base , and a post cold war assessment of u.s. space policy . the national space council and the space policy advisory board ceased to operate soon after president clinton took office in january 1993 . some observers view the national space council as a recreation of the national aeronautics and space council ( nasc ) , which was established decades earlier by the national aeronautics and space act of 1958 , the same act that established nasa . the nasc's statutory function was to advise the president on the interagency coordination of aeronautics and space activities , including "effective cooperation between the national aeronautics and space administration and the department of defense. the nasc was initially chaired by the president . it was a smaller group than its successor , the national space council . its membership initially consisted of the secretaries of state and defense , the administrator of nasa , the chairman of the atomic energy commission , not more than one additional federal official , and not more than three members from the private sector .