most of these rules are under review at epa . at the outset of the 115 th congress , with a republican president and republican majorities in both the house and senate , much was made of the opportunity presented to override epa regulatory actions from the final days of the obama administration through use of the congressional review act ( cra ) . these and other bills would address criticism by industry groups and others that epa under previous administrations has overreached its authority . environmental and public health groups , on the other hand , generally believe that the agency has not overreached in setting clean air act standards . these groups often maintain that the agency's standards are not stringent enough , do not meet statutory requirements , or disregard the findings of the agency's science advisors . the result is that epa clean air act standards generally are challenged in court both by industry and by environmental groups , with various states supporting each side . the resulting court decisions often set epa's agenda as much as congress or the administration . the courts will continue to play an important role , and the 115 th congress and epa itself may act to make important revisions to clean air act regulations . in short , the caa's regulatory structure continues in a state of uncertainty in 2018 , with possible changes emanating from the executive , legislative , and judicial branches . some have argued that the case for ghg controls has not been proven . others maintain that epa should delay taking such action until congress more explicitly authorizes it . of the ghg emission standards promulgated by epa , four sets of standards , which have had the broadest impacts , are discussed below: those for power plants , the oil and gas industry , trucks , and light - duty vehicles ( the latter two topics are combined under the heading " standards for motor vehicles " ) . epa finalized ghg standards for power plants in august 2015 ; set ghg emission standards for oil and gas industry sources in june 2016 ; finalized a second round of ghg standards for trucks in august 2016 ; and completed a mid - term evaluation ( mte ) of the already promulgated 2022-2025 ghg standards for light - duty vehicles ( cars and light trucks ) in january 2017 . the cra provides expedited procedures that can be used during a limited period of time after promulgation of an agency rule to bring resolutions disapproving regulations to the senate floor , where they cannot be amended or filibustered . in doing so , the cra can remove commonly used obstacles to senate action . a december 15 , 2016 , crs analysis concluded that joint resolutions disapproving regulations promulgated and received in congress on or after june 13 , 2016 , were eligible to use these fast - track senate procedures during the first 60 legislative days of the 115 th congress .