they also have implications for u.s. geopolitical interests . conversely , geopolitical tensions , risks , and opportunities can have major impacts on international trade and finance . these issues are complex and at times controversial , and developments in the global economy often make policy deliberation more challenging , because they involve balancing many competing interests . a major focus was examining and responding to the trump administration's evolving trade policy . u.s. trade policy under president trump to date arguably represents a significant shift from recent past administrations under both republicans and democrats . international trade and finance issues have been important to congress because they can affect the overall health of the u.s. economy and specific sectors , the success of u.s. businesses and workers , and americans' standard of living . congress is in a unique position to address these and other issues , particularly given its constitutional authority for legislating and overseeing international trade and financial policy . this report provides a brief overview of select trade and finance issues that may be of interest to the 115 th congress . members of congress exert significant influence over the course of u.s. trade policy and its implementation through their legislative , appropriations , and oversight roles . given current debates about trade and u.s. trade policy , fundamental questions about the future direction of trade and international economic issues are likely to continue to be areas of interest for the 115 th congress . in engaging on these issues , congress may conduct oversight of the renegotiation of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , and potentially consider implementing legislation for a revised nafta , and oversight of modification of the korus fta ; consider new bilateral trade agreement negotiations , including with the uk or japan ; examine the status of trade negotiations launched under the previous administration , including the potential transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) with the european union ( eu ) , a potential plurilateral trade in services agreement ( tisa ) , and ongoing discussions at the wto , as well as the future implications of the tpp without u.s. participation ; conduct oversight and take possible legislative action concerning a range of other trade issues , including u.s. trade relations with china and other major economies , as well as u.s. export and import policies and programs ; and monitor developments in capital flows and global debt levels , the international financial institutions and u.s. funding levels , the evolution of the aiib , and other countries' exchange rate policies , among other international finance issues . u.s. trade and economic policy affects the interest of all members of congress and their constituents . congressional actions on these issues can impact the health of the u.s. economy , the success of u.s. businesses and their workers , the standard of living of americans , and u.s. geopolitical interests . some of these issues may be highly contested , as members of congress and affected stakeholders have differing views on the benefits , costs , and role of u.s. trade policy .