how should readiness be measured ? how does the fy2018 budget request affect the u.s. military's readiness ? while this report discusses how differing uses of the term readiness affect the debate , it does not evaluate the current state of the u.s. military's readiness or provide a conclusive definition of readiness . today , when someone uses readiness in the broad sense they usually also assume it is good to maintain high levels of readiness in the narrow sense . few in the contemporary debate argue for forces — no matter how large — that are not ready in the narrow sense . to maintain u.s. economic competitiveness and readiness in the broad sense , he was willing to accept less ready forces in the narrow sense: [eisenhower] underscored his administration's recognition 'that the time has clearly come when the united states must take conclusive account , not only of the external threat posed by the soviets , but also of the internal threat posed by the long continuance and magnitude of federal spending.'.. [eisenhower] went on , truman's quest to build up america's military strength 'to a state of readiness on a specified d - day' had 'largely overlooked or totally ignored the length of time over which this costly level of preparedness would have to be maintained. in the third era , following the collapse of the soviet union in 1991 , some observers expected a lengthy respite from international military conflict . as a result , they argued u.s. defense resources should be devoted to developing leap - ahead technologies , which would better ready the u.s. military for future challenges . they argued this future readiness in the broad sense made sacrificing current readiness , in the narrow sense , worthwhile: the 'transformation approach' is based on the belief that the united states should accept greater short - term risk by limiting global engagement , canceling procurement of current or next - generation weapons systems , selectively lowering current readiness and operational tempo , cutting some force structure , and shrinking the defense infrastructure in order to accelerate the development and adoption of advanced systems , concepts , and organizations . what should the u.s. military be ready for ? in earlier eras , however , observers argued readiness in the narrow sense came at the expense of other , more important goals , which could leave the military less ready in the broader sense . three eras stand out . in the first era , the time between world war i and world war ii , most observers assumed the size of the military forces needed to fight a war would be many times larger than those the united states would maintain during peacetime . almost everyone assumed the u.s. military was not and would not be ready in the narrow sense .