a few of the proclamations contain exceptions . for instance , canyons of the ancients national monument is to remain open for oil and gas leasing and development because most of the lands have already been leased and development is occurring , according to the proclamation . however , the secretary of the interior is authorized to issue new leases only for specified purposes . another example is the proclamation for the san gabriel mountains national monument , which allows for the disposal of materials under the materials act of 1947 . in another example , the secretary of the interior is to study the impacts of livestock grazing on biological objects in the cascade - siskiyou national monument . existing grazing may continue with "appropriate terms and conditions. the secretary of agriculture and the secretary of the interior are to "meaningfully engage" the commission or a successor entity composed of tribal government officers should the commission cease to exist . if the secretaries decide not to incorporate recommendations of the commission ( or comparable entity ) in developing or revising management plans , the secretaries are to provide a written explanation of their reasoning . bears ears national monument further directs the secretaries to establish an advisory committee to provide information and advice on developing the management plan and , "as appropriate , management of the monument. the membership of the advisory committee is to be drawn from tribes and a variety of other stakeholders . table 6 reflects the tribal - related provisions of the proclamations for the 21 national monuments . the antiquities act of 1906 ( 54 u.s.c . §§320301-320303 ) authorizes the president to proclaim national monuments on federal lands that contain "historic landmarks , historic and prehistoric structures , and other objects of historic or scientific interest. the president is to reserve "the smallest area compatible with the proper care and management of the objects to be protected. most of the proclamations prohibit the use of motorized and non - motorized mechanized vehicles off - road except for emergency or administrative purposes . only four of the monument proclamations address timber on monument lands , directly or possibly as part of language on vegetative management . the proclamations appear to recognize the primary authority of states to manage fish and wildlife . the act does not further specify the process to be used by presidents in proclaiming monuments . the proclamations for 14 of the 21 national monuments state that they do not enlarge or diminish the rights of any indian tribe . all 14 proclamations state that they do not enlarge or diminish the rights of any indian tribe ; two of the 14 ( for bears ears and gold butte ) reference both indian "rights or jurisdiction. two of the proclamations , for organ mountains - desert peaks and rio grande del norte , specify the rights of both indian tribes and pueblos . nine of the 14 proclamations also include language regarding protection of indian sites and access to sites by members of indian tribes for traditional cultural and customary uses , consistent with relevant authorities . the text of these protection provisions differs in a number of ways .