appendix a . unlike h.r . 26 , however , the fca would apply this revised cra approval mechanism only to rules promulgated by a "federal financial agency," a term it defines as the financial regulators listed in table 1 . provisions of the financial choice act included in fy2018 appropriations bills selected provisions of the financial choice act were included in the fy2018 financial services and general government appropriations act ( h.r . on september 5 , 2017 , the house rules committee combined h.r . 3280 with selected other appropriation bills in h.r . first , is the cfpb as an institution structured appropriately to achieve the correct balance between independence on the one hand and transparency and accountability on the other ? those who criticize the cfpb's policy choices often attribute some of the perceived shortcomings to what they see as the cfpb's excessive independence , insularity , and lack of sufficient accountability . the presence of a director rather than a board , some argue , leads to a lack of diverse viewpoints at the cfpb . some also cite funding that is outside the traditional appropriations process as a contributing factor to the cfpb's independence . supporters of the cfpb highlight other aspects of its structure that they argue provide sufficient transparency and accountability , including the director's biannual testimony before congress and the cap on cfpb funding . other structural characteristics , they argue , are important for ensuring that the cfpb is somewhat insulated from political pressures and can focus on the technical aspect of policymaking . the second major policy question is whether the substance of the cfpb's rulemakings has struck an appropriate balance between protecting consumers and ensuring that consumers have access to financial products while also safeguarding lenders from unduly burdensome regulations . one of the long - standing issues in the regulation of consumer financial services is the perceived trade - off between protecting consumers and ensuring the providers of financial services are not unduly burdened . if regulation intended to protect consumers increases the cost of providing a financial product , a company may reduce how much of that product it is willing to provide and to whom it is willing to provide it . those who still receive the product may benefit from the enhanced disclosure or added legal protections of the regulation but at the cost of a potentially higher price . some members of congress believe the cfpb has struck an appropriate balance in its rulemaking between protecting consumers and ensuring that credit availability is not restricted due to overly burdensome regulations on financial institutions . others counter that some of the cfpb's rules have imposed compliance costs on lenders of all sizes that will result in less credit available to consumers and restrict the types of products available . an analysis of whether recent rulemakings have restricted the availability of credit is complicated by the effects of the financial crisis on the supply of and demand for credit , as well as by the fact that many of the more significant cfpb rulemakings only took effect in early 2014 .