these issues are discussed below . when choosing a small - dollar loan product , the ideal comparison for a potential borrower would consist of ( 1 ) the prices of two loans of the same type ( eg , two payday loans ) or ( 2 ) the prices of one type of small - dollar product with its next - best alternative . in light of tila disclosure requirements , the apr would be deemed the key metric for such comparisons . the mathematical relationships ( discussed in the appendix ) show that small - dollar loans , all else equal , will always have higher aprs in comparison to loans for larger amounts ; and loans with maturities of less than one year , all else equal , will always have higher aprs in comparison to loans with maturities equal to or greater than one year . for these reasons , apr comparisons are meaningful when loans are of similar amounts and have similar maturity lengths . however , making ideal comparisons is not always possible . even slight differences in product pricing and maturities increase the difficulty of comparing costs . for example , suppose a borrower is trying to decide whether to use a bank overdraft product or a payday loan . banks are allowed to set their own overdraft policies . some banks may charge a fixed fee for each overdraft regardless of the amount borrowed , whereas others have a tiered pricing structure as the amount of the loan increases . some banks require repayment sooner than the two - week period typically associated with a payday loan ; other banks may allow slightly longer repayment periods , such as 30 days . for this reason , the variances in pricing structure and maturities make apr comparisons problematic , not only for comparisons of small - dollar products across lender types , but also for comparisons among the same type of lenders ( eg , different banks ) . in addition , making loan comparisons based solely on product prices may not be possible if borrowers have strong preferences for certain product features or place value on the conveniences associated with the products . under such circumstances , prices may reflect more specialized market segmentation . the situations below illustrate when borrowers may place greater weight on nonprice factors relative to the total loan price . some borrowers may not find the apr to be a useful disclosure . interpreting aprs may not be widely understood , and some users of small - dollar loans report that the flat - fee pricing structure of afs credit providers is easier to understand in comparison to banks' fee structure disclosures . furthermore , some borrowers facing cash flow shortages may value the actual dollar cost of credit rather than the apr . borrowers may consider factors pertaining to product delivery , such as the convenience of locations and business hours or the length of the application process .