in general , nafta is considered to have benefitted u.s. agriculture . this is also true regarding the agreement's effects on employment and wages , as some workers and industries have faced disruptions due to loss of market share from increased competition , while others have gained from the new market opportunities that were created . yet others claim that nafta has further contributed to consolidation in north america's agriculture , resulting in fewer small farms , particularly in mexico . in the end , the extent to which nafta has benefitted the u.s. economy is not clear cut , since the gains could be partly attributable to mexico's unilateral liberalization ( which was happening at the same time as nafta ) or to gains attributable to the u.s. - canada fta ( custa , which was already in effect before nafta was negotiated ) . canada and mexico are key u.s. agricultural trading partners . since nafta was implemented , the value of u.s. agricultural trade with canada and mexico has increased sharply and now accounts for a large overall share of all u.s. agricultural exports and imports . agricultural products presented here cover commodities as defined by usda for the purposes of calculating u.s. agricultural exports , imports , and the agricultural trade balance . however , some in congress and within u.s. agriculture are cautiously supporting efforts to renegotiate or "modernize" some of nafta's provisions as they pertain to agriculture . some recommend that many of the agricultural provisions agreed to in the tpp agreement could provide a possible model framework for a nafta renegotiation . the administration's official notice to congress does not cite specific negotiating objectives for u.s. agriculture . the trump administration's earlier draft notice sent to congressional leadership did outline certain objectives for u.s. agriculture and sps measures . ustr's request for public comment on "matters relevant to the modernization" of nafta , however , does address certain agricultural issues , including sps and other technical trade barriers . others point to the benefits of regional trade agreements , including market integration , competitive or complementary economic linkages , and geographical proximity . some credit nafta with further facilitating trade by formalizing these changes and providing a more stable trade environment among the nafta partner countries . the u.s. chamber of commerce states: "nafta has been a bonanza for u.s. farmers and ranchers , helping u.s. agricultural exports to canada and mexico to increase by 350%," despite growth over the period in mexico's agricultural production . ustr also claims that nafta has benefitted american farmers . many u.s. food and agricultural industry groups claim that nafta has positively affected their markets . according to an industry coalition group , "nafta has been a windfall for u.s. farmers , ranchers and food processors. since the agreement was implemented , trilateral agricultural trade among the member countries has risen sharply . additionally , trade with canada and mexico comprise an ever - larger share of u.s. agricultural markets . many attribute generally lower u.s. consumer prices and improved consumer choices and variety ( eg , imports of off - season produce and greater variety of food products ) to nafta's elimination of tariffs and quota restrictions under the agreement .