occasional budget deficits are not necessarily problematic . extraordinary measures were previously adopted in march 2015 . coupled with short - run budget surpluses in march and april of that year ( which result primarily from the receipt of annual income tax returns ) , those measures were estimated to be exhausted in early november 2015 , or shortly after the most recent debt limit suspension . the latest cbo budget forecast projects a larger nominal budget deficit in fy2017 ( $559 billion ) than the federal deficit in fy2015 ( $466 billion ) . such an increase may reduce the length of time extraordinary measures would postpone a binding debt limit relative to what was experienced in 2015 . the federal government faces long - term budget challenges . deficit spending can allow governments to smooth outlays and revenues to shield taxpayers and program beneficiaries from abrupt economic shocks in the short term , while also temporarily boosting gdp when the economy is underperforming . persistent deficits , however , lead to growing levels of federal debt that may lead to higher interest payments and may also have adverse macroeconomic consequences in the long term , including slowing investment and lowering economic growth . since the debt cannot grow faster than gdp indefinitely , large deficits will eventually need to be reduced through increases in taxes , reductions in spending , or both . some measures of fiscal solvency in the long term indicate that , under current policy , the united state faces major future imbalance , specifically as it relates to rising retirement and health care costs and the likely impact on government - financed health care spending . existing deficit reduction policies like the bca have improved recent and near - term deficits but do not make significant changes to the parts of the budget that are projected to grow the fastest in the long - run . therefore , many budget analysts believe that additional deficit reduction is required to put the budget on a sustainable path over the long term . cbo's current law baseline projects inflation - adjusted deficits that are greater than the postwar average in each year of their most recent 10-year baseline . cbo , gao , and the trump administration agree that the current mix of federal fiscal policies is unsustainable in the long term . the nation's aging population , combined with rising health care costs per beneficiary , may keep federal health costs rising faster than per capita gdp . cbo projected in march 2017 that under current policy , federal spending on health programs ( including medicare , medicaid , chip , and exchange subsidies ) would grow from 5.5% of gdp in fy2017 to 8.8% of gdp in fy2047 . a 2017 gao report on fiscal health also cited health spending as a source of concern . though these forecasts are highly uncertain , it seems probable that spending on these programs will rise as a share of gdp over time . in addition , growing debt and rising interest rates are projected to cause interest payments to consume a greater share of future federal spending .