further , h.r . 1247 would require an mscf semipostal stamp depicting an african elephant in addition to an amur tiger . other bills would require usps to issue semipostal stamps supporting other causes , such as the peace corps ( h.r . this law requires the u.s . postal service ( usps ) to issue and sell the mscf stamp . a portion of the proceeds ( 11 cents , less usps's administrative costs ) from the stamp are transferred to the u.s . fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , which equally distributes the stamp - generated funds among the five mscf sub - funds ( see figure 1 ) . the other portion of the revenue goes to the postal service fund , which is a revolving fund in the u.s. treasury that consists largely of revenues generated from the sale of postal products and services . usps introduced the mscf stamp , entitled "save vanishing species," in september 2011 . the stamp depicts an amur tiger , a design approved by the postmaster general , who has the final authority to decide the design for semipostal stamps . congress initially provided for the mscf stamp to be available to the public for at least two years . congress extended the mandated sale of the mscf stamp by an additional four years through the multinational species conservation funds semipostal stamp reauthorization act of 2013 ( p.l . authorization for the mscf stamp is set to expire in september 2017 . this expiration does not preclude usps from continuing to issue and sell the stamp , should it choose to do so . as of november 2016 , more than 36.6 million mscf stamps had sold , generating more than $3.9 million for conservation . according to fws , funds from the stamps have supported 84 conservation projects in 33 countries . projects and programs funded by stamp sales address antipoaching activities , capacity building for conserving species , community engagement and outreach , habitat restoration , and activities to raise public awareness of the illegal wildlife trade , among other things . in addition , federal grants from mscf receive matching funds from nonfederal conservation supporters . fws has noted that the funds from stamp sales have leveraged more than double their value in funds for conservation . for example , from fy2012 to fy2016 , $3.1 million of funds generated from stamps leveraged $12.5 million in additional funds from nonfederal stakeholders for conservation projects . the mscf stamp's efficacy in generating funds for international conservation made reauthorizing the stamp a priority for addressing wildlife trafficking , as the presidential taskforce on wildlife trafficking created by the obama administration in 2014 noted . funds generated by mscf stamp sales have supported efforts to decrease wildlife trafficking . for example , fws used mscf stamp funds to support a program that rehabilitates trafficked tigers for return to the wild in indonesia . semipostal stamps are first - class letter stamps that are sold with a surcharge over their postage value . the additional charge is recognized by the stamp purchaser as a voluntary contribution to a designated cause .