pursuant to p.l . 100-656 , the business opportunity development reform act of 1988 , the sba is required to "develop and implement a process for the systematic collection of data on the operations of the [8 ( a ) ] program" and to report this data , not later than april 30 of each year , to congress . the act requires the report to include the following: the average personal net worth of individuals who own and control concerns that were initially certified for program participation during the immediately preceding fiscal year and the dollar distribution of each of these individual's net worth , at $50,000 increments . a description and estimate of the benefits and costs that have accrued to the economy and the federal government in the immediately preceding fiscal year due to the operations of those business concerns that were performing 8 ( a ) contracts . a compilation and evaluation of those business concerns that have exited the program during the immediately preceding three fiscal years , including the number of concerns actively engaged in business operations , those that have ceased or substantially curtailed operations , including the reasons for such actions , and those concerns that have been acquired by other firms or organizations owned and controlled by other than socially and economically disadvantaged individuals . for those businesses that have continued operations after they exited from the program , the sba administrator is required to separately detail the benefits and costs that have accrued to the economy during the immediately preceding fiscal year due to their operations . a listing of all program participants during the preceding fiscal year identifying , by state and region , for each firm: the concern's name , the race or ethnicity , and gender of the disadvantaged owners , the dollar value of all contracts received in the preceding year , the dollar amount of advance payments received by each concern pursuant to contracts awarded under section 8 ( a ) , and a description including ( if appropriate ) an estimate of the dollar value of all benefits and loans received during such year . the total dollar value of 8 ( a ) contracts and options awarded during the preceding fiscal year and such amount expressed as a percentage of total sales of all firms participating in the program during such year ; and of firms in each of the nine years of program participation . a description of additional resources or program authorities required to provide the types of services needed over the next two - year period to service the expected portfolio of 8 ( a ) certified firms . the total dollar value of 8 ( a ) contracts and options , at such dollar increments as the sba administrator deems appropriate , for each four digit standard industrial classification code under which such contracts and options were classified .