there is no separate house photo gallery facility . the executive committee is comprised of seven members . electronic recording or broadcasting equipment is generally prohibited in the chamber galleries , but radio / tv gallery credentials enable journalists to rebroadcast the floor audio and video footage produced by the house and the senate . the radio / tv galleries also maintain broadcast and recording studio spaces , which can be used by any correspondent with congressional credentials . in addition to the services provided to journalists , the radio / tv galleries also provide assistance to members of congress . it is also thought to improve government accountability . as the number of reporters and news outlets covering congress increased during the 1800s , the house and senate established formal press galleries , resources , and administrative rules to help manage the capitol press corps while preserving its access and independence . the first congressional reporters mainly transcribed the floor debates and provided more detailed accounts of congressional proceedings than what was available in the official records maintained in the house journal and the senate journal . this information , sometimes provided by members of congress themselves , would be sent as correspondence to newspaper publishers outside the capital area . known correspondents were often permitted on the chamber floors so that they could better hear the proceedings , but correspondents were sometimes restricted to the public galleries . by the middle of the 1800s , each chamber had established its own designated reporters' gallery space . in 1877 , the house and senate decided to create a committee of correspondents to oversee press gallery membership and administration . the official c ongressional directory first published a list of 86 correspondents entitled to admission to the reporters' galleries in 1880 and published press gallery rules in 1888 . separate galleries and correspondents' committees now exist for the daily printed press , periodical press , radio and television press , and press photographers . correspondents' committees , often upon request of gallery members , may propose changes to their gallery rules , subject to the approval of the speaker of the house and the senate committee on rules and administration . today , the congressional press galleries provide services both for journalists and for members of congress . for the media format and chamber it represents , each press gallery is typically responsible for credentialing journalists , maintaining capitol workspace for correspondents , and coordinating coverage for news conferences , hearings , and other congressional events . the press galleries also distribute press releases ; provide the press with information on floor proceedings , upcoming rules , amendments , and legislation ; provide information on committee hearings , witness testimony , and mark - ups ; and deliver messages or facilitate member communications with journalists . in addition to these regular responsibilities , the house and senate press galleries take on additional roles during presidential elections , overseeing arrangements and credentialing for daily press at the national political conventions and presidential inaugurations . the degree of autonomy granted to each press gallery and correspondents' committee results from responsibilities bestowed upon them by the speaker of the house and the senate committee on rules and administration .