1859 ) and the freedom for families act ( h.r . 2163 ) , would amend the tax code to provide tax - advantages to individuals with caregiving responsibilities . members of congress who support increased access to paid leave generally cite as their motivation the significant and growing difficulties some workers face when balancing work and family responsibilities , and the financial challenges faced by many working families that put unpaid leave out of reach . in general , expected benefits of expanded access to pfl include stronger labor force attachment for family caregivers and greater income stability for their families , and improvements to worker morale , job tenure , and other productivity - related factors . the oecd examined the availability of family caregiver leave among its member countries in 2011 and found that of the 25 countries for which it could identify information , 14 had polices providing paid leave to workers with ill or dying family members ; these are summarized in table 3 . qualifying needs for leave , leave entitlement durations , benefit amounts , and eligibility conditions varied considerably across the countries included in the oecd study . the overarching goal of pfl legislative activity in the 116 th congress has been to increase access to leave by reducing the costs associated with providing or taking leave . the strong families act , which became law in december 2017 ( p.l . 115-97 ) , allows employers to claim tax credits for a portion of wages paid to certain employees taking family or medical leave ; this approach potentially increases access to pfl for workers while reducing the costs to employers of providing the leave . a second approach addresses costs incurred by workers taking leave . for example , the establishment of a national family leave insurance program , such as that proposed in the family and medical insurance leave act ( family act ; s. 463 / h.r . 1185 ) , would provide cash benefits to eligible individuals who are engaged in certain caregiving activities , potentially making the use of unpaid leave ( eg , as provided by fmla or voluntarily by employers ) affordable for some workers . proposals such as the new parents act ( s. 920 / h.r . 1940 ) would allow eligible new parents to receive to up to three months of social security benefits , in return for deferring retirement ( or early retirement ) by a period of time determined by the social security administration to cover the costs of the parental benefit . other approaches include proposals to create tax - advantaged parental leave savings accounts ( eg , the working parents flexibility act of 2019 , h.r . 1859 ) and tax - advantaged distributions from health savings accounts for family and medical leave purposes ( eg , the freedom for families act , h.r . in addition , the president's fy2020 budget proposes to provide six weeks of financial support to new parents through state unemployment compensation ( uc ) programs .