it begins with a discussion of the laws related to the education of students with disabilities at the secondary and postsecondary levels . the increased rates of students with disabilities graduating from high school with a regular diploma and continuing on to postsecondary education may be part of the trends seen in the general population of transition - aged students . data collection efforts have also been launched to allow for better tracking of relevant trends . this report discusses policies aiming to promote educational attainment and examines trends in high school graduation and college enrollment for students with disabilities . subsequent sections discuss the existing data on transition - aged students with disabilities , what is currently known about such students , and federal legislation and other factors that may have contributed to changes in students with disabilities' high school graduation rates and postsecondary enrollment over time . the report offers a brief overview of what is currently known about the u.s. population of students with disabilities in secondary and postsecondary education . it focuses on data gathered in conjunction with federal programs and federally funded studies of nationally representative samples of students with disabilities . it does not attempt to provide an overview or review of existing research on transition - aged students with disabilities or to provide an in - depth examination of the differences between the rights of and services afforded to students with disabilities at the secondary and postsecondary levels . the next sections of the report provide an overview of the education and civil rights laws that aim to support students with disabilities as they work toward completing high school and potentially transition into further educational pursuits . federal data on students with disabilities transitioning from secondary to postsecondary education include both data reported from public high schools to ed , and federally funded studies and datasets examining students with disabilities transitioning from secondary to postsecondary education and enrolled in postsecondary education . this section will examine what is currently known about transition - aged students with disabilities from federal data , and the limitations of that data . high school graduation and college enrollment have increased considerably for all students in recent decades . the appeal of higher earnings or self - sufficiency may be a factor in the increasing educational attainment of students with and without disabilities . relatedly , the increase in unemployment among 16 to 24 year olds in the years immediately after the 2007-2009 recession may have factored both in declining high school dropout rates and in increasing postsecondary enrollment rates during those years . in addition , changes in the postsecondary landscape , such as increased access to non - selective two - year and less than two - year programs , may have encouraged more students to pursue postsecondary education . in addition to the potential factors impacting the overall population of transition - aged students , several congressional actions may have contributed specifically to the increasing percentages of students with disabilities graduating from high school with a regular diploma ( figure 1 ) and enrolling in postsecondary education .