government. ned continued to support programs in bolivia , for example , even after president evo morales expelled usaid and the u.s. ambassador to the country in 2013 . democracy promotion falls within the purview of several agencies and organizations that manage foreign assistance activities . this section describes the role of the primary entities implementing democracy promotion funds . in recent years , 95% - 99% of u.s. democracy promotion assistance has been funded within the department of state and usaid budgets , with 11 other agencies providing the rest . democracy promotion sometimes conflicts with other foreign policy priorities , and critics argue that when the united states exerts pressure on some regimes for undemocratic practices while ignoring similar practices among strategic partners against terrorism , or major oil suppliers , the moral authority of the united states is undermined . others assert that , as with any foreign intervention , it is appropriate and necessary for the united states to pick and choose situations in which the greatest opportunities for positive change exist . ineffectiveness and unintended consequences . recent democracy promotion efforts in afghanistan and iraq , and in several countries in the wake of the arab spring , have led some to conclude that these efforts are destined to fail because they attempt to induce social and structural changes in societies that u.s. policymakers do not fully understand . the results may not only be ineffective , but may have unintended consequences such as regional instability . democracy promotion advocates argue that it is a mistake to focus on the iraq and afghanistan examples , which reflect the shortfalls of military intervention more than democracy promotion , and cite positive results in less publicized situations such as colombia , indonesia , myanmar ( burma ) , slovakia , and tunisia . congress plays an important role in determining the shape , scope , and priorities of u.s. democracy assistance programs . following are some issues congress may consider as it carries out related legislative and oversight responsibilities . many members of congress have expressed concern about actions by the trump administration that they perceive as undermining u.s. democracy promotion efforts . president trump's frequent praise for authoritarian leaders , including russia's vladimir putin , kim jong - un of north korea , and rodrigo duterte of the philippines , combined with intermittent criticism of democratic leaders and allies , have raised concern that the administration is emboldening foreign nondemocratic behavior . moreover , president trump's statements valuing the u.s. economic relationship with saudi arabia over acute concerns about the saudi crown prince's role in the october 2018 murder of u.s. - based journalist jamal khashoggi have heightened this concern . at the same time , the trump administration has taken a hard line on some authoritarian leaders , with national security advisor john bolton referring to cuba , venezuela , and nicaragua as a "troika of tyranny. conflict between congress and the administration on whether , how and when the united states should promote democracy and condemn authoritarian regimes may be an issue throughout the 116 th congress . for both fy2018 and fy2019 , the trump administration proposed cuts to democracy promotion aid of more than 40% compared to prior year funding .