appendix a . historical origins of nass president lincoln established the u.s. department of agriculture in 1862 . the precursor of nass — the division of statistics — was established within usda a year later in 1863 . one of the key missions of the division of statistics was to provide information on commodity and agricultural markets to improve their operating efficiency and provide a fair and equitable environment for price discovery in the marketplace . the administration argued that without federal provision of objective , transparent data on u.s. and world markets to all participants on an equal basis , powerful interests with deep resources could get access to this critical information and either manipulate these markets or simply profit from it at the cost of individual farmers and ranchers . an initial duty of the division of statistics was to prepare monthly reports on the condition of u.s. crops . in 1866 , it began to publish annual statistics on production of major crops , livestock numbers , and annual farm prices . in 1882 , state statistical agents were hired on a part - time basis . in 1898 additional state agents were hired to provide better coordination and greater coverage . by 1905 , usda had state - level statistical agents in 43 states . a scandal involving advance knowledge of usda's crop forecasts by a new york cotton speculator occurred in 1905 and led to the establishment of the crop reporting board ( now called the agricultural statistics board [asb] ) . the crop reporting board consisted of several statisticians who provided an independent review of the survey data forwarded from nass's regional offices . in addition , a secure system of data collection and release — referred to as the "lockup" system — was established to prevent early release or advance knowledge of usda's crop forecasts . field offices forward their estimates to nass headquarters , where they are combined under the secure lockup system and released at preannounced scheduled times to the press and public by the asb . in 1961 , under a usda - wide reorganization , nass's immediate precursor — the statistical reporting service ( srs ) — was established . in 1986 , the srs was renamed as nass and the crop reporting board was renamed as the asb . over the years nass's reporting program of agricultural estimates has responded to an increased demand for agricultural production and market information with more frequent and detailed reports , including weekly reports on crop progress during the growing season , monthly reports on farm prices received and cattle on feed , and quarterly reports of hogs . appendix b . details on nass sampling method sampling from the area frame sampling from the area frame is a multistep process . first , all land in each state is classified into land use categories by intensity of cultivation — referred to as stratification — using a variety of map products , satellite imagery , and computer software packages . these land use classifications range from intensively cultivated areas to marginally cultivated grazing areas to urban areas .