prior to fdaaa ( i.e. , 2007 ) , 16 drugs were approved with restrictive risk management programs , including clozapine ( the "no blood , no drug" program ) and thalidomide ( the "system for thalidomide education and prescribing safety" program , or s.t.e.p.s. ) in 2002 , the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act ( p.l . 107-188 ) was signed into law . title v of the law ( pdufa iii ) reauthorized prescription drug user fees through fy2007 , and in exchange for industry user fees , fda committed to several performance goals , including those related to the agency's risk management activities such as review pre - nda / biologics license application ( bla ) meeting packages that include summaries of relevant safety information and industry questions / discussion points regarding proposed risk management plan activities and discuss the need for any post - approval risk management studies ; review proposed risk management plan activities included in an nda / bla ; and develop and issue guidance for industry addressing risk assessment , risk management , and pharmacovigilance practices . pursuant to the pdufa iii agreement , fda issued three risk management guidance documents , including guidance on the development , implementation , and evaluation of risk minimization action plans ( riskmaps ) for prescription drugs products ( and biologics ) . a riskmap is defined as a safety program designed to meet specific goal s ( i.e. , a desired end result such as a health outcome ) and objective s ( i.e. , an intermediate step to achieving goal ) in minimizing the known risks of a drug while preserving its benefits ) . a riskmap targets one or more safety goals and uses certain tools ( eg , targeted education and outreach ) to achieve those goals . riskmaps contained elements similar to rems ( described in the next section ) , and while fda could recommend that a sponsor implement such a safety program , fdaaa gave fda the explicit authority to require rems if necessary to ensure the benefits of a drug outweigh the risks . some drug applications approved prior to the effective date of fdaaa contained elements to assure safe use , which typically appeared in approved riskmaps . in march 2008 , fda identified and published in the federal register a list of drug and biological products that were deemed to have an approved rems and directed application holders to submit a proposed rems , as specified . in 2007 , fdaaa expanded the risk management authority of fda , authorizing the agency to require rems for certain drugs , under specified conditions . although fda practice had long included most of the elements that a rems may contain , fdaaa gave fda , through the rems process , the authority for structured follow - through , dispute resolution , and enforcement . rems is a required risk management plan that uses risk mitigation strategies beyond fda - approved professional labeling .