, percentile ) . an individual's annual relative earning values are then averaged over years of nonzero earnings to create a measure of peak lifetime earnings , which she describes as a "rough proxy for socioeconomic status. men with zero earnings during that time are dropped because social security is not able to distinguish between periods of unemployment and earnings not covered by social security . thus , the gap in life expectancy at age 50 between men in the lowest and highest income quintiles has risen from 5.1 years for the 1930 cohort to 12.7 years for the 1960 cohort . growth in the life expectancy gap over this time period is driven primarily by longevity gains among men in the top income quintile , but a small decline in longevity among men in the bottom quintile is also a contributing factor . for women , the pattern is generally similar: across the two cohorts , the life expectancy gap between the bottom and top income quintiles also increased , and there was evidence of a decline in life expectancy for the lowest two income quintiles . ( see figure 4 . ) the nas authors estimate that the life expectancy gap between the bottom and top income quintiles of women expanded from 3.9 years in the 1930 birth cohort to 13.6 years in the 1960 birth cohort . the authors note that , although the findings for women are more pronounced than those for men , these results are less reliable ( i.e. , because significant changes in women's labor force participation over this period affected the composition of the female sample ) . a 2016 study by the brookings institution also analyzes income inequality among the 50-and - older population and the growing longevity gap between income groups . this study analyzes demographic data from two large public use surveys , the hrs and the sipp , that have been matched to social security administrative data on earnings , benefits , and dates of death . the authors calculate study cohort life expectancy given survival to age 50 based on mortality risk projections for the sample . like other research , this study employs simplifying assumptions about future mortality risks , which may or may not be accurate . these reflect the progressivity in the design of the benefit formula . however , the social security program includes both contributions and benefits . therefore , when researchers measure whether the program is progressive , they typically compare lifetime benefits to lifetime payroll taxes . common measures include the ratio of lifetime benefits to lifetime taxes ; net benefits or the net present value ( npv ) , which is the difference between the present value of lifetime benefits and lifetime payroll taxes ; and the internal rate of return ( irr ) , which can be described as the rate of return on lifetime payroll taxes . if any of these measures — the lifetime benefit to lifetime tax ratio , npv , or irr — is higher for lower earners than for higher earners , then the program is considered to be progressive . variation in life expectancy can weaken the basic progressivity built into the social security benefit formula .