it focuses exclusively on costs . second , it establishes a process under which agencies shall be given an annual regulatory budget , with the director of omb identifying "a total amount of incremental costs that will be allowed for each agency in issuing new regulations and repealing regulations for the next fiscal year. directs that "the total incremental cost of all new regulations , including repealed regulations , to be finalized this year shall be no greater than zero , unless otherwise required by law or consistent with advice provided in writing by the director of the office of management and budget.... " third , it requires the director of omb to "provide the heads of agencies with guidance on the implementation of this section . four issues are discussed below . although many parts of the clean air act require the epa administrator to promulgate regulations without mentioning consideration of cost , epa is bound by the statute in some cases and by executive orders in the case of each economically significant rule to provide estimates of the costs and benefits during the rulemaking process . the agency has indicated that benefits exceed costs , usually by a wide margin , for the vast majority of its caa rules: as noted earlier , according to epa , the estimated cumulative benefits of caa regulations during the period 1990-2020 will exceed the estimated costs by more than 30 to 1 . projecting that benefits will exceed costs may not be sufficient under the trump administration , however . the president has spoken repeatedly of the need to reduce the cost of regulation , which he believes has restrained the growth of the economy and "killed" jobs . on january 30 , 2017 , he signed executive order 13771 , "reducing regulation and controlling regulatory costs. a second executive order , e.o . 13783 , "promoting energy independence and economic growth," signed march 28 , 2017 , addressed specific clean air act regulations . the first of these two executive orders addressed regulations promulgated by all federal agencies . press coverage focused on its requirement that " ... whenever an executive department or agency ... publicly proposes for notice and comment or otherwise promulgates a new regulation , it shall identify at least two existing regulations to be repealed. other elements of the order are also worth noting: first , the executive order does not mention the benefits of regulation . such guidance shall address , among other things , processes for standardizing the measurement and estimation of regulatory costs ; standards for determining what qualifies as new and offsetting regulations ; standards for determining the costs of existing regulations that are considered for elimination ; processes for accounting for costs in different fiscal years ; methods to oversee the issuance of rules with costs offset by savings at different times or different agencies ; and emergencies and other circumstances that might justify individual waivers of the requirements of this section. guidance was issued on april 5 , 2017 .