appendix a . this amendment did not pass . in 1970 , president nixon signed h.r . 514 into law . the 1969 amendments extended most esea programs through fy1973 , modified the title i - a basic grant program , extended the special incentive grant program , and included a provision to provide special grants to urban and rural schools , which provided additional funding to areas where there were high concentrations of disadvantaged children ( similar to what is now known as concentration grants ) . under the 1969 amendments , title i - a grants were allocated via three formulas: basic grants , special incentive grants , and special grants . the amendments also required that all applications and other pertinent lea documents be made available to the public . in addition , the commissioner of education ( hereinafter referred to as the commissioner ) was required to study the effectiveness of the program in meeting the needs of the disadvantaged and report the findings to congress . the amendments also mandated a study of the lea grant allocation formula and established the national advisory council on the education of disadvantaged children . two new fiscal requirements were also added to the statute: ( 1 ) a comparability requirement under which each lea receiving title i - a funds had to demonstrate comparable services were provided to both schools receiving title i - a funds and schools not receiving title i - a funds , and ( 2 ) a supplement , not supplant ( sns ) requirement that required leas to provide an assurance that basic grant funds were not supplanting nonfederal funds in their districts . the basic grant , special incentive grant , and special grant for urban and rural schools formulas are discussed in more detail below . the 1969 amendments did not make substantial changes to the basic grant formula due , in part , to the funding level for the program . since fy1967 , title i - a had not received sufficient appropriations to provide leas with their maximum grant amounts . as a result , congress retained the basic grant fy1967 state grant minimum provisions and the provisions prioritizing funding for state agency programs over basic grants included in the 1967 amendments . additionally , while the amendments increased the poverty threshold used to determine formula child counts , this change never went into effect due to insufficient appropriations . one change the 1969 amendments did make was to give the commissioner the option to use data from the census bureau's 1970 decennial census ( as opposed to the 1960 decennial census ) to determine grant amounts beginning in fy1973 . additionally , under the amendments basic grants could be used for salary bonuses for teachers serving in schools with large numbers of disadvantaged students . the 1969 amendments did not make major changes to the special incentive grant program , which , in 1970 ( when the 1969 amendments were enacted ) , had yet to be funded . special incentive grants to seas were based on an effort index and the state formula child count .