forever. members of congress included a provision in niaa that required agencies to inform a claimant beforehand that they could lose their gun rights and privileges if they are found to be mentally incompetent as a condition of a benefit program's administration and eligibility . in addition , as under the state grant provisions , niaa required those referring agencies to establish a firearms disabilities relief program , whereby any individual referred to the nics index for reasons related to mental incompetency would be able to petition to have his or her gun rights and privileges restored , if and when he or she had overcome the incapacities that led to the initial finding . the bureau of justice statistics ( bjs ) has awarded $109.8 million in nics improvement grants to state and local governments from fy2009 through fy2016 . according to the bjs , there were 298,571 prohibiting records related to persons "adjudicated as a mental defective" or "committed [involuntarily] to a mental institution" in the nics index as of january 1 , 2007 . 1181 set for ssa and any other federal agencies that provide disability benefits ? through nics , ffls initiate a background check by contacting either the fbi or a state or local agency serving as a point of contact ( poc ) . only ffls are permitted to use the nics system , and a nics check cannot be initiated until the ffl and intending customer have completely filled out and signed an atf form 4473 . on this form the intending customer attests that he or she is not a prohibited person and that he or she are who they say they are . the ffl attests that it has examined government - issued identification documents , verifying that the intending customer has completely and properly recorded his or her identity , address , and other biographical information based on those identification documents . by signing the atf form 4473 , both the ffl and intending customer attest that all the information is truthful . under the gca , there are criminal penalties for providing false information on the atf form 4473 for both the ffl and the intending customer . under the gca , there are nine classes of persons prohibited from shipping , transporting , receiving , or possessing firearms or ammunition: persons convicted in any court of a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year ; fugitives from justice ; unlawful users or addicts of any controlled substance as defined in section 102 of the controlled substances act ( 21 u.s.c . ยง802 ) ; persons adjudicated as "mental defective" or committed to mental institutions ; unauthorized immigrants and nonimmigrant visitors ( with exceptions in the latter case ) ; persons dishonorably discharged from the u.s. armed forces ; persons who have renounced their u.s. citizenship ; persons under court - order restraints related to harassing , stalking , or threatening an intimate partner or child of such intimate partner ; and persons convicted of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence .