5721 et seq. ) to determine if its provisions meet current needs . one such potential need is providing disaster assistance following a terrorist attack . the stafford act requires that all major disaster declaration requests be made by state governors or tribal leaders . such requests must be made on the basis that the incident is of such severity and magnitude that effective response is beyond the capability of the affected state and local government . included with the letter are supplemental material and any relevant information about the incident . the letter also describes what types of federal assistance is being requested . in the case of a request for a major disaster declaration , a particularly important piece of information accompanying the letter is the preliminary damage assessment ( pda ) . pdas provide public infrastructure damage estimates ( as well as estimated damage to households ) . it is included in this discussion because the governor requested stafford act assistance . the san bernardino and ohio state attacks are not included because stafford act declarations were not requested . table 1 provides a comparison of each incident . it is notable that in all but one case , the declaration was issued on the same day as the attack . the request for a declaration begins with a letter to the president from the governor or tribal leader . by regulation , fema compares this damage estimate against the state's population . in general , fema will make a recommendation to the president that a major disaster be declared if public infrastructure damages exceed $1.42 per capita . this formula is known as the "per capita threshold. a request for an emergency declaration follows the same basic regulatory procedures highlighted above for major disasters with some nuances . similar to a request for a major disaster declaration , the basis for an emergency declaration is that the incident is of such severity and magnitude that effective response is beyond the capability of the affected state and local government . fema , however , does not apply any formulas — including the per capita threshold — in regulations to make emergency declaration recommendations to the president . while there are differences between the two types of declarations , the ultimate decision to declare and grant federal assistance for emergencies and major disasters rests solely with the president . in general , an incident must meet three criteria to be eligible for a major disaster declaration: ( 1 ) definition , ( 2 ) unmet need , and ( 3 ) state action . according to this view , the stafford act's existing structure is sufficient to meet the potential terrorism challenges that may lie ahead . the selected approach will likely be influenced by two factors: ( 1 ) impact on federal costs , and ( 2 ) personal views concerning the appropriate nature of the federal government's role in addressing terrorism . some might be concerned that amending the stafford act to assure that soft target and nonconventional terror attacks are eligible for major disaster assistance might , in their view , inappropriately shift the primary financial burden for addressing terrorism costs from the states to the federal government .