no such legislation was enacted . coastwise shipping of refined petroleum products today is a third of the volume shipped in 1960 . in the early 1960s , strikes by crews on coastal tankers were a factor in decisions to build the colonial pipeline from houston to new york and the olympic pipeline from puget sound refineries to portland , or . today , these two coastal pipelines , along with a third , the plantation pipeline running from baton rouge , la , to washington , dc , transport the equivalent of 4,000 tanker loads of refined products per year . this is not a new line of inquiry . as figure 2 indicates , coastwise shipping temporarily surged in the late 1970s as the opening of the alaska pipeline brought about coastwise shipments of north slope crude oil from the port of valdez . the alaska oil shipments , which went mainly to refineries near seattle , san francisco , and los angeles , held steady for about a decade but then began declining . according to one analyst , the decline has been due partly to high transportation costs , which reduce the profitability of alaska production . more recently , the volume of coastwise and inland waterway freight has been rising due to the boom in crude oil production in texas and north dakota . however , coastwise movement of this oil and the products refined from it is overwhelmingly performed by barge ; very little oil in domestic trade moves by tanker ship . the use of coastal shipping is decreasing even between origin and destination pairs close to the coastline . for example , freight moving from new england and eastern new york to the southeastern coastal states of south carolina , georgia , and florida overwhelmingly moves by overland modes ( figure 3 ) . assuming an average of 25 tons per full truckload , the nearly 7 million tons carried by truck in 2014 ( as single - mode shipments ) equates to over 276,000 truck trips ( 758 per day ) . the amount carried by water over the entire year equates to a single coastal - sized shipload . reviving coastal shipping could dramatically increase the capacity of the nation's freight network . it also could provide a competitive alternative for some shippers , potentially addressing persistent complaints by shippers that carriers in the rail and oil pipeline industries are able to exert market power to command unfairly high freight rates . moreover , some of the necessary infrastructure is largely in place , as many of the harbors the federal government dredges for deep - draft vessels currently have little or no ship traffic . increasing coastal shipping would require little additional investment in highways , railroads , or pipelines . the question is whether a different mix of federal policies would make coastal trade an attractive option for shippers and ship owners . the comparatively high cost of u.s. - built ships appears to be deterring prospective carriers from building such vessels for use in coastwise trade . recent u.s. - built coastal - size container ships have a price range of $190 million to $250 million .