the house - passed bill ( h.r . 3354 ) would have funded nearly every program under the ovw account at the fy2017 level . the house - passed bill included a $0.5 million increase for research on violence against women relative to fy2017 funding . the proposed $45.5 million increase in the ovw account relative to fy2017 funding was due to the house proposing to fund grants for victims of trafficking through the ovw account rather than the state and local law enforcement assistance account , where the appropriation for this program is traditionally provided . the house - passed bill did not recommend transferring any funding from the crime victims fund to the ovw account . the senate committee - reported bill ( s. 1662 ) would have also largely funded programs under the ovw account at the fy2017 level . the two exceptions were $1.0 million increases , relative to fy2017 funding , for both transitional housing assistance and grants for rural domestic violence and child abuse enforcement assistance . the committee - reported bill included a $379.0 million transfer from the crime victims fund to the ovw account . congress and the administration provided $492.0 million for ovw for fy2018 , all of which comes via a transfer from the crime victims fund . fy2018 funding was $10.5 million greater than fy2017 funding and $12.0 million more than the administration's request . in general , for fy2018 ovw programs were funded at the fy2017 level , but there were a few programs that received an increase . congress and the administration provided , relative to fy2017 funding , an additional $5.0 million for transitional housing assistance grants , an additional $5.0 million for grants to assist victims of domestic violence in rural areas , and an additional $0.5 million for research related to violence against women . the office of justice programs ( ojp ) manages and coordinates the national institute of justice ; bureau of justice statistics ; office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention ; office of victims of crimes ; bureau of justice assistance ; office of sex offender sentencing , monitoring , apprehending , registering , and tracking ; and related grant programs . the office on violence against women ( ovw ) was established to administer programs created under the violence against women act ( vawa ) of 1994 ( p.l . the administration requested $218.0 million for cops for fy2018 , which was $3.5 million less than fy2017 funding . the budget request would have increased funding for the cops hiring program , and within this amount reestablished a set - aside for assistance to tribal law enforcement . however , the budget request would have eliminated funding for antimethamphetamine and antiheroin task forces . the house - passed bill included $240.5 million for the cops account , but it would have eliminated funding for many programs that are traditionally administered by the cops office . most of the programs in the house bill that would have been funded under the cops account have traditionally received funding under the s&llea account . the senate committee - reported bill included $226.5 million for the cops account .