appendix a . summary of pdufa vi agreement: performance goals and procedures fy2018-fy2022 appendix b . the house passed h.r . 2430 on july 12 , 2017 , and the senate passed it on august 3 , 2017 . 2430 was signed into law as fdara ( p.l . 115-52 ) on august 18 , 2017 . title i reauthorizes pdufa , allowing fda to collect fees and use the revenue to support specified activities for the review of prescription brand - name drugs . fdara includes eight other titles . a separate crs report describes provisions in those titles , which cover reauthorization of the medical device , generic drug , and biosimilar biological product user fees , as well as provisions concerning pediatric drugs and devices , reauthorizations and improvements related to drugs , inspections and regulatory improvements related to devices , improvements to generic drug access , and a set of miscellaneous provisions . provisions in ffdca sections 735 , 736 , and 736b appendix c. abbreviations used in this repor . the timeline for the development of the agreement and the reauthorization of the program is shown in figure 3 . the pdufa vi reauthorization process began with a public meeting held in july 2015 , followed by a 30-day comment period . from september 2015 through february 2016 , fda held meetings with industry and patient and consumer advocacy groups ; minutes of the meetings are available on the fda website . manufacturers argued that prolonged review times affected their ability to recoup the costs of research and development . during pdufa i consideration , fda estimated that each one - month delay in a review's completion cost a manufacturer an average of $10 million . fda argued that it needed more scientists to review incoming drug applications , as well as backlogged applications , and that it had insufficient appropriations to hire additional scientists to conduct these reviews . for decades , fda had asked congress for permission to implement user fees . the pharmaceutical industry generally opposed them , believing the funds might go into the treasury to reduce federal debt rather than help fund drug reviews . the pharmaceutical industry's opposition to user fees was mitigated , thus clearing a path for the 1992 law , when then fda commissioner david kessler worked out an arrangement that met two industry demands: ( 1 ) performance goals , which would set target completion times for various review processes , and ( 2 ) the promise that these fees would supplement — rather than replace — funding that congress appropriated to fda . those steps helped persuade industry groups that the fees would reduce review times — and paved the way for congress to authorize a revenue source that fda had sought for over 20 years . pdufa i — and the subsequent pdufa ii , pdufa iii , pdufa iv , pdufa v , and pdufa vi — authorized the collection of prescription drug user fees and the use of that revenue for specified activities .