appendix a . acronyms appendix b. glossary of financial statements appendix b provides a description of the financial statements listed in table 1 and table b - 1 by each sector . private sector income statement presents the results of a company's operations and whether it was profitable or incurred a loss during the period measured . objectivity and independence objectivity and independence principle . a member should maintain objectivity and be free of conflicts of interest in discharging professional responsibilities . a member in public practice should be independent in fact and appearance when providing auditing and other attestation services . objectivity is a state of mind , a quality that lends value to a member's services . it is a distinguishing feature of the profession . the principle of objectivity imposes the obligation to be impartial , intellectually honest , and free of conflicts of interest . independence precludes relationships that may appear to impair a member's objectivity in rendering attestation services . members often serve multiple interests in many different capacities and must demonstrate their objectivity in varying circumstances . members in public practice render attest , tax , and management advisory services . other members prepare financial statements in the employment of others , perform internal auditing services , and serve in financial and management capacities in industry , education , and government . they also educate and train those who aspire to admission into the profession . regardless of service or capacity , members should protect the integrity of their work , maintain objectivity , and avoid any subordination of their judgment . for a member in public practice , the maintenance of objectivity and independence requires a continuing assessment of client relationships and public responsibility . such a member who provides auditing and other attestation services should be independent in fact and appearance . in providing all other services , a member should maintain objectivity and avoid conflicts of interest . although members not in public practice cannot maintain the appearance of independence , they nevertheless have the responsibility to maintain objectivity in rendering professional services . members employed by others to prepare financial statements or to perform auditing , tax , or consulting services are charged with the same responsibility for objectivity as members in public practice and must be scrupulous in their application of generally accepted accounting principles and candid in all their dealings with members in public practice . due care due care principle . a member should observe the profession's technical and ethical standards , strive continually to improve competence and the quality of services , and discharge professional responsibility to the best of the member's ability . the quest for excellence is the essence of due care . due care requires a member to discharge professional responsibilities with competence and diligence . it imposes the obligation to perform professional services to the best of a member's ability , with concern for the best interest of those for whom the services are performed , and consistent with the profession's responsibility to the public . competence is derived from a synthesis of education and experience . it begins with a mastery of the common body of knowledge required for designation as a certified public accountant .