overvie . crispr - cas9 technology is still in its infancy , with many of the hoped - for applications potentially years in the future . however , the interest , efforts , and investments of the industrial and financial communities suggest the potential economic and other societal benefits are substantial . among the early indicators of the potential value of crispr - enabled products are fees being paid to license crispr patents , investments in firms with potential interests in crispr intellectual property , the type of companies investing in crispr research , and early applications . this section discusses recent projections made by market research firms , select private investments , federal research and development funding , and statistics on scientific publications . the fundamental federal guidance for regulating biotechnology products , including those developed using crispr - cas9 , is the coordinated framework for the regulation of biotechnology ( the coordinated framework ) originally published in 1986 by the white house office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) . a key principle in this regulatory structure is that genetically engineered products should continue to be regulated according to their characteristics and unique features , not their production method — that is , whether or not they were created through genetic engineering techniques ( eg , crispr - cas9 , zfns , and talens ) . the framework provides a regulatory approach intended to ensure the safety of biotechnology research and products , using existing statutory authority and previous agency experience . the coordinated framework consists of three primary agencies — the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , and the food and drug administration ( fda ) . epa protects human health and the environment by regulating genetically engineered products that qualify as pesticides under the federal insecticide , fungicide , and rodenticide act ( 7 u.s.c . §136 et seq .

 ) ; it sets guidelines on the amount of pesticidal residue that may be present in food under section 408 of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( 21 u.s.c . §301 et seq .

 ) ; and it regulates new chemical substances derived from microbial biotechnology under the toxic substances control act ( 15 u.s.c . §2601 et seq. ) usda regulates biotechnology products that may pose a risk to agricultural plant and animal health under the plant protection act ( 7 u.s.c . §7701 et seq. ) and the animal health protection act ( 7 u.s.c . §8301 et seq. ) fda protects human health and safety by regulating human and animal drugs , human and animal foods derived from genetically engineered plants , and genetically engineered animals under the authorities of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act and the public health service act ( 42 u.s.c . §201 et seq. ) new biotechnology developments , continuing opposition by consumer groups and environmentalists , and perceived inadequacies of federal regulation led the obama administration to issue a memorandum on july 2 , 2015 , to update the coordinated framework to ensure that the regulatory structure is capable of meeting future biotechnology risks .