drought . like the rest of southern africa , malawi was affected by the 2015-2016 el niño weather system . drought conditions , exacerbated by delays in the distribution of state - subsidized seeds and fertilizer , resulted in poor harvests nationwide . usaid expects conditions to improve after the 2017 april - may harvest season . nonetheless , further delays in fertilizer distributions , a worsening regional infestation of south american armyworms , and the inability of many farmers to hire agricultural laborers — a consequence of poor farm earnings in 2015-2016 — are expected to result in continued low output and undercut incomes for poor rural dwellers . roughly 6.7 million malawians were experiencing acute food insecurity in early 2017 . territorial dispute . malawi and tanzania have been engaged in a long - running dispute over competing sovereign claims to lake malawi ( also known as lake nyasa ) , in part fueled by the prospect that it may contain deep - water fossil fuel reserves . the dispute reemerged in early 2016 , when malawi lodged a diplomatic protest with tanzania's government after the latter published an official map showing the international border equally splitting the lake zone between the two countries . this depiction was at odds with malawi's claim to the entire lake , based in part on mappings and the administrative history of the lake during the colonial period . regional mediation efforts , which had stalled in recent years , are being facilitated by mozambique's former president , joaquim chissano . in february 2017 , president mutharika announced that mediation efforts would resume . meanwhile , malawi's government has allowed exploration for oil and gas in the lake to continue , drawing criticism from environmentalists and unesco . some analysts contend that economic plans for the lake , which also include a shipbuilding plant , may remain stymied by uncertainty linked to the ongoing border dispute . in may 2017 , the malawian government announced that it would lodge a legal case over the dispute with the international court of justice in the hague . refugee influx . between late 2015 and april 2016 , roughly 10,000 mozambicans crossed into southern malawi as refugees fleeing renewed fighting between the mozambican government and an armed opposition party known as renamo . most refugees have returned to mozambique ; roughly 3,000 remained in malawi as of late march 2017 . these refugees comprise a portion of a total population of about 27,300 refugees — most from rwanda and burundi — hosted by malawi . some have been living in malawi for several years . malawi , a former british colony , was ruled by its founding leader , hastings kamuzu banda ( no relation to joyce banda ) , from 1964 until he lost an election in 1994 to opposition leader bakili muluzi . that presidential election and the accompanying legislative races were the first multi - party elections held after a democratic transition spurred by social unrest and broad opposition to kamuzu banda's arguably authoritarian , patriarchal , and personalistic one - party rule . during muluzi's two terms , political pluralism grew and market - based economic reforms took hold , as did allegations of corruption .