in general , federal civil service employees are in the competitive service . through the csra , congress has provided certain procedural protections to a number of civil servants , delineating the conditions under which agencies may take adverse actions against federal employees . moreover , this report primarily focuses on the crsa's applicability to the competitive service . the requirements pertaining to senior executive service ( ses ) members are thus only discussed briefly . the report begins with a brief examination of an important principle that informs and supplements protections for federal workers — the constitutional protections afforded civil service employees by the due process clause . these constitutional considerations not only inform the interpretation and application of the existing statutory rules governing adverse actions against federal employees , but may also establish baseline parameters for policymakers' consideration of proposals to modify the removal and demotion processes authorized under current law . the due process clause of the fifth amendment requires the federal government to observe certain procedures when depriving individuals of life , liberty , or property . in addition to protecting against the deprivation of an individual's physical property , the constitution also guards against the deprivation of certain "property interests" without due process . the property interests protected by the due process clause are not themselves created by the constitution ; instead , those interests arise from an independent source , such as state or federal law . the csra contains an initial categorization of who counts as a federal employee and which particular employees are covered under its various procedural protections . these classifications are important because , among other things , the csra functions as the "comprehensive" legal framework governing certain type of actions taken by agencies against employees . as such , potential claims of certain federal workers not covered by particular provisions of the csra may be precluded because of the comprehensive scope of the csra . the statute defines the civil service generally as "all appointive positions in the executive , judicial , and legislative branches of the government of the united states" except for the armed forces and the uniformed forces . it further categorizes civil service federal government employees into three groups: ses employees , competitive service employees , and excepted service employees . ses employees are high - level positions in the federal government above the grade of general schedule 15 . career ses members are selected according to a merit - based system , and they operate functionally as a link , through successive presidential administrations , between career staff and the political appointees who head federal executive agencies . subchapter ii of chapter 75 provides various procedural protections for certain government employees subjected to "major adverse actions. those adverse actions include removals , suspensions for more than 14 days , reductions in grade or pay , and furloughs of 30 days or less . attention to all of these issues may occur if and when lawmakers consider amending the civil service laws . the csra's requirements for ses employees , including hiring and performance reviews , are distinct from those of competitive service and excepted service employees and are beyond the scope of this report .