in practice , however , their respective operations sometimes undermine each other . as one scholar notes , "the united states might be able to maintain an open - ended military presence in afghanistan or stabilize the country , but not both. the remaining junior officers , ncos , and enlisted soldiers in those units are unable to train fully because they lack senior leadership . in order to gain a better understanding of how the pentagon plans to use these additional troops , policymakers might benefit from a detailed breakdown of what types of troops are required and where and how they will be employed . will these additional troops be used primarily in a training and advisory capacity , or can they also be involved in combat operations independent of or in support of afghan security forces ? also , if additional u.s. forces are to take on an enhanced role , does this mean that the current rsm - dedicated u.s. troops in afghanistan will also be permitted to operate in a manner that is outside their current training and advisory mandate ? if missions for u.s. forces are enhanced or changed , will this require changes to existing rules of engagement ( roe ) and , if so , will new roes conflict with those employed by non - u.s. nato and coalition forces in afghanistan ? according to nato , as of february 2017 , there were 13,459 troops deployed from 39 nations to support rsm , including 6,941 u.s. troops . given the complexity of the campaign , along with the imprecise nature of u.s. goals for the region and absent a definitive statement from the trump administration regarding its priorities , it is currently difficult to evaluate the likely impact that additional forces may have . there are also an unspecified number of u.s. troops in afghanistan dedicated to the u.s. counterterrorism mission , which could account for the 8,400 overall u.s. troop level cited in congressional testimony and in press reports . reportedly , the united states has asked nato partners and other nations for additional troops and any additional non - u.s. troops could help to meet general nicholson's requirement for "a few thousand more troops" to assist in advisory and training activities . according to one report , nato is currently considering the u.s request for additional troops but any nato troops provided would not participate in direct combat missions . depending on the possible contributions of troops from other nations , the united states could send anywhere from a few hundred to 5,000 troops to afghanistan . because troop - contributing nations in the past have placed "caveats" on where and how their troops may be employed , additional u.s. forces might be required to assume a greater burden and conduct missions that other countries are unable to because of caveats . if additional non - u.s. forces are made available , policymakers might decide to examine how they will be employed and if there are associated caveats as to their use and how these caveats might affect the employment of u.s. forces . the united states and allies initially drove the taliban from power and largely destroyed al qaeda's ability to plan and execute terrorist attacks from afghanistan .