appendix a . comparison of berry amendment , kissell amendment , and buy american act appendix b . selected berry amendment domestic nonavailability waivers ( dnad ) since 200 . the two laws are controversial . proponents argue the amendments are important to the u.s. economy by helping to preserve the u.s. industrial base and creating manufacturing jobs for american workers . they also claim domestic preference laws may lessen dependence on foreign sources for certain critical u.s. military and nonmilitary needs , and that these laws encourage some foreign manufacturers to invest within the united states so that their products can be sold to the u.s. government . on the other hand , opponents believe the laws give monopolies to certain companies , raise the government's procurement costs , and fail to fully utilize the international supply chains that many u.s. manufacturers rely on to meet their production needs . the berry amendment ( 10 u.s.c . unless dod grants a waiver because domestic firms do not make the product or because other exceptions in the law are met , the entire production process of an affected product , from the production of raw materials to the manufacture of all components to final assembly , must be performed in the united states . as an example , when dod purchases a military uniform , it must be sewn in the united states using fabric , thread , buttons , and zippers made in the united states from raw materials of u.s. origin . the berry amendment mandates a much higher level of domestic content than the buy american act of 1933 , which generally governs the procurements of other federal agencies . under the buy american act , the final product must be mined , produced , or manufactured in the united states , and if manufactured , either at least 50% of the cost of its components , by value , must be manufactured in the united states , or the end product must be a commercially available off - the - shelf item . a second law , sometimes referred to as the kissell amendment ( 6 u.s.c . ยง453b ) , is modeled on , but not identical to , the berry amendment . the kissell amendment was enacted as section 604 of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l . in recent congresses , lawmakers have introduced bills that would have widened the scope of these domestic preference laws . for instance , in the 115 th congress , the homeland production security act , h.r . 1811 , would amend the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l . tsa provides 14 different uniform items to new hires . proponents of the berry and kissell amendments assert that the laws serve to keep certain u.s. production lines operating . they argue that the u.s. military should not be dependent on foreign sources for critical items , including those covered by the berry and kissell amendments , and that dependence on foreign sources for military and national security items could lead to supply problems during times of war or military mobilization .