bolster international efforts . support collective statements and resolutions critical of chinese human rights policies in the united nations and other international fora . should human rights issues be prioritized ? what is the range of possible policy tools for promoting human rights in china ? which options are the most effective , and over what time frame are they most effective ? how much importance should the united states attach to multilateral efforts to promote human rights in china ? should international approaches be focused on the united nations , or be coordinated directly with like - minded governments ? how are possible u.s. human rights policies constrained , if at all , by other u.s. policies and interests related to china ? how are they constrained , if at all , by the institutions and mechanisms that form the basis of u.s. - china relations ? should the united states' interest in human rights be the subject of negotiation , and , if so , should the united states be willing to match improvements in china's human rights conditions with actions valued by china ? in what areas might such matching "action for action" be explored ? should the u.s. government press china to abide by international human rights standards and covenants in a separate bilateral human rights dialogue , or as part of other dialogues ? some human rights advocates argue that promoting human rights in china should be viewed as a national interest and elevated to first order importance in u.s. policy toward china . they contend that u.s. foreign policy should be more values - focused , and that other areas of the bilateral relationship , such as security and trade , would benefit from prioritizing human rights . some experts recommend a "whole - of - government" approach , whereby human rights policy is coordinated among all agencies dealing with china , and suggest that the administration and congress work together to consider legislative and other measures . they favor placing human rights conditions upon beijing before satisfying china's desire for international cooperation in many areas , and imposing sanctions when necessary . other specialists contend that open censure and efforts to place human rights - related conditions upon further development of the bilateral relationship have not been very effective . they suggest that it is more useful , particularly in the long run , to take a more cooperative and flexible approach toward promoting human rights in china . in this way , u.s. policies to promote human rights in the prc are less likely to meet resistance among ccp hardliners and more likely to find agreement among chinese governmental and nongovernmental leaders who also may be pursuing human rights and related objectives . a less confrontational approach , they add , is also more compatible with the myriad ongoing forms of u.s. engagement and cooperation with china . they urge u.s. policymakers to seek common ground with their chinese counterparts and to appeal as much as possible to china's own interests on human rights issues .