, ethanol ) . the tax credits for alcohol fuels ( including ethanol ) expired at the end of 2011 . it is possible that qualifying production begins after the december 31 , 2019 , start - of - construction expiration date , meaning that tax expenditures for the ptc are expected to continue for at least the next decade . u.s. department of the treasury tax expenditure estimates can be used to illustrate how expiring provisions affect the distribution of energy - related tax expenditures over time ( see figure 2 ) . treasury and jct tax expenditure estimates differ in a number of ways . the treasury provides tax expenditures over an 11-year budget window . the jct uses a shorter 5-year window . the jct and treasury also use different methodologies when preparing tax expenditure estimates , and have different classifications as to what provisions constitute tax expenditures . thus , the tax expenditure estimates prepared by each entity are not directly comparable . however , looking at treasury tax expenditure estimates over time can illustrate broader trends regarding which types of energy are receiving tax - related benefits . in 2018 , according to treasury's tax expenditure estimates , tax expenditures supporting renewables totaled an estimated $8.4 billion . as a result , the amount of tax - related federal financial support for energy differs across energy sectors , and is not necessarily proportional to the amount of energy production from various energy sectors . the total amount of energy - related tax incentives is projected to decline under current law , although extensions of expired energy tax provisions , or other modifications to energy tax provisions , could change these figures . by 2028 , that number is expected to decline to $3.5 billion . the decline can be explained by the reduced tax expenditures for the ptc and itc as these provisions phase down or expire . treasury estimates that tax expenditures supporting fossil fuels will total $2.2 billion in 2018 . the treasury anticipates this number increasing over time , reaching an estimated $3.8 billion by 2028 . the treasury estimates that the revenue losses associated with most permanent oil - and - gas tax incentives will increase over the next decade . the energy sector is supported by an array of tax incentives reflecting diverse policy objectives . over the longer term , the amount of tax - related support for the energy sector could decline if provisions are allowed to expire as scheduled under current law . starting in 2008 , the federal government incurred outlays associated with excise tax credits for biodiesel and renewable diesel . under current law , the tax credits for biodiesel and renewable diesel expired at the end of 2017 . thus , after fy2018 ( which includes the end of calendar year 2017 ) , there are no projected costs associated with tax incentives for renewable fuels . expired tax incentives may be extended , however , as part of the "tax extenders. beginning in the mid - 2000s , the cost of energy tax incentives for renewables began to increase .