public interest . how does the corps arrive at and document its assessment of public interest in its pipeline - related regulatory and civil works activities ? that is , how are anticipated costs and benefits ( both monetized and non - monetized ) for one group weighed relative to costs and benefits for another group , and how is the national public interest considered ? general permits . risk and safety . to what extent is the corps authorized to address oil and natural gas pipeline safety ( eg , risk of spills ) as part of its regulatory authorizations and civil works decisions ? how are low - probability , high - consequence safety risks considered and addressed in the corps' decisionmaking processes ? how does the use of general permits ( rather than individual permits ) for corps - regulated pipeline segments affect the agency's review of proposed water crossings , the information available to stakeholders and the public , and compliance with the requirements of nhpa ? an extensive discussion of each of these questions is beyond the scope of this report . many of these questions are not unique to pipelines or to the corps ; that is , many of them have been the subject of past ( and ongoing ) court cases related to other corps approvals or to similar actions by other federal agencies . limits of agency authority . when a pipeline is largely a nonfederal undertaking and the federal role is limited to discrete segments , to what extent should the federal government shape siting and other aspects of the pipeline ? as congress considers the corps' current and future roles and the federal role in pipelines more broadly , these questions reflect some of the basic debates about federal actions associated with private infrastructure . part of the compliance may include consultation or input from other entities . table 1 lists selected federal laws that , if applicable to a corps pipeline - related action , may require the corps to consult with relevant state or tribal entities or with other federal agencies . most requirements listed in the table are limited to actions taken by federal agencies . for example , an oil pipeline constructed on private land that does not require a federal agency approval ( eg , a pipeline that does not cross corps jurisdictional waters or federal lands ) would not be subject to nepa or nhpa . as shown in table 1 , federal licenses and approvals , such as corps individual permits , generally are conditioned on the permittee obtaining a state or tribal water quality certification pursuant to section 401 of the clean water act and a state or tribal consistency concurrence pursuant to the coastal zone management act . for the nwps , compliance with section 401 of the clean water act is accomplished by satisfying gc 25 . the state or tribe can certify all activities authorized by an nwp or require that verifications of certain activities under an nwp obtain state or water quality certification . the state or tribe can approve , deny , or condition its certification .