among them are . current law does not require auto dealers to fix used cars on their lots , or taxi and ride - sharing services to repair vehicles being used to transport customers . some members of congress have called for including used cars in the recall process . when a house floor amendment was debated during consideration of the surface transportation bill in 2015 , it was argued that auto dealers do not in practice sell cars with defects and that some recalls are "overly broad because the majority of vehicle recalls do not require the drastic step of grounding the vehicle. nhtsa presently has no authority to order repairs of recalled vehicles used by taxi and ride - sharing services . currently , nhtsa cannot require manufacturers to immediately stop sales of vehicles or equipment without following the substantial procedural steps needed to complete a recall investigation . the obama administration asked congress to grant nhtsa "imminent hazard authority," which would allow the agency to take immediate action when it believed there was the likelihood of death or serious injury . congress did not include such authority in the fast act . some members of congress have called for amending the early warning reporting provisions to require nhtsa to make information it receives from manufacturers more publicly available in a searchable , website format , contending that consumers and safety analysts could better evaluate potential defects . nhtsa may allow auto manufacturers to limit a recall to a certain geographic area if there is evidence that the defect is primarily found in vehicles registered in that area . for example , the recall of takata airbags was initially deemed a regional recall because excess humidity seemed to play a role , so only vehicles in more humid parts of the country were subject to the recall . critics contended that a regional recall was inappropriate because vehicles registered in other areas at the time of the recall could subsequently be sold or moved to high - humidity areas , putting owners and passengers at risk . the takata recall was broadened to a national recall after airbag defects were found in vehicles in other parts of the country . legislation proposed during the consideration of the fast act would have eliminated regional recalls . the security and privacy in your car act of 2017 ( s. 680 ) would direct nhtsa and the federal trade commission to establish federal standards to secure connected features and other motor vehicle data from hackers and data trackers . the legislation would also require the two agencies to develop a "cyber dashboard" rating that would show on a vehicle window sticker how well each vehicle model protects security and privacy of vehicle owners . the security and privacy in your car study act of 2017 ( h.r . 701 ) would require nhtsa to report to congress after conducting a study to determine the appropriate cybersecurity standards for motor vehicles , including how critical vehicle software systems can be separated from other software systems , and techniques necessary to prevent intrusions into motor vehicle software systems .