title i of p.l . 115-25 focuses on authorizing r&d efforts at noaa , mostly led by the oar , primarily to improve forecasts and warnings of potentially damaging weather events . title i addresses a broad array of activities authorized in the legislation that would , if implemented , range from conducting basic r&d on weather to enhancing the observing systems to improve the data used for forecasts and warnings . 115-25 addresses microsatellites , integration of data from the ocean observing system , and a study and report on future satellite data needs . subsection 301 ( a ) requires noaa to complete and operationalize the microsatellite project called the constellation observing system for meteorology , ionosphere , and climate ( cosmic - 1 and cosmic - 2 ) . noaa is to deploy microsatellites in polar and equatorial orbits , integrate the satellite data into operational and research weather forecast models , and make the data free and available to everyone . the cosmic satellite system makes use of a technique called radio occultation , using radio signals from global positioning satellites ( gps ) , which allows high - precision measurements of the global atmosphere . the data from the cosmic mission , combined with other atmospheric data , likely would improve the precision and accuracy of weather forecasts and warnings . subsection 301 ( a ) also requires the nws director to integrate data collected by the integrated ocean observing system into regional weather forecasts and to support the development of real - time data - sharing products and forecast products . it requires noaa to identify where monitoring and observing systems have degraded and may have reduced the quality of weather forecasts . subsection 301 ( a ) requires noaa to follow report recommendations , authorized under subsection 301 ( b ) , on specifications for weather satellite systems . subsection 301 ( b ) requires noaa to enter into an agreement with the national academy of sciences ( nas ) to conduct a study on future weather satellite needs . the resulting report is due within two years of entering into the agreement for the study . if an agreement cannot be achieved with nas , subsection 301 ( b ) would allow noaa to enter into an agreement with another nonfederal government entity with expertise and objectivity comparable to nas . the legislation authorizes $1 million total for the study and report during fy2018 and fy2019 . subsection 302 ( a ) authorizes noaa to purchase weather data from commercial sources and to place noaa weather satellites on government or private - sector payloads for launch into orbit . subsection 302 ( b ) directs noaa , within 180 days of enactment ( october 2017 ) , to submit to congress a strategic plan for procuring commercial weather data . congress has expressed interest in expanding noaa's use of commercially available weather data for at least the previous two congresses . outstanding issues include whether and how commercially available data meet the requirements and specifications for use in noaa's forecasts and warnings . subsection 302 ( c ) authorizes noaa to address some of these issues .