this title of h.r . 23 would establish reclamation as the lead agency responsible for coordinating all reviews , analyses , opinions , statements , permits , licenses , or other federal approvals required for new surface water storage projects on lands administered by doi and usda . provisions under title v would not change existing nepa requirements associated with permit issuance but would require reclamation to establish and implement procedures that would be largely similar to those implemented by doi and usda as part of those agencies' respective permitting processes . without explicitly referring to nepa , provisions in sections 503 , 504 , and 505 would establish certain responsibilities and requirements for lead and cooperating agencies that would be largely similar to those established by the white house council on environmental quality in its regulations implementing nepa . that is , title v of h.r . 23 would appear to establish a new process that reclamation would coordinate , but the bill would not eliminate any existing process . each agency's interpretation and implementation of the directives in this title likely would determine whether , or the extent to which , the agency integrates the reclamation - led process and the existing process the agency is required to complete to comply with nepa . additionally , provisions in section 504 would require reclamation to implement a coordination process that involves instituting a new pre - application coordination process ; preparing a unified environmental document that would serve as the record on which all cooperating agencies shall base any project - approval decisions ; ensuring cooperating agencies make decisions on a given project within deadlines specified in section 504 ; and appointing a project manager to facilitate the issuance of the relevant final approvals and to ensure fulfillment of any reclamation responsibilities . section 506 would allow doi to accept funds from a nonfederal project applicant to expedite the evaluation of permits related to the project . no provision in title v would explicitly waive existing nepa requirements associated with the issuance of permits or grants of right - of - way for federal land . 23 , under various scenarios ? 23 under the esa . currently , hatchery fish are not included in population estimates of protected species , due largely to their different genetic makeup from wild fish . under title vi of h.r . the inclusion of these fish eventually could lessen some esa restrictions on water conveyance compared to current levels . section 110 would deem compliance under the california environmental quality act to suffice for compliance with the national environmental policy act ( nepa , 42 u.s.c . §§4321-4347 ) for any project related to the cvp or related deliveries , including permits under state law . this provision would allow cvp projects and deliveries that conform to state law to circumvent traditional nepa requirements . decisions between new projects using the traditional federal financing model and those adopting new , alternative arrangements could create questions in the discussion of h.r . the need for and likelihood of authorization for new federal projects , as well as the appropriate split of responsibilities between federal and nonfederal stakeholders for new investments , also may be debated .