this report examines h.r . 10 introduced in the 115 th congress . 10 proposes wide - ranging changes to the financial regulatory system , and it contains provisions related to banking issues , including provisions found in titles i , iii , v , vi , vii , and ix . crs report r45073 , economic growth , regulatory relief , and consumer protection act ( s. 2155 ) and selected policy issues , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] . recent years have been a particularly transformative period for banking . this section provides background on the issue of agency independence and issues related to creating an appropriate degree of accountability , including whether the agency is self - funding or funded through appropriations ; whether the agency is led by an individual or a bipartisan commission ; what regulatory analysis requirements the agency faces in the rulemaking process ; and to what extent agency rulemaking is subject to congressional review . in addition to issues related to regulation , banking is also continually affected by market and economic conditions and trends . this section analyzes certain issues related to trends that may concern banks , including migration of financial activity from banks into nonbanks or the "shadow banking" system ; increasing capabilities and market presence of financial technology ( "fintech" ) ; increasing interest rates in the future ; and competitive and regulatory issues related to institutions with different charters but similar business models — such as banks , thrifts , and credit unions . because these issues involve the interactions between several broad market forces , specific legislative alternatives will not be examined in this section . in addition , many argue the crisis revealed that the financial system was excessively risky and the regulatory system had serious weaknesses . many regulatory changes were made in response to perceived weaknesses in the financial regulatory system , including to bank regulation . congress enacted the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l . 111-203 ; dodd - frank act ) in 2010 with the intention of strengthening regulation and addressing risks . in addition , u.s. and international bank regulators agreed to the basel iii accords — an international framework for bank regulation — which called for making certain bank regulations more stringent . in the ensuing years , some observers have raised concerns that the potential benefits of the regulatory changes ( better - managed risks , increased consumer protection , greater systemic stability , etc. ) are outweighed by the potential costs ( eg , reduced credit availability for consumers and businesses , and slower economic growth ) . meanwhile , market forces and economic conditions continue to affect the banking industry coincident with the implementation of new regulation . this report provides a broad overview of selected banking - related issues , including prudential regulation , consumer protection , "too big to fail" ( tbtf ) banks , community banking , regulatory agency structures and independence , and recent market and economic trends . it is not an exhaustive look at all bank policy issues , nor is it a detailed examination of any one issue .