§2015 or in a similar program ) . states must pay back these loans . if the loans are not paid back quickly ( depending on the timing of the beginning of the loan period ) , states may face interest charges , and states' employers may face increased net futa rates until the loans are repaid . the bill would make a number of changes to the state uc demonstration projects created by the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l . the bill would extend the time period that the ( now - expired ) state demonstration projects could be approved by dol through december 31 , 2021 ( p.l . as of november 13 , 2018 , the virgin islands owed $68.5 million to the federal accounts within the utf . the president's budget for fy2019 proposes changes to several aspects of the ui system . it would create a new required standard for state account balances within the utf . the president's fy2019 budget also proposes to make funding for reemployment services and eligibility assessments ( resea ) permanent beginning in 2020 , and to make these assessments mandatory for 50% of uc beneficiaries . additionally , the proposal would create a new benefit entitlement for paid parental leave financed through state unemployment taxes . finally , the president's budget for fy2019 proposes a set of additional integrity measures , including offsetting social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) benefits for concurrent receipt of ui benefits . representative david mckinley introduced the manufacturing economic recovery act of 2017,  h.r . the bill , among other items , would create a permanent work opportunity tax credit for hiring a full - time employee in a manufacturing facility located in the united states and include an increased credit for hiring individuals receiving unemployment compensation . delegate eleanor holmes norton introduced the reducing long - term unemployment act,  h.r . 1091 , the flexibility to promote reemployment act . 112-96  authorized these demonstration projects through december 31 , 2015 ) , as well as expanded the existing authority for state uc demonstration projects by authorizing 10 states per year to conduct approved demonstration projects ( the original , expired authority was only for 10 states total ) . 1091 would also revise state uc demonstration project requirements , including removing a requirement that any direct disbursements paid to employers for hiring uc claimants not exceed an individual's uc weekly benefit amount and requiring that dol approve state applications for uc demonstration projects based on the order of receipt . additionally , the bill would transfer the responsibility for the state uc demonstration project impact evaluation from the states , as under the now - expired demonstration authority , to dol and would require a specific procedure for termination of the state uc demonstration project by dol . senator jeff merkley and representative jared polis introduced s. 987 and h.r . 3314 , the 100 by '50 act , respectively .