in these cases , the loan will remain in dmcs . in instances in which a pca has been unsuccessful in collection on a defaulted loan , the pca may be required to return the loan to dmcs for assignment to another pca . for those borrower accounts held by dmcs , drg may perform many of the typical debt collection activities performed by a pca , such as identifying accounts eligible for rehabilitation and identifying accounts eligible for administrative resolution , such as loan discharge due to death or total and permanent disability . the drg serves as the contact center for dmcs . after a defaulted loan is transferred to dmcs from a loan servicer , dmcs generates a letter advising a borrower that he or she can avoid assignment of the defaulted loan to a pca by either entering into a voluntary repayment agreement or by providing proof that the debt is legally unenforceable . if a borrower does not complete either of these actions within 60 days , the defaulted loan may be assigned to one of several contracted pcas , which complete a variety of tasks related to attempting to bring borrowers out of default and collecting payment on defaulted loans ( discussed below ) . in certain instances , the fsa may decide not to assign a borrower's account to a pca , such as if the amount owed is less than $500 . in addition , the dmcs processes all payments made by defaulted borrowers on their loans , regardless of whether a loan has been assigned to a pca . it also reports loan status to nslds , and reports loans and loan status to consumer reporting agencies . in many instances , if a borrower becomes more than 360 days delinquent on his or her direct loan , the account is assigned to one of several pcas with which fsa has contracted to perform myriad debt resolution functions . these include determining whether a borrower account is eligible for administrative resolutions , such as loan discharge due to death or total and permanent disability ; attempting to obtain voluntary payment from a borrower by , for instance , negotiating reasonable repayment schedules with a borrower for potential loan rehabilitation ; and determining whether a borrower account is eligible for some involuntary payment methods , such as administrative wage garnishment . unlike with loan servicing , a variety of federal statutes and regulations dictate many facets of federal debt collection in general and ed debt collection , via pcas , specifically . for instance , the federal claims collections standards set forth the standards federal agencies use in the "collection , offset , compromise , and the suspension or termination of collection activity for civil claims for money , funds , or property," and ed regulations contain requirements that specifically pertain to debt collections undertaken by ed . in addition , the fair debt collections practices act prescribes standards that debt collectors in general must follow , which are intended to eliminate abusive debt collection practices . finally , fsa's contracts with pcas provide more detail than its contracts with federal loan servicers regarding specific tasks to be performed ; however , pcas are given some discretion to determine how to complete those tasks .