, the community participates in the nfip ) . a fully individualistic approach to flood risk would advocate that individuals and households should purchase adequate flood insurance to protect themselves against a major flood disaster . a more egalitarian approach could take the view that individuals do not necessarily have a free choice on whether or not they purchase flood insurance ( for example , residents of a community which does not participate in the nfip ) and that some individuals and households may not be able to afford sufficient coverage . in this case , the policy question is whether or not the federal government should step in after a disaster even if the victims do not have flood insurance . congress may allow these conflicting policies to continue and to retain the current difference between the amounts available from flood insurance and disaster assistance , or may consider proposals that would alter the balance between assistance and insurance . a significant amount of money is available to individuals and households through funding sources which are not available in all disasters , particularly through cdbg - dr. for example , homeowners in louisiana and mississippi could get grants of up to $150,000 after the 2005 hurricane season , as could homeowners in new jersey after hurricane sandy . rather than being funded through the annual appropriations process , statutory authority for cdbg - dr funding is provided via supplemental appropriations which are awarded by congress only in extraordinary circumstances that have resulted in significant unmet needs for long - term recovery . because congress has so far opted to use special appropriations to deliver cdbg - dr funds rather than establishing a permanent cdbg disaster recovery program , hud cannot create permanent regulations and guidance of how states should implement cdbg - dr grants . this may lead to delay and / or confusion in implementation , and may also subject program design decisions to local politics . unless the individual state required homeowners to purchase flood insurance , the recipients of cdbg - dr grants are exempt from the requirement to purchase flood insurance . given the unequal use of cdbg - dr , there may be an issue of equity in disaster housing assistance , where some disaster events receive an expanded form of federal assistance to meet housing needs in the form of cdbg , which can create different tiers of disaster housing assistance for declared disasters . nfip's authorization will expire on november 30 , 2018 . the availability of nfip insurance has impacts on other programs operated by fema and other agencies such as sba and hud . separately from , or in conjunction with , nfip reauthorization , the impacts on other programs may be useful to consider . ยง4001 et seq. ) other sources of disaster assistance are described in detail in the following crs reports ; however , this is not a comprehensive list of available disaster assistance following a flood , but rather a sampling of the most commonly used programs .