this section presents the two sides of this debate . a number of bills have been introduced and seen action in recent congresses that would impose additional regulatory impact analysis requirements on financial regulators , including bills that would impose more stringent cba requirements . examples include bills that would impose certain requirements on all agencies , including the financial regulators ; bills that address independent or financial regulators specifically ; and bills affecting only one financial regulator . congress likely will continue to face questions over what appropriate cba requirements for financial regulators should be . a reasoned and systematic examination of likely consequences of a regulation is a useful practice to ensure good and avoid bad regulation . however , calibrating requirements to reach this outcome is difficult . excessively lenient requirements could allow bad regulation to be implemented , because regulators could promulgate regulations without due consideration of their likely effects . in contrast , excessively stringent requirements could block good regulation from being implemented , because the time and resources required to perform the analysis could make the cost to regulators prohibitively high . the calibration is complicated by the difficulties and uncertainties involved in performing cba . additional lack of clarity is involved in financial regulation , because experts disagree over whether cba is especially difficult and uncertain in that field . these factors suggest that the question of what cba requirements financial regulators should face may not be easily settled . agencies are given this independence in part so that experts writing technical rules have some degree of insulation from political considerations . one aspect of these regulatory agencies' independence is that they are not subject to certain requirements that direct other agencies to perform cbas with certain parameters and executive review . some observers argue that this independence is appropriate and that subjecting financial regulators to increased requirements would inhibit implementing necessary , beneficial regulation . however , others argue that financial regulators should be subject to greater requirements to increase accountability . the debate has drawn increased attention in recent years as regulators promulgate and continue to promulgate rules mandated and authorized by the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l . in response , a number of bills in recent congresses have proposed increased requirements . this report examines issues related to financial regulators and cbas , including potential difficulties facing such regulators and methods available to them when preforming a cba ; the analytical requirements the agencies currently face ; and the arguments for and against increasing requirements on financial regulators . this report also briefly describes several examples of proposed legislation that would change the requirements facing financial regulators . cba can help ensure that regulators demonstrate that their decisions are based on an informed estimation of likely consequences during the development , issuance , and implementation of rules . in the analysis , economists and other experts use theory , modeling , statistical analysis , and other tools to estimate the likely outcomes if a particular regulation were to be implemented . these outcomes are compared with the likely outcomes if no regulation or a different regulation were implemented .