appendix a . current structure of the eitc there are eight formulas currently in effect to calculate the eitc ( four for unmarried individuals and four for married couples , depending on the number of children they have ) , illustrated in table a - 1 . for any of the eight formulas , the credit has three value ranges similar to those illustrated in figure a - 1 , for an unmarried taxpayer with one child . first , the credit increases to its maximum value from the first dollar of earnings until earnings reach the "earned income amount. over this "phase - in range" the credit value is equal to the credit rate multiplied by earnings . when earnings are between the "earned income amount" and the "phaseout threshold" — referred to as the "plateau" — the credit amount remains constant at its maximum level . for each dollar over the "phaseout threshold," the credit is reduced by the phaseout rate until the credit equals zero . this final range of income over which the credit falls in value is referred to as the "phaseout range. this provision was ultimately dropped in the conference committee . in addition , since the eitc was viewed in part as an alternative to cash welfare , it was generally targeted to the same recipients — single mothers with children . ( childless low - income adults would not receive the eitc until the 1990s , discussed subsequently. ) the credit was extended several times before being made permanent by the revenue act of 1978 ( p.l . some policymakers were interested in alternatives to cash welfare for the poor . some welfare reform proposals relied on the "negative income tax" ( nit ) concept . the nit proposals would have provided a guaranteed income to families who had no earnings ( the "income guarantee" that was part of these proposals ) . for families with earnings , the nit would have been gradually reduced as earnings increased . influenced by the idea of a nit , president nixon proposed in 1971 the "family assistance plan" ( fap ) that "would have helped working - poor families with children by means of a federal minimum cash guarantee. senator russell long , then chairman of the senate finance committee , did not support fap because it provided "its largest benefits to those without earnings" and would , in his opinion , discourage people from working . instead , senator long proposed a "work bonus" plan that would supplement the wages of poor workers . senator long stated that his proposed "work bonus plan" was "a dignified way" to help poor americans "whereby the more he [or she] works the more he [or she] gets. senator long also believed his "work bonus plan" would "prevent the social security tax from taking away from the poor and low - income earners the money they need for support of their families. the "work bonus plan" proposal was passed by the senate in 1972 , 1973 , and 1974 , but the house did not pass it until 1975 . the "work bonus plan" was renamed the earned income tax credit and was enacted on a temporary basis as part of the tax reduction act of 1975 ( p.l .