, 1 st sess. ( see figure 9 . ) supporters of pharmaceutical advertising say it contributes to more informed consumers who then visit their doctors and become more involved in their own treatment , leading to better and earlier diagnosis of undertreated illnesses . critics say the industry's presentation of the balance of drug benefit and risk information may encourage inappropriate prescribing of advertised products and ultimately may lead to higher drug spending . ( see " what are u.s. states doing to address drug costs ? price transparency legislation assumes that research and development costs are , or should be , a main factor used by drugmakers in setting prices . several studies of specific drugs indicate that research cost was not a primary factor in pricing . a 2015 senate finance committee investigation of gilead pharmaceutical's hepatitis c drugs sovaldi and harvoni found that gilead's research and development costs , and its expected return for buying pharmasset , inc. , which originally developed the products , "were not key considerations in determining the pricing of these drugs. gilead's "own documents and correspondence show its pricing strategy was focused on maximizing revenue — even as the company's analysis showed a lower price would allow more patients to be treated. similarly , an examination of the pfizer breast cancer drug ibrance found the main factors used by pfizer to set the drug's list price were the price of existing drugs in the same therapeutic category , likely reimbursement from insurance companies and federal programs and feedback from prescribers . the united states is one of two nations ( along with new zealand ) that allow direct - to - consumer ( dtc ) advertising of prescription drugs . congress has given fda the authority to regulate dtc ads to ensure they are not false or misleading , fairly balance the benefits and risks of the specific drugs , and contain facts relevant to a drug's intended uses . under current law , businesses , including pharmaceutical companies , may take a federal tax deduction for advertising expenses . advertising expenditures generally are treated as ordinary and necessary business expenses in the tax code and can be fully deducted in the year they are incurred . dtc advertising is just one facet of the industry's promotion efforts . ( see " what is behind the recent volatility in retail drug spending ? at the same time , fewer brand - name drugs have lost patent protection than in previous years , which has meant lower savings from new generic substitutes . the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) forecasts that retail drug spending could average 6.3% annual growth from 2017 to 2026 . although that growth rate would be a reduction from recent , more rapid levels , cms expects retail drug spending to increase faster than other areas of medical spending in this 10-year period . this report will address frequently asked questions about government and private - sector policies that affect drug prices and availability . among the prescription drug topics covered are federally funded research and development , regulation of direct - to - consumer advertising , legal restrictions on reimportation , and federal price negotiation .