sinclair is also the largest producer of local news in the country . for example , sinclair's connect to congress initiative provides sinclair's local television news anchors the ability to interview members of congress remotely via sinclair's news bureau in washington , dc . in the national market , a firm owning stations in many local markets may be better positioned to bargain with large advertisers such as automobile manufacturers and retail chains . stations may purchase rights to programming from television and movie studios and sports leagues . section 257 ( b ) of the act directs the fcc to promote policies favoring the diversity of media voices and vigorous economic competition . this report provides background on the market structure and economic situation of the u.s. television industry . it then discusses the specific matters the federal communications commission ( fcc ) and the antitrust division of the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) must examine in reviewing sinclair's proposal to purchase tribune . this report includes maps showing the television markets affected by the proposed transaction , detailed information about joint agreements to which sinclair and tribune are parties , and a chronology of key fcc actions related to broadcast station ownership that set the stage for sinclair's acquisition offer . sinclair broadcast group is currently one of the largest broadcast television groups in the united states . in reviewing the proposed sinclair - tribune media transaction , the fcc is to examine whether it is consistent with the commission's local media ownership rules . the fcc has distinct sets of rules governing ownership of multiple media outlets in a single market . these include , but are not limited to , ( 1 ) local radio ownership rules ; ( 2 ) radio / television cross - ownership rules ; and ( 3 ) local television ownership rules ( known as the television duopoly rules ) . sinclair reported more than $2.7 billion in total revenues in 2016 . as of june 2017 , sinclair owned and / or operated 173 television stations in 81 local television markets . in addition , sinclair owns four radio stations , two broadcast networks ( tbd and comet ) , and the tennis channel cable network . on june 30 , 2017 , the fcc's media bureau , acting under delegated authority from chairman ajit pai , approved sinclair's acquisition of 14 stations in eight television markets from bonten media group . as part of the transaction , sinclair agreed to take over five agreements under which bonten shares services with four stations it does not own . as of the publication date of this report , the bonten transaction was awaiting approval of federal antitrust authorities . if it is completed without divestitures , sinclair would own 187 television broadcast stations in 89 local markets , and would be a party to 60 shared services agreements with stations it does not own . to minimize such behavior , the fcc has developed attribution rules "to identify those interests in or relationships to licensees that confer a degree of influence or control such that the holders have a realistic potential to affect the programming decisions of licensees or other core operating functions.