a related bill , h.r . 4417 , has been introduced in the house . the senate also passed s. 129 , which would reauthorize the national sea grant program and make funds available for hab research through that program . the bill would authorize grants for university research on several targeted topics , including "the biology , prevention , and forecasting of harmful algal blooms. a related bill , h.r . epa , states , and their partners are working to identify and restore waterbodies that are affected by habs and the excess nutrients that contribute to their formation . congress has passed legislation to help drive and fund research efforts and improve collaboration among the many federal agencies involved in hab - related activities . moving forward , congress may be interested in oversight of the administration's efforts to implement habhrca and other hab - related authorities . while congress , federal agencies , and states are taking steps to address habs , many observers assert that further action is needed to make progress that outpaces the growing consequences of nutrient pollution . most observers agree that further research is needed to understand the most appropriate way to predict , minimize , and suppress hab outbreaks , including whether and how to regulate algal toxins . these advocates assert that congress should ensure that adequate funding is available for such research . to control habs , some advocate for regulation of nonpoint source pollution , arguing that point sources are disproportionately regulated and that nonpoint sources are the larger contributors to nutrient pollution . instead of regulation , some argue that epa and other federal agencies should continue to focus on collaborative , voluntary watershed - level efforts to address nonpoint source pollution that contributes to hab formation and that congress should ensure that financial assistance for these efforts continues . controlling nonpoint sources of excess nutrients that contribute to hab formation is challenging . they are diffuse and pervasive and often attributable to many sources and activities rather than a single cause . yet , scientists generally agree that the current trends in overenriched waters and hab events cannot be corrected without addressing nonpoint source nutrient pollution in a significant way and that controlling point sources alone is not enough . given the consequences of habs and the difficulty in controlling nonpoint sources of the nutrients that contribute to their formation , challenges and issues associated with habs are likely to remain of interest to congress . record rainfalls and an impending hurricane season prompted the u.s. army corps of engineers to release water from the lake into rivers and estuaries in an attempt to keep the lake from overflowing . the releases occurred at a time when a lake - wide hab was forming , allowing nutrients and algae to move downstream , eventually reaching area beaches and requiring beach closures and cleanups that had substantial impacts on the local and state economy . the following text box summarizes some of these key research areas . congressional interest in habs has largely focused on funding further research and coordinating the efforts of federal agencies and their partners to study and address habs .