appendix a . comparative charts of individuals named as members or attendees of nsc and / or pc meetings table a - 1 depicts the membership of the nsc , from the reagan administration through the trump administration . decisionmaking committees . coordinating and managing u.s. national security affairs requires routine coordination and discussion among relevant departments and agencies . most administrations have therefore set up a hierarchical system of committees designed to discuss , and when appropriate decide , national security matters . these committees meet as frequently as the white house deems necessary . the design and composition of the committee structure is the prerogative of the president , but the approach has often included some variant of the following: the principals committee ( pc ) is a level below the nsc , convened by the national security advisor . the pc does not need to include all statutory nsc members , but it generally includes the heads of departments or agencies involved with the subject matter being discussed at a given meeting . the deputies committee ( dc ) is convened by the deputy national security advisor , and generally includes the deputy heads of departments ( i.e. , the deputy secretary of defense or deputy secretary of state ) involved with the subject matter being discussed at a given meeting . policy coordination committee s ( pcc ) are established by the deputies committee and are responsible for day - to - day management of national security matters on a given region or topic at the assistant secretary level from relevant agencies . these are chaired by members of the national security staff whose subject matter portfolios are relevant to the issue at hand . different administrations have used various titles for these committees ; under president obama , this forum was called the interagency policy committee . overall , the nsc and its supporting processes and institutions are designed to be flexible , thereby affording the president maximum latitude to create a security advisory body that suits his unique decisionmaking style . apart from appropriating the nsc annual budget , congress has little oversight over the executive office of the president , and the national security council system in particular , due to the fact that most national security positions within the white house itself ( as opposed to the senior levels of departments and agencies ) are not currently subject to the advice and consent of the senate . some observers over the years have argued that the position of national security adviser should be subject to senate confirmation and available to testify before congressional committees , as are officials from other government departments and agencies . others argue that the president is entitled to confidential advice from his immediate staff . on april 4 , 2017 , the trump administration issued national security presidential memorandum ( nspm ) - 4: organization of the national security council , the homeland security council , and subcommittees . nspm - 4 details how the executive branch intends to manage and coordinate national and homeland security issues among relevant departments and agencies .