costs . the costs associated with government regulation — rulemaking , supervision , and enforcement — are frequently referred to as regulatory burden . regulatory requirements often are imposed on providers of financial services , so financial institutions frequently are the focus of discussions about regulatory burden . but costs associated with regulation can flow through the providers and ultimately be borne , in part , by different entities , including consumers , the government , and the economy at large . for example , a provider may respond to increased regulatory burden by raising the prices it charges to customers . if regulatory burden reduces the long - term availability of credit , it would have a negative effect on business investment and economic growth . regulatory burden may manifest itself in different forms . operating costs are the costs the company must bear to adhere to the regulation , such as employee training . some regulations create one - time operating costs borne up front , whereas other regulations create recurring costs that exist as long as the requirement is in effect . opportunity costs are the costs associated with foregone business opportunities because of additional regulation . for example , a lender may make fewer mortgages because new regulations make mortgage lending more expensive , and that lender may instead perform a different type of lending that is now more profitable . trade - o ffs . regulatory relief may face trade - offs between reducing regulatory burden and potentially reducing the benefits of regulation . the trade - offs are not limited to the effects on the direct recipients of relief — usually the providers of financial services — but may extend to the effects on consumers , investors , particular markets , and market stability more broadly . the presence of regulatory burden does not necessarily mean that a regulation is undesirable or should be repealed . a regulation can have benefits that could outweigh its costs , but the presence of costs means , tautologically , that the regulation causes regulatory burden . the concept of regulatory burden can be contrasted with the phrase unduly burdensome . whereas regulatory burden is about the costs associated with a regulation , unduly burdensome refers to the balance between benefits and costs . for example , some would consider a regulation to be unduly burdensome if costs are in excess of benefits or the same benefits could be achieved at a lower cost . however , the presence of regulatory burden does not mean that all regulations are unduly burdensome . policymakers consider these trade - offs and evaluate the broader effects of regulation that could be either positive or negative , such as how a requirement would impact innovation , the price of credit , and the availability of credit . for example , efforts to protect consumers against potential actions taken by banks may drive up the cost for a bank to provide certain services and may result in that activity migrating to a less regulated part of the financial system or to foreign jurisdictions with lower regulatory standards . however , trade - offs are not always present .