more information on the hhf is available on treasury's website . this funding was allocated to selected states through five rounds of funding . the fifth round took place in 2016 after congress authorized treasury to allocate additional unused tarp funds to the program . round one: in february 2010 , treasury made a total of $1.5 billion available to five states that had experienced the greatest declines in home prices as of december 2009: california , arizona , florida , nevada , and michigan . round two: in march 2010 , treasury made a total of $600 million available to five states that had large proportions of their populations living in areas of economic distress , defined as counties with average unemployment rates above 12% in 2009: north carolina , ohio , oregon , rhode island , and south carolina . ( the five states that received funding in the first round were not eligible. ) round three: in august 2010 , treasury made a total of $2 billion available to 17 states and the district of columbia , all of which had unemployment rates at or above the national average between june 2009 and june 2010 . nine of the states that received funds through one of the previous rounds ( all but arizona ) also received funding in the third round . the states that received funding for the first time in the third round were alabama , georgia , illinois , indiana , kentucky , mississippi , new jersey , tennessee , and the district of columbia . round four: in september 2010 , treasury provided a total of $3.5 billion to the 19 states ( including dc ) that had received funding in earlier rounds . a total of $7.6 billion was provided to states through the first four rounds . in early 2016 , after congress authorized treasury to provide an additional $2 billion in tarp funds to the program , treasury allocated this amount to participating states through two phases: round 5 , phase 1: in february 2016 , treasury allocated $1 billion to participating states based on their population and utilization of previous hhf funds . states had to have used at least 50% of the hhf funding they previously received to be eligible for this funding . each participating state except alabama received additional funding in this phase . ( alabama had not used 50% of its previously allocated hhf funds. ) round 5 , phase 2: in april 2016 , treasury allocated $1 billion competitively to participating states . all but six participating states received additional funds through this phase . five states did not apply for funding ( alabama , arizona , florida , nevada , and south carolina ) , while one state ( georgia ) applied but did not receive any funding . hhf funds are provided to state housing finance agencies ( hfas ) to use for designing programs that address foreclosures and are tailored to local conditions . for example , a state that had experienced steep decreases in house prices might choose to use funds to reduce the principal balances of certain mortgages , while a state experiencing high unemployment might want to use funds to provide temporary mortgage assistance to unemployed homeowners .