appendix a . craig dorrans , program manager of pma - 205 at the naval air systems command says crews for the boeing p - 8a poseidon , the replacement for the p - 3 , will probably be able to perform as much as 70% of their training in a toft . the p - 8a is based on the boeing 737-800 , allowing the military to leverage commercial simulation capabilities already developed . training for fire scout pilots is already moving to 100% synthetic training . "we're looking at 100% simulation to train aircrew for the fire scout and mq - 4 triton," dorrans says . is a study warranted at this time to further consolidate pilot training ? given the ramp - up in f - 35a purchases , additional kc - 46 lots , and development of the b - 21 bomber , what is the impact of a fourth major defense acquisition program to the usaf budget ? should the training fleet be recapitalized sooner to accommodate the increase in the number of fifth - generation platforms ? considering that the winning bid was less than 50% of the air force's projected cost , can boeing execute the program on time and within budget ? air force pilot training how does the usaf produce pilots ? the usaf uses a deliberate , competitive process to select pilot candidates . once chosen , candidates undergo a lengthy academic and flight training program . pilot candidate selection the usaf pilot selection process begins with a battery of academic and psychomotor tests ; candidates must also meet flight physical requirements and anthropometric standards . the usaf uses a pilot candidate selection method ( pcsm ) tool to predict the ability of a prospective candidate to complete pilot training . the pcsm score is a combination of performance on the test of basic aviation skills ( tbas ) and air force officer qualifying test ( afoqt ) and the total number of flying hours the candidate has already accumulated from civilian flight training . a pilot selection board , composed of senior usaf aviators , uses the pcsm score along with other whole - person concept factors to select candidate pilots . according to some researchers , higher scores on the pcsm may predict greater probability of successfully completing training ; reduced flight hours needed to complete training ; a higher class rank ; and greater likelihood of being fighter aircraft qualified . the tbas is a computerized psychomotor test to measure a candidate's motor skills , cognitive aptitude , and attitude toward risk . the candidate manipulates a joystick , throttle , and rudder pedals to accomplish tasks to measure directional orientation , listening skills , horizontal tracking , aircraft tracking , and combining all actions at once . the afoqt is a standardized test similar to the scholastic aptitude test . it measures applicants' aptitudes for various officer commissioning programs and includes a specific portion dedicated to measuring aptitude for pilot and combat systems officer career fields . regardless of the desired field , the afoqt is mandatory for application for a commission in the usaf . the afoqt has been used for officer selection since 1957 and has been updated about every seven years .