other roads must meet state standards . all bridge projects using federal funds must meet the standards set forth in the aashto bridge design specifications . there is at least one division office in each state . the level of staffing at these offices might be greatly reduced depending on the degree to which project oversight responsibilities are reduced or eliminated . however , fhwa would continue to have responsibility for some programs and projects , as well as certain inspection and safety activities . the agency would need to determine whether district offices would be necessary to conduct these activities . the need for the federal transit administration's roughly 550 full - time - equivalent positions would depend on the extent to which congress retains a federal role in public transportation . congress and the administration would also face a determination of what , if any , role the federal government would have in transportation planning . current federal law sets planning requirements that must be met at the state and regional levels to receive federal funds for transportation and certain other activities . for example , each state must maintain a state transportation improvement plan , and federal funds may be used only for projects listed in the plan . federal law requires the participation of many stakeholders in the planning process , public notification of certain actions , identification of state and regional goals , and development of short - and long - range state and metropolitan plans . metropolitan planning organizations ( mpos ) exist primarily because of federal planning requirements . devolution legislation might need to address whether federal mandates for state and metropolitan planning would continue and , if so , how they might be changed in view of the diminished federal role in surface transportation . the states would have to determine how they would respond to devolution of responsibility for public transportation . in most states , the bulk of public transportation activities are conducted by local governments or by special - purpose authorities established by the legislature , rather than directly by the state government . states might need to create new mechanisms for overseeing and funding public transportation if the federal government were to retreat from those roles . these transfers have shifted a total of $143.6 billion to the htf . the last $70 billion of these transfers were authorized in the fixing america's surface transportation act ( fast act ; p.l . 114-94 ) , which was signed by president barack obama on december 4 , 2015 . the fast act funds federal surface transportation programs from fy2016 through fy2020 . when the act expires , the de facto policy of relying on general fund transfers to sustain the htf will be 12 years old . opposition to raising the federal fuels tax rates has left the rates unchanged since 1993 . the taxes have lost roughly 40% of their purchasing power since then . figure 1 shows the trust fund's financial outlook . the gap between tax revenues coming into the htf and outlays from the fund is projected to widen . the general fund transfers authorized under the fast act will fill this gap through fy2020 .