the united states and uk have had minimal trade frictions . however , the uk notably has been a part of the long - running u.s. - eu dispute in the wto over subsidies to boeing and airbus . this action triggered the two - year article 50 exit process under the treaty on european union . in recent years , u.s. and uk majority - owned multinational enterprises ( mnes ) have employed over 2 million employees combined at their subsidiaries in each other's markets . in 2015 , u.s. - uk fdi totaled $1.2 trillion , composed of $682 billion of u.s. outbound fdi and $556 billion of inbound fdi to the united states . the uk ranked as the second - largest destination for u.s. fdi abroad ( the netherlands being the largest ) , and the largest source of fdi in the united states ( ahead of japan ) . a number of industries stand out in the u.s. - uk investment relationship , notably finance and insurance , "professional , scientific , and technical" services , and manufacturing ( particularly chemicals , transportation , equipment , and primary and fabricated metals ) . congress also would face a decision on future implementing legislation for a u.s. - uk fta to enter into force . an fta could receive expedited legislative consideration if congress determines that it advances trade negotiating objectives in tpa and meets tpa's other requirements , including for the president to notify and consult with congress on the status and content of the negotiations . the united states and the uk have a deep , extensive economic relationship . u.s. firms , large and small , are involved in u.s. - uk trade , directly and as a part of integrated supply chains . in 2016 , u.s. goods and services exports to the uk totaled about $121 billion , and u.s. goods and services imports from the uk reached $107 billion , yielding a $15 billion u.s. trade surplus ( figure 1 ) . in terms of the eu , the uk accounted for about one - fifth of u.s. total trade with the eu - 28 , making it the united states' second - largest trading partner within the eu after germany . globally , in goods trade , the uk ranked as the united states' fifth - largest export destination and seventh - largest source of imports . top u.s. goods exports to the uk include civilian aircraft and parts , nonmonetary gold bullion ( bulk gold before coining ) , pharmaceutical products , and art . top u.s. imports from the uk include machines and machinery , motor vehicles , and pharmaceutical products . the uk is the united states' largest services trading partner , accounting for close to one - tenth of u.s. total trade in services and spanning sectors such as financial services , tourism , education , and business services . the united states is the uk's largest food and agricultural trading partner outside the eu for both exports and imports . while the u.s. - uk trade is significant and stands out in particular sectors , it is outweighed by u.s. trade with the rest of the eu ( figure 2 ) .