as the following sections explain , all infrastructure investments are not the same . government spending is divided into consumption expenditures and investments . infrastructure is beneficial for both businesses and households and for the economy broadly . for businesses , infrastructure can help to lower fixed costs of production , especially transportation costs , which are often a central determinant of where businesses are located . for households , a wide variety of final goods and services are provided through infrastructure services , such as water , energy , and telecommunications . ; ( 2 ) equipment ( computers , military hardware , etc .

 ) ; and ( 3 ) intellectual property ( software , research and development , etc. ) infrastructure benefits the economy overall , as it allows more goods and services to be produced with the same level of inputs , fostering long - term economic growth . investment is generally recorded in two alternative ways , which can present different perspectives on overall investment . first , bea reports the annual flow of funds spent by the government on investment projects . however , because the results of these investments tend to produce value for many years at a time , bea also tracks the total value of all investments that are still productive , which is often referred to as the "total stock of investments. bea tracks the total value of all government investments by estimating the stock of productive capital and increasing the capital stock when new funds are invested and decreasing the capital stock over time as projects deteriorate , or depreciate . the overall capital stock will either increase or decrease over time depending on the size of the flow of investment funds relative to the depreciation of the capital stock . federal , state , and local governments share the cost of infrastructure investments , with the majority of direct spending coming from state and local governments . the federal government contributes to infrastructure investments in the form of direct spending , grants to state and local governments , loan guarantees , and preferential tax treatment . due to the ambiguous definition of infrastructure , tracking government spending on infrastructure investments can often be difficult . the remainder of this report focuses on the ways in which additional infrastructure investments affect economic output and employment . one of the more comprehensive sources of data on government investment in infrastructure is the bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) , which tracks government spending and investment in various areas . consumption expenditures consist of spending by the government to produce and provide goods and services to the public , such as paying census workers to survey households . by contrast , investment spending consists of government spending on fixed assets , or capital , used to benefit the public for more than one year , such as roads , bridges , computers , and government buildings . investment is then further divided into three categories: ( 1 ) structures , which include many of the classic examples of infrastructure ( water systems , highways , bridges , etc .

 ) this report largely focuses on structures , as this most closely aligns with the types of infrastructure cited by policymakers .