payment is made to the seller of the automobile . a veteran may be eligible for adaptive equipment for up to two automobiles during a four - year period . payments for adaptive equipment may be made to either the seller or the veteran up to maximum amounts set periodically by the veterans health administration . for example , the current maximum amount payable for an automatic transmission is $1,363.00 . a veteran with a service - connected disability is eligible for an annual clothing allowance if because of the disability he or she wears or uses a prosthetic or orthopedic appliance , including a wheelchair , which the va determines is likely to damage the veteran's clothing ; or uses a prescription skin medication that the va determines causes irreparable damage to the veteran's outergarments . a veteran is eligible for one annual clothing allowance if he or she uses one type of device or medication . a veteran may be eligible for more than one annual clothing allowance if he or she uses multiple devices or medications and multiple outergarments are subject to damage , or one type of outergarment is subject to an increased rate of damage due to the use of multiple devices or medications . the current clothing allowance is $779.62 and is payable on august 1 of each year . the clothing allowance is not automatically adjusted for annual increases in the cost - of - living . however , generally , legislation is enacted annually to increase the clothing allowance using the social security cola . a veteran with a service - connected disability , even if rated at 0% , who is in good health may apply for service - disabled veterans insurance ( s - dvi ) life insurance within two years of receiving a disability rating from the va. good health is defined by regulation as being free from any medical condition that would likely weaken the person's normal physical or mental functions or shorten his or her life . s - dvi provides a variety of term and permanent life insurance plans to eligible veterans . s - dvi policies have maximum face value of $10,000 and do not pay dividends . insurance premiums vary by age and type of plan . totally disabled veterans are eligible to have their premiums waived . a veteran under the age of 65 and eligible for an s - dvi premium waiver may also purchase $30,000 in supplemental coverage if he or she applies within one - year of receiving the premium waiver . s - dvi may be paid in the case of a veteran who did not apply for insurance during the two - year eligibility period due to mental incompetence and who dies before a guardian is appointed or within two - years of such appointment ( referred to as gratuitous s - dvi ) . table 1 summarizes the programs discussed in this report . as the table shows , the programs vary in both funding levels and the number of beneficiaries served . veterans disability compensation ( vdc ) is a monthly cash payment to a veteran with a service - connected disability .