exploiting vulnerabilities is one such tool . in exploiting vulnerabilities , law enforcement may take one of two broad paths to gain access to devices and information . there have been reports of such hacking for more than a decade . can nits introduce unintended weaknesses into the target machines / servers ? can they ( and how often do they ) unintentionally collect information beyond the scope of the intended target information ? within the broader going dark debate , "lawful hacking is often posited as an alternative to encryption regulation. some experts have suggested that the u.s. government should continue to support strengthening encryption and simultaneously give law enforcement resources to bolster their capabilities to conduct investigations in an environment of evolving technology and strong encryption . some have also noted that "if the executive branch is unable to successfully develop lawful hacking tools to address a sufficient amount of the need for government access to communications to meet the expectations of the general public , it becomes dramatically more likely that it will feel compelled to seek comprehensive legislative solutions mandating exceptional access. these hacking tools may include exploits for both publicly known and zero - day vulnerabilities . the ability of law enforcement to take advantage of publicly known vulnerabilities may drive the conversation on going dark . if law enforcement is readily able to exploit these vulnerabilities , the question of whether it is going dark becomes less relevant . however , if law enforcement cannot take advantage of known vulnerabilities ( for whatever reason ) , the question remains of whether it is being outpaced by the speed and strength of technology . law enforcement's use of zero - day vulnerabilities ( those that it would submit to the vulnerabilities equities process ) , however , is a different issue . one question is whether the vep , or any potential changes to the process , could affect law enforcement's reported going dark challenges . if the vep generally results in disclosure of vulnerabilities , law enforcement might have a more limited timeframe in which it may develop exploits for , and take advantage of , a given vulnerability . on the other hand , if disclosure results in vendors patching these holes , malicious actors may be less likely to detect and exploit the vulnerabilities . law enforcement may acquire knowledge of vulnerabilities through a number of means ; this information may be publicly available ( such as that included in the national vulnerability database ) , obtained from a hacker or vulnerabilities marketplace , or discovered . law enforcement may obtain exploits to take advantage of these vulnerabilities by purchasing them off - the - shelf ( which may not be useful to law enforcement who need to customize them for legal use ) , including from an online marketplace . they may also develop exploits ( or contract an outside entity to develop them ) tailored to suit specific law enforcement needs . yet another unknown regarding the acquisition of zero - day vulnerabilities or exploits is whether other entities have or will discover the same vulnerability .