there is no fha income limit . for example , although the fha program is sometimes considered to be self - funding , with borrowers and / or lenders paying fees to cover the costs of the insurance or guarantees , a dministrative and other operating costs are appropriated by congress . the government also faces the risk that the programs' fees will not cover costs and could result in a transfer from the government . ( in economic terms , to the extent that the fees do not cover the government's costs , the programs are subsidized. ) the fha , the va , and the usda programs present a risk that their reserves will be insufficient and require additional funds from congress . the gses were designed to be nongovernmental entities with no budget impact . observers argued that the gses' charters created an implicit federal guarantee that if the gses were unable to honor their guarantee of timely payment of principal and interest , the federal government would make the payments . this amounts to insurance for which the federal government does not receive payment . since september 2008 , the gses have been in conservatorship , and treasury has provided $187 billion in support to them . as previously noted , a key aspect of the programs' costs is the size of each program's loan limits . higher loan limits may have the effect of increasing financial risk to the federal government , both because they can lead to the government insuring or guaranteeing larger individual mortgages and because they may increase the overall number of mortgages backed by the federal government , as more borrowers may qualify for and seek out these types of mortgages . however , the extent to which overall risk to the government is actually increased will also depend on a variety of additional factors , including the credit quality of the mortgages insured . some policymakers argue that the federal government ( i.e. , fha , fannie mae , and freddie mac ) is currently playing too large of a role in the mortgage market . these policymakers would like to take steps to reduce the federal government's role while increasing the role of private capital . in rural areas , it can be difficult to find similar homes that have been sold recently . this can make rural housing more risky to lenders , and the usda housing programs are designed to either assume that risk by making mortgages to homeowners or reduce the risk to lenders by insuring mortgages . in addition , the usda mortgage programs complement the usda's rural development program , which benefits less - developed rural areas by supporting a wide range of essential rural services such as housing , economic development , and health care . a general case for loan limits is made by some who argue that a case can be made for providing assistance in purchasing basic shelter , but the case is much weaker ( or nonexistent ) for aiding the purchase of upscale housing . the following sections summarize the limit on the dollar amount of a mortgage that is eligible for each of these programs .