sec . 130 of the continuing appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l . 114-223 ) included specific authority for dhs to obligate resources provided under the continuing resolution in a revised cas , and the trump administration's supplemental appropriations request for fy2017 indicated that the administration was continuing to organize dhs funding on that basis . division f of p.l . 115-31 provided appropriations under a revised cas for all dhs components except the u.s. coast guard , which has faced a series of challenges in updating its financial management systems . congress will consider whether the new cas provides the improved transparency it sought , whether the new ppa structure is sufficiently detailed , and also whether and how to integrate the coast guard into the new structures in the coming years . [author name scrubbed] , specialist in homeland security policy and appropriations ( [email address scrubbed] , [phone number scrubbed] ) for additional information , see crs report r42753 , dhs headquarters consolidation project: issues for congress . the department of homeland security's headquarters footprint occupies more than 7 million square feet of office space in about 50 separate locations in the greater washington , dc , area . this is largely a legacy of how the department was assembled in a short period of time from 22 separate federal agencies which were themselves spread across the national capital region . the fragmentation of headquarters is cited by the department as a major contributor to inefficiencies , including time lost shuttling staff between headquarters elements ; additional security , real estate , and administrative costs ; and reduced cohesion among the components that make up the department . to unify the department's headquarters functions , the department approved a $3.4 billion master plan to create a new dhs headquarters on the grounds of st. elizabeths in anacostia . according to gsa , this is the largest federal office construction since the pentagon was built during world war ii . $1.4 billion of this project was to be funded through the dhs budget , and $2 billion through the gsa . thus far a total of over $2.5 billion has been appropriated for the project — $759 million for dhs and $1,548 million to gsa through fy2016 . phase 1a of the project — a new coast guard headquarters facility — has been completed with the funding already provided by congress and is now in use . in 2013 , a revised construction schedule was developed , projecting lower levels of appropriations and a longer timeline for the project . under the new projection , the project would be completed in fy2026 at a cost of $4.5 billion . the project was criticized by gao in september 2014 for not conforming to certain leading practices for capital decisionmaking processes . dhs and gsa revised its plans as a result of similar observations by gao and other critics , announcing a new plan that would be completed in fy2021 , and cost $3.7 billion . according to gsa , even with the cost increases from delaying funding , the project would still result in over $430 million in projected savings compared to leasing over the next 30 years .