bat . the first limitation of existing empirical evidence is that uncertainty in the timing of exchange rate responses to border tax adjustments may make it difficult to empirically isolate the "true response" to a given policy . for example , exchange rates may respond to a bat upon enactment as the shift from proposal to law induces behavioral changes . however , exchange rates may also respond before enactment if individuals and firms are forward looking and try to capitalize on any opportunities in foreign exchange markets . moreover , market participants may not fully respond to the new tax until its mechanics are understood after implementation , allowing for further responses after enactment . second , implementation of border - adjusted taxes elsewhere has often been accompanied by other changes in tax and spending policies . in those cases , any exchange - rate evaluation of the border - adjusted tax may require estimation or assumptions of the economic response to other policy changes . this adds an additional layer of difficulty and uncertainty in isolating exchange - rate and trade - balance responses to a border adjustment . third , some recent implementations of border adjustment have been in countries with economies that have a smaller global impact than that of the united states . that difference could change the likelihood or degree to which potential sources of interference with full exchange - rate adjustment take effect in each case . for instance , exchange - rate changes may have a significant impact in countries whose debt is denominated in u.s. dollars but with assets in their own currencies , which could have subsequent effects on financial markets . other potential obstacles to full exchange - rate adjustment do not depend on the size of the economy and would be unaffected by this distinction . finally , some recent introductions and modifications of vats have occurred in economies where the local currency is fixed against another currency ( in some cases the dollar ) . these countries are described as having fixed exchange rates and cannot be used to evaluate border adjustments because the adjustment mechanism for trade flows is not possible . even countries that do not fix their currency may have exchange rates that are less flexible due to currency unions and international trading patterns . a notable example of this is in the set of countries that use the euro ( which include many oecd countries mentioned below ) , which would limit exchange rate responses to border adjustments in those countries since a large portion of their trade is likely conducted with countries that use the same currency . the existing literature includes some studies that are broadly supportive of a full and timely exchange - rate response to vats . de mooij and keen ( 2013 ) used data for 30 organization for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) countries from 1965 through 2009 to estimate the effect of vats on trade balances . the authors made adjustments to address potential complicating factors in the estimation process , including separation of countries into categories based on the flexibility of their exchange rates .