each of those components is described in further detail below . a sequester provides for the enforcement of budgetary limits established in law through the automatic cancellation of previously enacted spending . this cancellation of spending makes largely across - the - board reductions to nonexempt programs , activities , and accounts . a sequester is implemented through a sequestration order issued by the president as required by law . the purpose of a sequester is to enforce certain statutory budget requirements—either to discourage congress from enacting legislation violating a specific budgetary goal or to encourage congress to enact legislation that would fulfill a specific budgetary goal . one of the authors of the law that first employed the sequester recently stated , "it was never the objective ... to trigger the sequester ; the objective ... was to have the threat of the sequester force compromise and action. as mentioned above , sequestration is currently used as the enforcement mechanism for policies established in the bca: for the discretionary spending limits , a sequester will occur only if appropriations are enacted that exceed either the defense or nondefense discretionary limits . in such a case , sequestration is generally enforced when omb issues a final sequestration report within 15 calendar days after the end of a session of congress . in addition , a separate sequester may be triggered if the enactment of appropriations causes a breach in the discretionary limits during the second and third quarter of the fiscal year . in such an event , sequestration would take place 15 days after the enactment of the appropriation . if the enactment of appropriations causes the discretionary spending limits to be breached in the last quarter of the fiscal year , the spending limit for the following fiscal year for that category must be reduced by the amount of the breach . as mentioned above , the bca requires reductions to these discretionary spending limits annually . these reductions are to be calculated by omb and included annually in the omb sequestration preview report to the president and congress , which is to be issued with the president's annual budget submission . the reductions would then apply to the discretionary spending limits for the budget year corresponding to the president's submission . while these reductions are often referred to as a sequester , they are not a sequester per se because they do not make automatic , across - the - board cuts to programs . instead , they lower the spending limits , allowing congress the discretion to develop legislation within the reduced limits . a sequester of nonexempt mandatory spending programs will take place each year through fy2029 . these levels are also calculated by omb and are included in the annual omb report to congress on the joint committee reductions , which is also to be issued with the president's budget submission . the sequester does not occur , however , until the beginning of the upcoming fiscal year . legislation has been enacted making changes to the spending limits or enforcement procedures included in the bca for each year from fy2013 through fy2021 . some of the most significant of these changes are the following: the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra ; p.l .