the house - passed version of h.r . 1628 , the american health care act of 2017 ( ahca ) , would include significant changes to the medicaid program . the bill would , among other things , phase out the enhanced matching for the aca medicaid expansion and convert medicaid financing for most groups to a per capita cap model , which would subject federal payments to states to aggregate limits measured by the number of enrollees in the states' plans . additionally , the bill would allow states to impose work requirements on non - disabled , non - elderly , non - pregnant individuals . under this proposal , states could elect to require those beneficiaries to engage in work activities as a condition of continued eligibility under medicaid . work activities would be defined to be the same as those employment - related requirements imposed on tanf recipients . the house of representatives passed the ahca , including this provision on work requirements , on may 4 , 2017 . additionally , the better care reconciliation act ( bcra ) , a senate draft amendment in the nature of a substitute to h.r . 1628 , was recently published by the senate committee on the budget for possible consideration . similar to the ahca , the most current version of the bcra , as posted on the senate budget committee website on june 26 , 2017 , would make fundamental changes to the medicaid program . the senate draft amendment would , among other things , terminate the enhanced funding for the aca medicaid expansion population and establish a per enrollee limit on federal payments to states for most groups , but in a manner that differs from the house - passed bill in certain respects . the bcra also includes a work requirement that is almost identical to the provision in the ahca . should either of these proposals be enacted into law , states would have the option of imposing work requirements that conform to the federal standards without obtaining authority pursuant to a demonstration project under ssa section 1115 . in general , ssa section 1115 permits states to examine potential innovations in certain state - administered public programs , including medicaid . on march 14 , 2017 , hhs secretary tom price and centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) administrator seema verma cosigned a letter to state governors affirming the federal and state "partnership in improving medicaid. among other things , the letter announced the trump administration's intent to use section 1115 demonstration authority to "approve meritorious innovations that build on the human dignity that comes with training , employment and independence. several states , such as kentucky , pennsylvania , and indiana , have also sought waivers to impose some type of medicaid work incentives under section 1115 . the share of costs paid by the federal government varies for each state and is referred to as the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) . failure to cover a "mandatory eligibility group" under a state plan places all federal medicaid funds received by the state in jeopardy of being withheld .