each is examined below . of the 16 countries that offered a patent box at the end of 2015 , all but three were members of the organization of economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) . not all of those oecd countries , however , are also locations for substantial investments in business r&d . given that patent boxes apply to the profits resulting from successful r&d investments , and that they can lead to substantial reductions in the cost of capital if r&d costs can be deducted at regular corporate tax rates , it seems likely that a patent box could encourage companies to perform more r&d than they otherwise would . what the report did not attempt to do is measure the contribution of these forms of ip to the performance of the economy or of ip - intensive industries . as a result , a strong correlation between an industry's ip - intensity and its share of u.s. employment or exports did not constitute conclusive evidence that the former was a major cause of the latter . still , the report's findings indicate which u.s. industries would be likely to benefit the most from a patent box , if the u.s. government were to adopt one . in the 2012 report , an industry's ip - intensity was measured by its number of ip holdings in a certain period divided by its total employment . an industry was considered ip - intensive if its ratio of ip holdings to employment exceeded the average for all industries . there was nothing special about the use of industry employment as the basis for comparison . other indicators of industry performance could also have been used , such as value added , r&d investment , and gross output . since existing patent boxes generally lower the tax burden on the income from patented technologies , this section focuses on patent - intensive industries only . the uspto grants utility , plant , and design patents , which give the recipient the right to prevent "others from making , using , offering for sale , or selling the invention throughout the united states or importing the invention into the united states. a utility patent protects the use of an invention and how it is made ; a design patent protects an invention's appearance ; and a plant patent protects plants that have been invented or discovered and asexually reproduced into a distinct and new variety of plant , excluding a tuber propagated plant or a plant found in an uncultivated condition . utility patents of both foreign and domestic origin accounted for 91.5% of all patents granted by the uspto in 2015 , and 52.0% of all patents granted that year were foreign in origin . the uspto organizes patents into over 450 "technology classes," according to their inventive content . it also has developed a mapping scheme ( or concordance ) that links each technology class to 30 industry codes under the north american industry classification system . owing to the limitations of the mapping scheme , the linkages cover only utility patents and manufacturing industries .