the dol rule was controversial . these workers are sometimes referred to as guest workers . in the past , guest workers were used to address u.s. worker shortages during times of war . notably , the controversial bracero program , which began during world war ii and lasted until 1964 , brought several million mexican agricultural workers into the united states . today , the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) provides for the temporary admission of agricultural and nonagricultural workers to the united states through the h - 2a and h - 2b visa programs , respectively . these programs , which are subject to detailed recruitment and other requirements , seek to meet the legitimate temporary labor needs of employers while providing protections to u.s. and foreign workers . guest worker programs generally try to achieve two goals simultaneously: to be responsive to legitimate employer needs for temporary labor and to provide adequate protections for u.s. and foreign temporary workers . dol explicitly addressed the idea of balancing the needs of employers and workers in the supplementary information accompanying a 2011 proposed rule on the h - 2b visa: although the department still seeks to maintain an efficient system , it has in this new rule struck a balance between reducing processing times and protecting u.s. worker access to these job opportunities . the balancing of broad guest worker program goals is reflected , in practice , in the particular provisions that h - 2a and h - 2b proposals include on a range of component policy considerations , such as program administration , the labor market test , and wages , among others . many policymakers assert that the h - 2a and h - 2b visa programs are not adequately meeting employers' labor needs and / or are not adequately protecting u.s. and foreign workers , although their particular criticisms vary widely . in past years , proposed solutions have taken the form of reforms to the h - 2a and h - 2b visas as well as new guest worker visa programs . in the current climate , pursuing reforms to existing visa programs seems to be the course more policymakers are likely to follow . appendix a. dol h - 2a and h - 2b labor certifications by state appendix b. dol h - 2b labor certifications by occupation in fy2015 , dol approved 5,112 h - 2b labor certification applications . for these applications , dol approved requests for a total of 101,765 h - 2b positions . typically , a majority of h - 2b requests certified by dol are for workers in a few occupations . in fy2015 , as shown in table b - 1 , more than half the certified positions were in three occupations , and 76% of certified positions were in 10 occupations . one occupation , landscaping & groundskeeping worker , accounted for 41% of the total number of h - 2b positions certified .