the new fiduciary rule has generated much controversy both as it was proposed and in its final form . controversial issues include questions about the obama administration's rationale for the rule ; concerns about the rule's effect on small businesses and small investors ; and suggestions that dol should wait for the sec to issue a rule requiring a fiduciary standard for securities brokers and dealers . individuals who are held to fiduciary standards are required to act solely in the interests of plan participants and beneficiaries . therefore , expanding the definition of investment advice may increase the number of individuals held to this higher standard . while these two aspects of the rule are currently in place , other aspects of the exemption , such as requirements to make specific disclosures and warrant policies and procedures and to execute written contracts , are to become applicable on january 1 , 2018 . legislation has been introduced in the 114 th and 115 th congresses to prevent or delay the implementation of the fiduciary rule or to codify a definition of investment advice , which would take precedence over the regulation . on april 7 , 2017 , dol delayed two aspects of the rule's applicability date by 60 days , from april 10 , 2017 , to june 9 , 2017: ( 1 ) the expanded definition of investment advice and ( 2 ) the impartial conduct standard of the best interest contract ( bic ) exemption . a number of bills have been introduced in the 115 th congress that would prevent or delay implementation of the fiduciary rule , or define investment advice in u.s. code and provide for a best - interest pte . a number of bills were introduced in the 114 th congress that would have rescinded the fiduciary rule , prevented or delayed the implementation of the fiduciary rule , or defined investment advice in the u.s. code and provided for a best - interest pte . individuals who provide recommendations that meet the definition of investment advice are held to a fiduciary standard , which is a higher standard of conduct than for individuals who provide recommendations that do not meet the definition . on april 8 , 2016 , the department of labor ( dol ) issued a final rule ( 2016 final rule ) that expanded the definition of investment advice within employer - sponsored private - sector pension plans and individual retirement accounts ( iras ) .