sources . the agreement states that "funds provided to developing country parties may come from a wide variety of sources , public and private , bilateral and multilateral , including alternative sources" ( 1 / cp.16§99 ) . in 2015 , the cop to the unfccc in paris , france , adopted the paris agreement ( pa ) . the pa builds upon the convention and — for the first time — brings all nations into a common framework to undertake efforts to combat climate change , adapt to its effects , and support developing countries in their efforts . article 9 of the pa reiterates the obligation in the convention for developed country parties , including the united states , to seek to mobilize financial support to assist developing country parties with climate change mitigation and adaptation efforts ( article 9.1 ) . also , for the first time under the unfccc , the pa encourages all parties to provide financial support voluntarily , regardless of their economic standing ( article 9.2 ) . the agreement states that developed country parties should take the lead in mobilizing climate finance and that the mobilized resources may come from a wide variety of sources . it adds that the mobilization of climate finance "should represent a progression beyond previous efforts" ( article 9.3 ) . the cop decision to carry out the pa ( 1 / cp.21 ) uses exhortatory language to restate the collective pledge by developed countries of $100 billion annually by 2020 and calls for continuing this collective mobilization through 2025 . in addition , the parties agree to set , prior to their 2025 meeting , a new collective quantified goal for mobilizing financial resources of not less than $100 billion annually to assist developing country parties . on june 1 , 2017 , president donald trump announced his intention to withdraw from the pa . under the provisions of the pa , this could not be completed before november 4 , 2020 . other crs products examine the legal and policy implications of this announcement . the 2009 copenhagen accord opened the way for the gcf to be designated as an operating entity of the financial mechanism of the unfccc ( similar to the gef ) . parties agreed to the design of the gcf during the 2011 cop in durban , south africa . the gcf is intended to operate at arm's length from the unfccc , with an independent board , trustee , and secretariat . the gcf is to be "accountable to and function under the guidance of the conference of parties" ( i.e. , similar in legal structure to the gef ) , as opposed to "accountable to and function under the guidance and authority of the conference of parties" ( i.e. , similar in legal structure to the adaptation fund ) . the purpose of the fund is to assist developing countries in their efforts to combat climate change through the provision of grants and other concessional financing . the gcf is capitalized by "financial inputs from developed country parties to the convention" and "may also receive financial inputs from a variety of other sources , public and private , including alternative sources. the gcf became operational in the summer of 2014 .