appendix a . key u.s. government agencies army corps of engineers ( corps ) — part of the department of defense , the army corps of engineers manages both federal water resource development projects and regulated activities affecting certain waterways and wetlands , including activities associated with infrastructure . consumption " below. ) the rise in consumption , though , did not keep pace with production , so companies turned to exports , first by pipeline to mexico and then as lng to other parts of the world . seven reactors have permanently closed since 2013 , and the owners of 12 more have announced their permanent closure by the mid - 2020s . construction of two new reactors at the summer plant site in south carolina was cancelled following a bankruptcy filing in 2017 by the project's lead contractor , westinghouse electric company . most of the closed and threatened nuclear power plants sell their electricity at competitive market prices , in contrast to plants that recover their costs ( including a reasonable rate of return ) through regulated rates . nuclear plants that rely on power markets have seen falling wholesale power prices and stagnant demand , combined with relatively high operating and capital costs in some cases , particularly at plants with a single reactor . ( for more information , see crs report r44715 , financial challenges of operating nuclear power plants in the united states , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) some contend that electricity markets are undervaluing the reliability of nuclear generation , its role in diversifying the nation's power supply , and its importance in reducing co 2 emissions . nuclear power accounted for 56% of u.s. sources considered to be zero - carbon electricity generation in 2017 . a major government effort to preserve nuclear power as a non - direct carbon emitting electricity source is being implemented by the state of new york , which is providing payments in the form of zero emission credits ( zecs ) to four upstate reactors that had been at risk of retirement . the state of illinois enacted legislation in december 2016 to provide zecs to prevent the planned closure of three at - risk reactors . nuclear power incentives at the federal level have also been proposed , such as an investment tax credit . a federal nuclear energy production tax credit was extended by the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( p.l . 115-123 , sec . however , some others contend that such drawbacks as accident risk , high costs , and disposal of radioactive waste outweigh the technology's benefits . focusing on renewable energy and energy efficiency would be far more effective in reducing carbon emissions , they argue . it is not clear , however , that these alternatives can provide sufficient baseload power supplies to replace nuclear . all but three of today's 98 nuclear power reactors ( figure 7 ) began operating before 1990 , and most started commercial operation before 1980 . they were initially licensed by nrc to operate for 40 years , a period that for more than half of u.s. reactors expires before 2020 .