in the caa amendments of 1990 , p.l . , no minimum quantity ) for "tier ii" reporting for which a serc , lepc , or local fire department may require additional information from the facility owner or operator about the presence of a hazardous chemical present at the facility . gdc is a performance - based authority recognizing that owners and operators have a general duty and responsibility to prevent and mitigate the consequences of chemical accidents . further , section 112 ( r ) ( 7 ) authorizes epa to require the establishment of approved risk management planning requirements for stationary sources that manage certain types of toxic or flammable substances , if the quantity of the substance exceeds a threshold established in regulation for that substance . similar to emergency planning notification requirements discussed above , whether the owner or operator of a facility would be required under epcra or cercla to report an actual release into the environment would depend primarily on the quantity of the release . section 103 of cercla generally requires persons who release hazardous substances into the environment to notify the federal national response center of the incident as soon as the person has knowledge of the release , if the quantity of the release is equal to or exceeds the threshold for that substance . in making these determinations , epa must take into account the "toxicity , reactivity , volatility , dispersability , combustability , or flammability" of a substance . section 302 ( c ) of epcra requires the owner or operator of a facility storing an extremely hazardous substance exceeding the applicable threshold to report the presence of the substance to the serc and the lepc ( but not the local fire department ) . section 303 ( d ) also requires facilities subject to the reporting of an extremely hazardous substance to designate a representative to serve on the lepc . states established sercs and lepcs pursuant to section 301 of epcra . the general threshold of 10,000 pounds for the reporting of hazardous chemicals applies to "tier i" reporting under which the facility owner or operator is required to report this information at its own initiative to the serc , the appropriate lepc , and the local fire department . there is a "zero" threshold ( i.e. if a hazardous chemical also is designated under epcra as an extremely hazardous substance , the reporting threshold generally is 500 pounds , and may be less under separate reporting requirements . section 302 ( a ) of epcra directs epa to determine which chemicals warrant designation as extremely hazardous substances and to establish separate reporting thresholds for them . section 324 of epcra requires information reported by facilities to sercs , lepcs , and local fire departments to be made available to the public , with the exception of facility information that may be subject to protection as confidential business or trade information . section 322 of epcra specifies the types of confidential business or trade information that a facility owner or operator may choose to protect from public disclosure . for security purposes , a facility owner or operator also may opt not to publicly disclose the exact location of a specific chemical within a facility boundary .