the constitution does not mention immigration . it does not expressly confer upon any of the three branches of government the power to control how citizens of other countries enter , live , and remain in the united states . parts of the constitution address related subjects . the supreme court has sometimes relied upon congress's enumerated powers over naturalization and foreign commerce , and to a lesser extent upon the executive's implied article ii foreign affairs power , as sources of federal immigration power . significantly , however , the court has also consistently attributed the immigration power to the federal government's inherent sovereign authority to control its borders and its relations with foreign nations . this inherent sovereign power , according to the court , gives congress essentially unfettered authority to restrict the entry of nonresident aliens . the court has determined that the executive branch , by extension , possesses unusually broad authority to enforce laws pertaining to alien entry , and to do so under a level of judicial review much more limited than that which would apply outside of the exclusion context . the scope of the federal government's power to exclude aliens is at the forefront of litigation concerning two successive executive orders ( the second revising and replacing the first ) issued by president donald trump that , in their revised form , seek to deny entry temporarily to foreign nationals from six predominantly muslim countries and to all refugees , subject to limited waiver . a series of lower court decisions largely enjoined implementation of the orders . in particular , courts ruled that the president's travel restrictions are likely unconstitutional or exceed his statutory authority . the supreme court granted certiorari to review decisions by the u.s. courts of appeals for the fourth and ninth circuits that upheld nationwide injunctions against the revised executive order . the supreme court also partially stayed the injunctions , allowing the executive branch to implement the revised order in part pending the outcome of the litigation . a decision by the court on the merits of these cases , which have come to be known as the "travel ban" litigation , could deliver a major statement about the constitutional and statutory scope of the president's power to exclude aliens . the litigation has threshold issues , however , such as questions of mootness and standing , that may well prevent the court from reaching the merits , particularly following the issuance of a presidential proclamation superseding and somewhat modifying some of the entry restrictions at issue in the case . this report provides an overview of the legislative and executive powers to exclude aliens . the report concludes with a case study . the report applies the principles of the supreme court's immigration jurisprudence to the two primary claims that u.s. persons and entities have pressed against the president's revised executive order in the "travel ban" litigation: ( 1 ) that the revised order violates the establishment clause ; and ( 2 ) that the revised order violates the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) .