the extension could be retroactive . the extensions also could be short - term , long - term , or permanent . another option would be to allow expired provisions to remain expired . the amount of revenue that would be lost by temporarily extending business tax provisions that expired at the end of 2017 is generally small ( see table 1 ) . for each provision included in this report , the one - year extension in the bba18 was estimated to reduce revenues by less than $300 million over the 10-year ( 2018 through 2027 ) budget window . another option would be to extend expired provisions and make them permanent . the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) estimated the effects of making 10 of the provisions permanent . the list excluded the extension of the production activities deduction for puerto rico ( given that the production activities deduction is repealed in general going forward ) and the lower tax rate for timber gains , which would no longer be relevant given the lower corporate tax rate . it also excluded the increase in the rum cover over . according to jct , making the 10 business provisions that expired at the end of 2016 and were extended through 2017 permanent would reduce federal revenues by an estimated $7.6 billion over the 10-year ( 2018 through 2027 ) budget window . extending the rum cover over for an additional six years would add about $4 billion based on the one - year revenue cost . the cost of assets that provide services over a period of time , such as machines or buildings , is deducted over a period of years as depreciation . the schedule of depreciation deductions depends on the life of the asset and the distribution of deductions over that life . straight - line depreciation is used for structures , where equal amounts are deducted in each year . for equipment , deductions are accelerated with larger amounts deducted in earlier years . equipment is most commonly depreciated over 5 years or 7 years , but some short - lived assets are depreciated over 3 years and some longer - lived assets are depreciated over 10 , 15 , or 20 years . nonresidential structures are depreciated over 39 years . aside from the desire for economic stimulus , traditional economic theories suggest that tax depreciation should match as closely as possible economic ( physical ) depreciation of assets . the depreciation provisions discussed below all allow earlier deductions for depreciation , which are valuable because of the time value of money . expensing provisions allow a firm to deduct the cost of an asset the year it is placed in service . investment in certain assets ( largely equipment with shorter lives ) was eligible for bonus depreciation that allowed half of cost to be expensed ( deducted immediately ) in 2017 , including some of the assets discussed below that are depreciated over 7 years or 5 years . this bonus depreciation was originally scheduled to begin phasing out in 2018 . legislation enacted in december 2017 ( p.l . 115-97 ) would allow 100% expensing of equipment for several years going forward .