table 1 . selected crs appropriations expert . as in section 163 of p.l . 114-254 , the second cr for fy2017 , congress broadened the reach of the provision to include the transportation security administration and the u.s. secret service . two key differences in this provision from this last appearance is that in this cr , it is solely for personnel costs to maintain staffing levels , not for other operational expenses , and it does not describe any specific purposes for which the funding is provided . this section extends special procurement authorities for research and development activities at dhs , known as "other transaction authority. similar provisions have previously been included in crs covering dhs , including , most recently , section 132 of the fy2017 cr ( p.l . these provisions are generally of two types . first , certain provisions designate exceptions to the formula and purpose for which any referenced funding is extended . these are often referred to as "anomalies. the purpose of anomalies is to preserve congress's constitutional prerogative to provide appropriations in the manner it sees fit , even in instances when only short - term funding is provided . second , certain provisions may have the effect of creating new law or changing existing law . most typically , these provisions are used to renew expiring provisions of law or extend the scope of certain existing statutory requirements to the funds provided in the cr . substantive provisions that establish major new policies have also been included on occasion . unless otherwise indicated , such provisions are temporary in nature and expire when the cr sunsets . these anomalies and provisions that change law may be included at the request of the president . congress could accept , reject , or modify such proposals in the course of drafting and considering appropriations measures that provide continuing appropriations . in addition , congress may identify or initiate any other anomalies and provisions changing law that they wish to be included in the cr . this section of the report summarizes provisions in this cr that are agency - , account - , or program - specific , alphabetically organized by appropriations act title for 11 of the 12 regular appropriations acts covered in section 101 . ( there are no anomalies concerning items funded in the state foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act. ) the summaries generally provide brief explanations of the provisions . in some cases they include additional information , such as whether a provision was requested by the president or included in prior year crs . for additional information on specific provisions in the cr , contact the crs appropriations experts listed in table 1 at the end of the report . for the duration of the cr , section 116 increases funding for the commodity supplemental food program , a domestic food assistance program that predominantly serves the low - income elderly . instead of basing funding for the program on the fy2017 funding level ( $236.1 million ) , this cr provision would use a base of approximately $238.1 million . this anomaly is typically included to maintain current caseload and participation while accounting for increased food costs .