there is no explicit prohibition against the confederate flag . for more information , see crs report r44321 , diversity , inclusion , and equal opportunity in the armed services: background and issues for congress . arlington national cemetery is under the jurisdiction of the u.s. army . confederate flags must be removed at private expense on the first workday following memorial day or the day observed as confederate memorial day . on june 6 , 1900 , congress authorized $2,500 for a section of arlington national cemetery to be set aside for the burial of confederate dead . how should differing views on the meaning of these symbols be addressed ? which symbols , if any , should be removed from federal sites , and which , if any , should be preserved for their historical or honorary significance ? should every tribute to a person who fought for the confederacy be considered a confederate symbol ? should federal agencies give additional attention to education and dialogue about the conflicted history of these symbols — including their role in civil war history and in subsequent historical eras — or are current interpretive efforts adequate ? how , if at all , should current practices of honoring the confederate dead in national cemeteries be changed ? to what extent , if any , should the presence of confederate symbols at nonfederal sites affect federal funding for programs connected to these sites ? this report focuses primarily on confederate symbols administered by three federal entities — nps , the va , and dod . each of these entities manages multiple sites or programs that involve confederate symbols . the report begins with a discussion of recent legislative proposals , and then discusses the agencies' current policies with respect to confederate symbols , along with issues for congress . bills in recent congresses have addressed confederate symbols and their relation to federal lands and programs . the 115 th congress is considering bills with varying provisions on confederate commemorative works , names , and other symbols under federal jurisdiction . the 114 th congress also considered several legislative proposals , but none were enacted in law . of the pending proposals in the 115 th congress , some might be relatively straightforward to implement , while others might give rise to questions about implementation . depending on specific bill provisions , such questions could include what constitutes a confederate symbol , how required agency actions toward confederate symbols would be funded , whether or not a given display of a symbol would qualify as a historical or educational context , and how implementation would be affected by statutory requirements for historic preservation and other existing protections . nps manages over 70 units of the national park system related to civil war history , some of which contain works commemorating confederate soldiers or actions . additionally , nps administers 14 national cemeteries that , under agency policy , may display the confederate flag at certain times of year . the agency also provides education and interpretation related to civil war history and the confederate states . park gift shops operated by concessioners sometimes sell books or other items that display confederate symbols .