serbs also have been confronted by courts in kosovo . in january 2016 , kosovo's basic court of mitrovica , which is composed of a panel of international judges under the auspices of the eu's rule - of - law mission in the country , found the former head of a serb paramilitary group guilty of committing war crimes against ethnic albanian civilians and sentenced him to nine years in prison . belgrade has complained that war crimes cases against kosovo albanians have not been prosecuted as often or as vigorously as cases against ethnic serbs . in response , kosovo's government introduced a controversial court to prosecute cases against former members of the kosovo liberation army ( kla ) identified in the eu special investigative task force report . both croatia and serbia expressed disappointment with the international court of justice's rejection in february 2015 of long - standing claims of genocide by croatia and serbia against one another . finally , the two countries have not yet resolved their dispute over territory along a stretch of the danube river . serbia's relationship with bosnia also has been strained at times . the two countries dispute border demarcation at four locations along the drina river ; serbia's preferred demarcation would shift local infrastructure and a hydroelectric power plant onto serbian territory . a bosnian commission has begun to investigate serbia's claims . in addition , serbia's relationship with the bosnian entity of republika srpska also led to tensions between belgrade and sarajevo . former republika srpska president ( and current member of bosnia's collective presidency ) milorad dodik made frequent threats to hold an independence referendum and seek union with serbia . however , the vučić government repeatedly has stated that it respects bosnia's territorial integrity and has no intention of incorporating the territory of the republica srpska into serbia proper . according to the economist intelligence unit , in the period following the 2008 global financial crisis , serbia was "one of the region's worst - performing economies , owing to institutional and regulatory deficiencies , poor infrastructure , an oversized state , insufficient openness of the economy , low levels of innovation , and demographic weaknesses. between 2013 and 2017 , average real gdp growth was just 1.2% , one of the region's lowest rates . nevertheless , for the first half of 2018 , real gdp growth was reported to be 4.9% year on year , a significant increase from the 1.4% during the same period in 2017 . serbia's recent growth is attributed in part to increased consumption and investment . furthermore , serbia's unemployment level has decreased slightly to 12.5% , although it varies by region and is higher in southern and southeastern serbia . however , serbia's high youth unemployment rate , estimated to be 33% in 2017 , remains a policy challenge . serbia was ranked 48 th in the world bank's doing business 2019 report , an improvement from previous years and a stronger rating than most of the country's neighbors , including those already in the eu . serbia's main exports include machinery , manufactured goods , agricultural products , and chemicals .