what are some of the constitutional and political elements that may have contributed to its longevity ? perhaps the most important factor contributing to the durability of the electoral college is article v of the constitution , which establishes procedures for constitutional amendments . the founders intentionally made it difficult to revise the constitution , establishing requirements for three separate super - majority votes: by two - thirds in both houses of congress and in three - quarters of the states . to this may be added the fact that congress exercises still further influence on the amendment process because it can choose ratification by state legislatures , or by ad hoc state ratification conventions , at its discretion . in practice , the standard for ratification is even higher , since it is customary to attach a seven - year deadline for ratification to all proposed amendments . to date , no electoral college reform amendment has been able to meet these exacting requirements , notwithstanding sometimes vigorous action in congress over the years . most successful constitutional amendments have emerged as responses to the stimulus of sudden transformative events , such as the 22 nd amendment , which established a two - term limit for presidents in most instances , or benefitted from the "ripeness" of an idea that had been before the public for many years , such as the 26 th amendment , which extended the right to vote to citizens 18 years of age or older . sometimes both factors contributed to the successful proposal and ratification of a proposed change to the constitution , as was the case with the 25 th amendment , which governs presidential succession and disability . committed and persistent advocacy and leadership among senior members of both houses of congress is another factor that has proved essential to the success of proposed constitutional amendments . public awareness of the issue in question and a broad national consensus that reform was necessary have also historically contributed to the success of proposed amendments . the 12 th amendment , to date the only major constitutional change to the electoral college system that met these qualifications , was a direct response to turmoil accompanying the presidential election of 1800 . the failure of the original constitutional electoral college provisions led to a constitutional crisis that , once surmounted , motivated congress to propose , and the states to ratify , the 12 th amendment , in what could be described as record time , considering the era . although "public opinion" in its modern sense can scarcely be said to have existed at the time , america's political elites had been strongly influenced by the election and its aftermath . today , by comparison , although substantial majorities of americans , as measured by survey research , approve of direct popular election , neither a compelling national consensus nor the urgency of reform has been demonstrated with respect to the electoral college . finally , as noted above , successful amendments have almost always depended on support and focused effort by congressional leaders who helped move amendments through the legislative process in both chambers of congress to proposal to the states and ratification by them .