no change . in recent years , the senate foreign relations committee has held closed briefings with state department officials in anticipation of the tip report's release as well as public hearings after its publication . the house foreign affairs committee , particularly its subcommittee on africa , global health , global human rights , and international organizations , has also long held hearings on the tip report . comptroller reports . to date , gao has prepared two reports that directly address the state department's tip report , one in 2006 and a second in 2016 . both contain gao recommendations that remain pending or unimplemented . legislation in the 115 th congress . several bills in the 115 th congress have been introduced to further modify requirements associated with the tip report , including h.r . 2200 , the frederick douglass trafficking victims prevention and protection reauthorization act of 2017 , which passed the house on july 12 , 2017 , and contains several changes to the tip report's country ranking process . other bills introduced in the 115 th congress that , if passed , would modify requirements associated with the tip report include h.r . 436 , the human trafficking prioritization act ; s. 377 , the trafficking in persons report integrity act ; h.r . 1191 , the child soldier prevention act of 2017 ; and h.r . 2219 and s. 952 , the end banking for human traffickers act of 2017 . common themes in the legislative proposals to modify the tip report's methodology focus on reducing the prospects for political interference , while also increasing public transparency and congressional oversight into the state department's country ranking process . a key focus of the proposals involves changes to the special watch list or tier 2 watch list . various bills seek to modify: the number of years a country may remain on the tier 2 watch list , from a maximum of four years ( two consecutive years on tier 2 watch list , plus a maximum of two waivers to remain on the list for two more years ) to three ( two consecutive years on tier 2 watch list , plus one waiver ) ; the conditions under which a country may remain on the tier 2 watch list ( excluding those that have committed to take future antitrafficking steps , but have not already taken concrete steps to implement policies that would constitute significant efforts toward becoming compliant with the tvpa's minimum standards for eliminating trafficking ) ; expectations for upgrading a tier 2 watch list country that exhausted its permitted time on that list and was subsequently downgraded to tier 3 for lack of progress , including whether or how long it would be permitted to return to the tier 2 watch list in the future ; public documentation requirements to justify the continued listing of a country on the tier 2 watch list ; and country narratives in the tip report to explicitly rationalize a country's upgrade or downgrade compared to its previous - year ranking .