the issue remains unresolved . the thaçi / haradinaj government faced other political challenges , as well , such as the issue of weak governing institutions , particularly in the area of the rule of law . the organization for security and cooperation in europe ( osce ) and the european commission ( the eu's executive ) have noted serious problems , such as a legacy of strong executive influence on judicial decisions , threats against judges and their families , and poor court infrastructure and security arrangements . another issue that has become more controversial is possible war crimes and crimes against humanity allegedly committed in 1999-2000 by former members of the kla against ethnic serb and other minorities and "political opponents" during and after the conflict between kosovo and serbia . although the icty detained , tried , and convicted war crimes suspects from the entire region and from different ethnic groups , most were serbs and bosnian serbs . in an early august 2017 "commentary" in the serb newspaper blic , serbian president vučić observed that it was time the people [of serbia] "stopped putting their heads in the sand" on kosovo and "got real. this article caught the attention of both the nationalists in serbia who oppose any concessions to kosovo , and the government in pristina . although the kosovo government is not under any illusion that vučić would recognize kosovo's independence any time soon , it nevertheless interpreted the article as a trial balloon that vučić might be willing to make other concessions on kosovo in order to ease tensions and smooth serbia's relations with the eu . for instance , pristina has looked to serbia to stop blocking kosovo's ability to join some u.n. organizations , such as the united nations educational , scientific , and cultural organization ( unesco ) or even the international police agency ( interpol ) . in september , shortly after taking office , haradinaj condemned a newly released serbian documentary film that reportedly attacked pristina's bid to join unesco . also in september 2017 , haradinaj announced that kosovo would withdraw its application to join interpol due to an insufficient number of votes , and opposition from serbia and china . the european union — both its member countries and its institutions , notably the european commission — plays a prominent role in the institution - building needs and socioeconomic development of kosovo . the eu is by far the single largest donor providing assistance to kosovo . kosovo has received more than €2.3 billion in eu assistance since 1999 , targeted mostly at projects involving public infrastructure including roads , hospitals , and water supply . other projects include supporting and promoting business , farms , civil society , human rights , education , access to health care , and transportation . the eu is kosovo's largest trade partner , with approximately 32% of kosovo's exports going to the eu . as noted above , in 2016 , the eu offered kosovo visa - free travel for its citizens conditioned on progress on its boundary dispute with montenegro and its efforts to address corruption and weaknesses in its rule - of - law institutions .