and i think most of them are unnecessary. following issuance of the trump administration's plans regarding special envoys on august 28 , 2017 , senator corker reiterated his concern regarding the accumulation of special envoys at the department . he added that the authorization bill the committee passed in july "recognizes that urgent developments may require the creation of a special envoy" and that he looked forward to examining the proposed changes in detail . at the same hearing , ranking member benjamin cardin said that "we have too many special envoys . on the other hand , there are areas that i want to have special attention , where i don't think you get it unless there's a point person within the state department to deal with it.... " following the publication of secretary tillerson's letter outlining the department's plans with regard to special envoys , senator cardin commented , "i agree with secretary tillerson that there is room for examining the use of our special envoys ... while i support creating a more efficient and effective department , we must be sure that the administration is not eliminating envoys who are critical to our ability to advance our interests and our values. there are numerous arguments for and against the use of special envoys — both in general and with regard to specific policy issues . which positions are necessary or unnecessary may differ from one member of congress to another or from one administration to another . proponents of special envoys espouse several perceived benefits of such positions , including the notions that such positions are short - term and flexible and can activate u.s. response more easily than having to go through regular channels ; are a quick tool that the department of state can use when a crisis erupts ; indicate high - level administration interest in a particular issue ; help an ambassador or an assistant secretary who does not have the time or resources to deal with a specific issue within a country ; can coordinate a wider range of aspects that go beyond the country or region under the purview of an ambassador or assistant secretary ; can represent directly the views of the president or secretary of state and , thus , give the u.s. representative greater status ( than an assistant secretary , for example ) and access to higher level foreign government officials ; are generally less expensive than a full - time permanent government employee , whose position may be difficult to eliminate at the end of an administration ; could engage , in certain cases , with enemies or others that regular diplomats would or could not ; and address issues that congress or interest groups are calling attention toward . critics argue that special envoys , especially if overused , can create concerns .