it was reported ( h.rept . 115-804 ) on july 3 , 2018 . the house considered a further amended version on july 10 , 2018 , and passed it under suspension of the rule by a voice vote . s. 488 was originally introduced by senator pat toomey as the encouraging employee ownership act , increasing the threshold for disclosure relating to compensatory benefit plans . after senate passage on september 11 , 2017 , it was taken up in the house and amended with a number of different provisions , mostly focusing on securities regulation . title xiv of the amended version of s. 488 , however , is nearly identical to h.r . 4537 as it passed the house . 4537 as passed by the house and s. 488 as passed by the house would institute a number of requirements relating to international insurance standards and insurance covered agreements . u.s. federal representatives in international fora are directed not to agree to any proposal that does not recognize the u.s. system as satisfying that proposal . such representatives would be required to consult and coordinate with the state insurance regulators and with congress prior to and during negotiations and to submit a report to congress prior to entering into an agreement . with regard to future covered agreements , the bill would require u.s. negotiators to provide congressional access to negotiating texts and to "closely consult and coordinate with state insurance commissioners. future covered agreements are to be submitted to congress for possible disapproval under "fast track" legislative provisions . section 211 of p.l . 115-174 finds that the treasury , federal reserve , and fio director shall support transparency in international insurance fora and shall "achieve consensus positions with state insurance regulators through the [naic]" when taking positions in international fora . it creates an "insurance policy advisory committee on international capital standards and other insurance issues" at the federal reserve made up of 21 members with expertise on various aspects of insurance . the federal reserve and the department of the treasury are to complete both an annual report and provide testimony on the ongoing discussions at the iais through 2022 , and the federal reserve and fio are to complete a study and report , along with the opportunity for public comment and review by the government accountability office ( gao ) , on the impact of international capital standards or other proposals prior to agreeing to such standards . unlike s. 1360 , however , the enacted law does not have specific requirements on the final text of any international capital standard . section 115 ( a ) of h.r . 10 would repeal the nonbank designation authority and the application of enhanced prudential requirements by the federal reserve . section 111 ( a ) of h.r . 10 would repeal all of dodd - frank title ii , which created ola , and replace it with a new chapter of the bankruptcy code for financial firms , but one that would not apply to insurers . thus , any insurer failure would be resolved by the state resolution system . representative sean duffy along with seven additional cosponsors introduced h.r . 4537 on december 4 , 2017 .