reportedly , the spanish company was not vetted adequately . other large contracts involving ppps for infrastructure in asunción , where a large percentage of paraguayans live , also are under scrutiny by the current comptroller . however , the economic growth spurred by low - tax policies , other financial - stabilization efforts , and booming soybean and cattle exports achieved during the cartes administration has been lauded by some of cartes's colleagues in the colorado party . the economy's susceptibility to the vagaries of weather conditions and fluctuations in world prices for commodities and other variables was evident in 2012 , when economic growth contracted by 1.2% as a result of a severe drought and an outbreak of foot - and - mouth disease harming cattle exports . in 2013 , partially due to a full recovery from the drought and favorable weather conditions , paraguay's gdp grew by 14.2% , the highest growth rate in latin america . according to the economic intelligence unit ( eiu ) , the paraguayan economy grew by 4.7% in 2014 , slowed to 3% in 2015 , and accelerated to 4% in 2016 . eiu also forecasts that growth likely will remain between 3.2% and 4% in coming years , which is strong by regional standards . in late may 2017 , finance minister santiago peña and the governor of the itapúa department ( the term for a state in paraguay ) announced their intention to run for the ticket of the colorado party when primaries are held in december 2017 ahead of the 2018 general elections . it appears that president cartes will endorse this ticket if it is victorious in the december 2017 primary ( when all the parties will select their candidates ) . both former president lugo and president cartes have indicated that they may seek senate seats in the 2018 legislative elections , which is an avenue that former leaders in some nations , such as colombia , have used to retain influence . the rejection of the referendum to permit reelection leaves questions about the strength and prospects for the cartista wing of the colorado party in the 2018 presidential race , especially as tensions in the colorado party remain and a unified ticket may not emerge . however , the plra , historically known as the liberal party , also is suffering divisions and appears likely to remain divided going into the 2018 national elections . in addition , the country is experiencing division outside the realm of formal politics , as rural and urban disparities are revealing strains and occasionally sparking protest and a generation born after the years of the stroessner dictatorship is beginning to become politically active . paraguay's small but open economy depends heavily on commodities . its export - oriented agricultural sector accounts for about 20% of the country's gross domestic product ( gdp ) . traditional exports include soybeans , cotton , and meat . in addition to a dominant agricultural sector , paraguay has a struggling industrial or manufacturing sector and a large informal economy . the slowdown of the economies of brazil , china , and russia has resulted in lower demand for paraguay's exports from these important trade partners .