figure 1 . usda agricultural exports , 1989-2016source: crs from usda trade ( https: / / apps.fas.usda.gov / gats / default.aspx ) . usda's fas administers a series of programs to develop export markets for u.s. agricultural products . these programs are authorized in periodic omnibus farm bills . usda administers two types of agricultural trade and export promotion programs: 1 . export market development programs assist u.s. industry efforts to build , maintain , and expand overseas markets for u.s. agricultural products . usda administers five programs: the market access program ( map ) , the foreign market development program ( fmdp ) , the emerging markets program ( emp ) , the quality samples program ( qsp ) , and the technical assistance for specialty crops ( tasc ) program . in general , these programs provide matching funds to u.s. organizations to conduct a wide range of activities , including information and market research , consumer promotion , counseling and assistance , trade servicing , capacity building , and market access support to potential u.s. exporters of agricultural products . export financing assistance programs , such as the export credit guarantee program ( gsm - 102 ) and the facility guarantee program ( fgp ) , provide payment guarantees on commercial financing to facilitate u.s. agricultural exports . these programs provide loan guarantees to lower the cost of borrowing to foreign countries to buy u.s. agricultural products . gsm - 102 guarantees repayment of commercial financing by approved foreign banks , mainly of developing countries , for up to two years for the purchase of u.s. farm and food products . fgp guarantees financing of goods and services exported from the united states to improve or establish agriculture - related facilities in emerging markets . in addition to usda's export financing assistance through gsm - 102 and fgp , other federal agencies also provide assistance to u.s. agricultural exporters such as the export - import bank ( ex - im bank ) and the small business administration ( sba ) . these agencies provide support to both agricultural and non - farm exporting companies . however , data and information are not publicly available to indicate the extent to which these agencies have provided support to agricultural exporters . ex - im bank , a wholly owned u.s. government corporation , finances and insures u.s. exports of goods and services in order to support u.s. jobs . it aims to do so when the private sector is unwilling or unable to finance exports alone at commercially viable terms and / or to counter financing offered by foreign countries through their counterparts to ex - im bank . ex - im bank takes the lead in financing and insuring non - agricultural u.s. exports but also plays a role in supporting agricultural exports through its finance and insurance programs . structurally , agricultural export support through ex - im bank and usda takes place through separate operations . however , by statute , ex - im bank's agricultural export support is influenced by usda's programs and positions . specifically , ex - im bank's charter states that it must supplement , but not compete with , private capital or the ccc agricultural commodity programs .