, or other reports . those issues that were considered previously are designated with an asterisk in the relevant section titles of this report . ; crs report r44120 , fy2016 national defense authorization act: selected military personnel issues , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report r43647 , fy2015 national defense authorization act: selected military personnel issues , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] . crs point of contact : [author name scrubbed] , x[phone number scrubbed] . background : under the survivor benefit plan ( sbp ) , a military retiree may have a portion of his or her monthly retired pay withheld in order to provide , after his or her death , a monthly benefit to a surviving spouse or other eligible recipients . when an active duty servicemember dies , his or her survivor's payment through the sbp is usually 55% of the retired base pay that the member would otherwise have been eligible to receive . by law , surviving spouses who receive both an annuity from dod as a beneficiary of the sbp and from the department of veterans affairs' dependency and indemnity compensation ( dic ) must have their sbp payments reduced by the amount of dic . congress first authorized a payment to such surviving spouses to offset that reduction in the fy2008 ndaa . this benefit is called the special survivor indemnity allowance ( ssia ) . monthly ssia payments are currently $310 and are taxable . section 646 of the fy2017 ndaa extended the payment of ssia until may 31 , 2018 . discussion: section 621 of the house - passed bill would have expressed the sense of congress that the ssia was created as a "stop gap" measure to assist widowed spouses by reducing the sbp / dic offset required by law . this section also stated that the dollar - for - dollar reduction in payment to surviving spouses should be fully repealed at the first opportunity . section 638 of the senate - passed version was adopted by the conferees . this provision amends 10 u.s.c . section 1450 to permanently extend the authority to pay the ssia and would require inflation adjustments to that allowance by the amount of the military retired pay cost - of - living adjustment for each calendar year beginning in 2019 . section 622 of the final bill adopts senate section 631 and modifies sections 1447 and 1452 of title 10 , united states code , to ensure equitable treatment under the sbp of members of the uniformed services covered by the modernized retirement system who elect to receive a lump sum of retired pay , as authorized under 10 u.s.c . references: crs report r44577 , fy2017 national defense authorization act: selected military personnel issues , by [author name scrubbed] et al. , fy2017 national defense authorization act: selected military personnel issues ; crs report r40757 , veterans' benefits: dependency and indemnity compensation ( dic ) for survivors , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl34751 , military retirement: background and recent developments , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report r40589 , concurrent receipt: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . crs point of contact : [author name scrubbed] , x[phone number scrubbed .