the fbi concurred with both recommendations . there is a ctf at each field office . these ctfs focus on local cybersecurity threats , respond to incidents , and maintain relationships with companies and institutions . they also support the national effort to combat cybercrime by participating in national virtual teams on certain cyber issues and providing cyber subject matter experts or surge capability outside of their territories , when needed . in 2006 , the fbi established cyber action teams ( cats ) of agents and computer scientists that can be rapidly deployed around the country or the world to assist in computer - intrusion investigations . cat members have expertise in various computer languages , forensic investigations , and analysis of malware . in addition to domestic field offices pursuing international leads in investigations , the fbi has positioned cyber assistant legal attachés ( alats ) in some foreign countries . these alats work with law enforcement in host countries to share information , collaborate on investigations , and enhance relationships with partner agencies . they focus on "identifying , disrupting , and dismantling cyber threat actors and organizations. in addition to its partnerships with law enforcement , the fbi has established several initiatives to interface with the private sector regarding cyber incidents . they collect and share information , build partnerships , and enhance awareness . the fbi stood up the internet crime complaint center ( ic3 ) in 2000 . its mission is two - fold: ( 1 ) act as a reporting mechanism for the public to submit information on potential criminal activity facilitated by the internet , and ( 2 ) foster law enforcement and industry alliances . information is shared with law enforcement to bolster investigative and intelligence activities and with the public to enhance awareness . law enforcement can remotely search the ic3 database through the fbi's law enforcement enterprise portal . infragard is a collaboration between the fbi and private sector partners . these partners include business executives , entrepreneurs , computer professionals , academia , the military , law enforcement , and other government officials . the program facilitates information sharing with the goal of protecting u.s. critical infrastructure . there are 84 infragard chapters around the country with more than 43,000 members . the alliance originally focused on cyber threats and has since expanded to include other threats that might impact critical infrastructure . infragard members have access to iguardian , a tool that the fbi specifically developed for the private sector to report cyber incidents . members can see information and intelligence surrounding incidents that may be similar to their own . information submitted through iguardian is also sent directly to cywatch , where agents and analysts can use the information to deconflict information , build cases , and notify potential victims . the national cyber - forensics and training alliance ( ncfta ) is a nonprofit information - sharing organization bringing together subject matter experts from law enforcement , the private sector , and academia to target cybercrime . the ncfta produces unclassified intelligence assessments and develops strategies to mitigate cyber threats . the fbi can use this information to initiate or bolster law enforcement investigations .