finally , options for change are evaluated . the right of citizens to petition the government has long been considered a protected and fundamental aspect of the citizen - government dynamic . today , interactions between the private citizens and the executive branch take many forms . codifying either the entire ethics pledge ( s ) or individual sections would have the effect of making those changes permanent , and not subject to being revoked by a future executive order . this could allow for permanent changes to existing ethics and conflict - of - interest provisions . should action to incorporate ethics - pledge revolving - door restrictions be desired , several options might exist . these could include extending the "cooling - off" period to two years or more , placing a blanket ban on taking certain positions for compensation , and placing a ban on taking certain types of nongovernmental positions . as mentioned above under " the revolving door ," current statutory "cooling off" periods for executive branch officials range from a lifetime ban on "switching sides" ; to a two - year period for "very senior" officials , and a one - year period for "senior" officials , for certain activities ; and a one - year restriction on all "senior" or "very senior" employees representing a foreign government or political party . one option might be to extend the cooling - off period to two years or more . this would match language in all three ethics pledges . extending the cooling - off period for former appointees to two years , however , could possibly be seen as an unreasonable restriction on postemployment . alternatively , congress could reduce or eliminate the cooling - off period . having a shorter cooling - off period , or eliminating it altogether , might arguably increase the talent pool available both inside and outside the government . instead of , or in addition to , addressing cooling - off periods , congress could enact a blanket restriction on the acceptance of certain types of outside employment for the length of an administration . this might include codifying additional revolving door restrictions as discussed above ; incorporating individual provisions ( eg , a lobbying gift ban or restrictions on trade negotiations by former appointees ) ; or adding specific definitions , waivers , or disclosure concepts to federal law . , the president's bid for reelection ) . such a policy might encourage executive branch appointees to serve for the length of the president's term before seeking outside employment . several disadvantages to creating such postemployment restrictions on appointees potentially exist . first , if the restriction covered only the acceptance of private compensation , fees , or other remuneration , it is possible that an appointee could leave the administration to take an uncompensated position with any private entity . these positions might be advisory in nature and could carry the promise of future compensation after the end of the former appointee's restricted time .