prior to enactment of p.l . 115-97 , taxpayers could subtract from their adjusted gross income ( agi ) the standard deduction or sum of their itemized deductions ( whichever is greater ) and the appropriate number of personal exemptions for themselves , their spouse ( if married ) , and their dependents . for 2017 , the personal exemption amount was $4,050 per person . 115-97 , the personal exemption amount was reduced to zero from 2018 through the end of 2025 . while the personal exemption is not in effect from 2018 through 2025 , the definition of dependent for the exemption was retained and other provisions in the tax code still refer to this definition . a dependent is either ( 1 ) a qualifying child or ( 2 ) a qualifying relative . there are several tests to determine whether an individual is a taxpayer's qualifying child or relative , outlined in table a - 1 . the eligibility rules and definitions of the exclusion are similar to those of the credit . however , there is one key difference . specifically , the $5,000 limit applies irrespective of the number of qualifying individuals . for example , a family with one qualifying child or two qualifying children can both set aside a maximum $5,000 on a pretax basis for child care . with the child and dependent care credit there are separate limits based on the number of qualifying individuals ( $3,000 for one qualifying individual , $6,000 for two or more qualifying individuals ) . in addition , married taxpayers who file their returns as married filing separately are eligible to benefit from this exclusion , while they are ineligible for the credit . the aggregate data for the child and dependent care credit indicate several key aspects of this tax benefit . income l evel of cdctc c laimants: middle - and upper - middle - income taxpayers claim the majority of tax credit dollars . average c redit a mount: at most income levels the average credit amount is between $500 and $600 . lower - income taxpayers receive less than the average amount . the report also includes some summary data on these benefits which highlight some of the characteristics of claimants . the child and dependent care tax credit is a nonrefundable tax credit that reduces a taxpayer's federal income tax liability based on child and dependent care expenses incurred so the taxpayer can work or look for work . since the credit ( sometimes referred to as the child care credit or the cdctc ) is nonrefundable , the amount of the credit cannot exceed a taxpayer's federal income tax liability . taxpayers with little or no federal income tax liability — including many low - income taxpayers — generally receive little if any benefit from nonrefundable credits like the cdctc . in addition to the cdctc , workers can exclude from their wages up to $5,000 of employer - sponsored child and dependent care benefits . since the value of these benefits is excluded from wages , it is not subject to income or payroll taxes .