the provisions of p.l . 115-123 that amended section 45q and their implications are discussed in more detail in the text box below . other bills also would amend the internal revenue code in ways affecting ccs . for example , s. 843 and h.r . 2011 would amend section 142 of the internal revenue code to allow qualified co 2 capture facilities that capture 65% or more of their co 2 emissions to be eligible for tax - exempt private activity bonds . the bills assert that allowing tax - exempt financing for the purchase of capital equipment that is used to capture carbon dioxide will reduce the costs of developing carbon dioxide capture projects , accelerate their deployment , and , in conjunction with carbon dioxide utilization and long - term storage , help the united states meet critical environmental , economic , and national security goals . several bills would address federal efforts to enhance ccs or emphasize different aspects of the process across three different federal agency and departmental jurisdictions: epa , doe , and the department of agriculture . s. 2602 , for example , would authorize activities under epa jurisdiction to support direct air capture and utilization of co 2 , and would include carbon capture infrastructure projects as eligible under the fast act , as part of the bill's intent to expedite the permitting process for ccs . the legislation would add ccs infrastructure projects explicitly as eligible covered projects , meaning any infrastructure construction activity requiring authorization or environmental review by a federal agency . 5745 would amend the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-58 ) to authorize doe to further its ccs research , development , and deployment ( rd&d ) activities , and place a greater emphasis on co 2 utilization . s. 2803 would also authorize a project aimed to achieve net - negative co 2 emissions — projects utilizing biomass and fossil fuels to produce electricity , fuels , or chemicals — with a net removal of co 2 from the atmosphere . s. 2997 would authorize the secretary of agriculture to pursue biomass - related ccs r&d projects , and would authorize the use of loans or loan guarantees for biomass - related co 2 capture and utilization activities . 2296 would focus on doe ccs - related activities and require the department to evaluate its rd&d projects and make recommendations whether each project should continue to receive funding based on progress toward its ccs goals . 4096 would establish a $5 million prize for ccs - related technology development and commercialization , pursuant to section 24 of the stevenson - wydler technology innovation act of 1980 ( 15 u.s.c . 5745 would authorize or encourage rd&d activities across the spectrum of ccs , including carbon capture , carbon sequestration , carbon utilization , and carbon removal ( including direct air capture ) , and would authorize a $15 million prize competition to develop direct air capture technology . the bill also would establish a task force to assess the potential for a national system of co 2 pipelines .