this assumption is supported by the data . when considering the estimated costs of pa , requests in which the per capita impact indicator was exceeded by the per capita impact estimate were decided , on average , 6.4 days sooner than requests in which the indicator was not exceeded . furthermore , ia requests that estimated more than $7.5 million in costs were decided on average in 6.2 days versus 13.4 days for those requests that estimate less than $7.5 million in costs . this may indicate that those factors may make it far easier , or more obvious , to fema that ia should be recommend as part of a disaster declaration . the type of disaster event may also impact the pda timeline . when excluding those requests that were either expedited or appealed , the average number of days for key stages of the pda process for fires , floods , hurricanes , severe storms , severe winter storms , tornadoes , and tropical storms are reported in table 8 . across the 485 events included in the table , the average amount of time between when the incident begins and when the governor or tribal leader submits the request is 27.6 days . however , for flooding events , the average time is 48.5 days , likely reflecting the unique access issues that prevent damage assessment teams from evaluating damage until the flood waters have receded . conversely , the average time is shorter for hurricanes , likely reflecting the lead time and ability to anticipate the severity of those events given forecasting . similar to the time between when the incident begins and the request is submitted , the time between when the request is submitted and when the decision is announced varies by event . for example , the average time between when the request is submitted and when the decision is announced for all events is 13.4 days . however , decisions on major disaster requests for fire - related events occur , on average , 20.5 days after they are submitted . this likely reflects the availability of fire management assistance grants under stafford act authorities , which facilitate response to fires without the need for a presidentially declared disaster . beyond the declaration decision , pdas may be useful predictors of the ultimate obligations for pa and ia . by combining the information from pda reports with information from the disaster relief fund ( drf ) , it is possible to assess how accurate the pda process is for estimating the amount of public and individual assistance ultimately obligated . this information may be useful for assessing the adequacy of the pda process for evaluating whether federal supplemental assistance is necessary following an event . before examining the differences between drf obligations and pda estimates , a few words of caution are warranted . first , the estimates included in the pda report are just that — estimates . therefore , some might argue that some degree of inaccuracy should both be expected and tolerated .