attorneys . in its report , the committee directed doj to use no less than $3 million of the funding provided for the office of the u.s . attorneys to conduct criminal and civil prosecutions into the illegal prescribing and dispensing of opioids . the explanatory statement states that additional funding was being provided for the dea to "expand opioid and heroin enforcement efforts , including supporting existing heroin enforcement teams and establishing new ones ; invest in the fentanyl signature profiling program and law enforcement safety ; and accelerate efforts to dismantle transnational criminal organizations and cartels. the explanatory statement , by reference , also incorporates the senate committee on appropriations' language regarding the proposed "hot spots" pilot program . congress chose to provide additional direct support to the u.s . attorneys offices to combat opioid abuse . the trump administration requested approximately $19 million to target transnational organized crime ( toc ) , including the following: $6 million in additional ocdetf funding to support investigations and prosecutions that target high - priority toc , ocdetf's heroin response strategy , and short - term deployment of federal law enforcement personnel to address violent crime . $7 million for the fbi to support ongoing investigations of toc . $7 million for the dea to investigate transnational criminal organizations responsible for trafficking large quantities of drugs into the country . the house committee on appropriations stated in its report that it provided $15 million under the dea's salaries and expenses account for enhancement of heroin enforcement activities and investigations of transnational criminal organizations involved in drug trafficking . the committee also explained that funds are included under ocdeft to support interagency task forces that target high - level drug trafficking organizations through coordinated , multijurisdictional investigations . the report from the senate committee on appropriations was silent as to whether the committee provided funding for any of the program increases requested by the administration . as mentioned above , the agreement provided additional funding to the dea to help it "dismantle transnational criminal organizations and cartels. the explanatory statement also stated that additional ocdeft funding was included to "enhance investigations and prosecutions of major drug trafficking organizations with a focus on reducing the availability of opioids. the explanatory statement was silent as to whether there was any additional funding for the fbi to specifically support investigations of toc . for fy2018 , the trump administration requested an additional $145 million for enforcing immigration laws , including the following: $75 million for additional eoir immigration judges and support staff . $9 million for additional deputy u.s . marshals to provide court security and timely detainee processing . $50 million for additional housing , medical , and transportation costs for the usms due to an increased detainee population resulting from expanded immigration law enforcement . $7 million for additional assistant u.s . attorneys to help prosecute offenses that are a result of expanded immigration law enforcement . $2 million for the civil division for additional personnel to defend challenges to the immigration laws , regulations , and policies . $2 million for the environment and national resources division to help acquire real property along the southwest border to be used to secure the border between the united states and mexico .