excepted s ervice positions are civil service positions which are not in the competitive service or the ses . the title 5 rules on appointment ( except for veterans' preference ) , pay , and classification do not apply . ses positions are classified above grade 15 of the general schedule or in level iv or v of the executive schedule , or an equivalent position , and are not filled by presidential appointment by and with the advice and consent of the senate . members of the ses , among other duties , direct the work of an organizational unit and exercise important policymaking , policy - determining , or other executive functions . the reemployment priority list is the mechanism agencies use to give reemployment consideration to their current and former competitive service employees who will be , or were , separated by reduction in force or who are fully recovered from a compensable injury after more than one year . employees are to be selected from among the best - qualified candidates and without discrimination . qualification standards and requirements for these positions are established by the individual agencies . the individuals "will be directly involved with the recovery and relief efforts associated with hurricane harvey or hurricane irma. subject to guidance from the opm director , federal executive boards ( febs ) are available to assist the agency with matters related to emergency operations , such as operations under hazardous weather conditions . the febs were established by a presidential memorandum issued by president john f. kennedy in november 1961 , to "provide means for closer coordination of federal activities at the regional level. currently , febs operate in 28 metropolitan areas . a goal of the febs is "to create effective collaboration on emergency readiness and recovery , and to educate [the] federal workforce on issues in emergency situations. table 1 , below , provides information on selected flexibilities related to staffing , compensation , leave transfer , and telework in title 5 of the united states code and title 5 of the code of federal regulations . the table refers to several hr terms , which are explained as follows: competitive s ervice positions are civil service positions in the executive branch , except positions which are specifically excepted from the competitive service by or under statute ; positions to which appointments are made by nomination for confirmation by the senate , unless the senate otherwise directs ; and positions in the senior executive service ( ses ) . such positions require applicants to compete against one another in open competition based on job - related criteria to obtain employment . the positions are subject to the civil service laws codified at title 5 of the united states code and to oversight by opm . the memorandum "remind[s] agencies of the wide range of human resources ( hr ) policies and flexibilities currently available to assist federal employees. on september 1 , 2017 , opm , in consultation with the office of management and budget ( omb ) , established an emergency leave transfer program for federal employees who were adversely affected by hurricane harvey .