appendix a . background primer on coal coal consists of the fossilized remains of ancient plant life that have been transformed through metamorphosis into carbon - rich mineral deposits . it occurs as seams in sedimentary rock strata as old as 300 million years , though the most abundant deposits in the united states were deposited during the geologic carboniferous period between 210 and 250 million years ago . coal mineral classification considers type , rank , and grade . the plant life that coal originated from determines its type , and the degree of metamorphosis determines its rank , grade , and the amount of inorganic mineral matter present . qualities such as moisture , carbon , sulfur , and ash content contribute to a coal's heating value as a fuel ( measured in btus ) . the content of sulfur is significant because of the sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) emissions that occur during coal combustion . under the clean air act , there are federal limits on the amount of so 2 , among other pollutants , allowed from coal - fired power plants . western coal ( which has low sulfur and low energy content ) , primarily produced in the prb of wyoming , is used generally for power generation , while eastern coal has been used domestically for power generation and exported for coking and metallurgical purposes . moisture adds weight to the coal , increasing shipping costs while decreasing its heating value . minerals deposited with the plants that formed coal create ash when coal burns . figure a - 1 below illustrates the various coal classifications . coal mining methods there are two primary mining techniques used in the united states: underground mining and surface mining . about 69% of u.s. coal comes from surface mines , while the remaining 31% comes from deep underground mines . underground mining there are two primary underground mining techniques: room and pillar ( including conventional and continuous mining ) and longwall . room and pillar and continuous mining is practiced as follows: in flat - lying coal beds , conventional room and pillar techniques rely on cutting , drilling , blasting , loading , hauling , and roof bolting — a labor - intensive process . long steel bolts properly spaced and driven into the roof are required . in continuous mining , the cutting , drilling , blasting , and loading are performed by a mechanical excavator known as a continuous miner . the continuous miner cuts and loads the coal . together , room and pillar and continuous techniques account for 50% ( conventional , room and pillar 2% ; continuous 48% ) of underground mining . the most efficient technique in underground mining is the longwall method , which employs a large machine with a rotating drum that moves back and forth across a wide coal seam . once coal is removed by a longwall miner or other method , it is then moved out of the mine with conveyor belts or shuttle cars . about 50% of underground coal is produced using the longwall technique . surface mining surface mining , also called "open - pit" or strip mining , entails blasting rock above the coal with explosives .