no provision . section 301 ( g ) of the championing healthy kids act would add a new state option at ssa section 2107 to allow states to consider all enrollees in chip and in qualified chip look - alike programs to be members of a single risk pool when developing rates and premiums for program participation . a qualified chip look - alike program would be defined as a state - only program ( i.e. , financed with nonfederal funds , including premiums ) that is available for purchase for children through the age of 18 who are not eligible for medicaid or chip and that provides benefits that are at least identical to chip state plan benefits ( or a waiver of such plan ) . section 301 ( g ) would also amend irc section 5000a ( f ) ( 1 ) to add a qualified chip look - alike program to the types of coverage that qualify as minimum essential coverage . this provision would be effective with respect to taxable years after december 31 , 2017 . ssa section 1139a ( e ) , as added by chipra section 401 ( a ) , requires the hhs secretary , in consultation with the cms administrator , to conduct a demonstration project to develop a model for reducing childhood obesity by awarding grants to eligible entities ( eg , community - based organizations , federally - qualified health centers , and universities and colleges ) to carry out the project . the law specifies how awarded funds shall be used ( eg , to carry out community - based activities related to reducing childhood obesity ) , and requires the secretary to prioritize grants to certain eligible entities ( eg , those that can demonstrate having previously received funds to carry out activities that promote individual and community health , and those located in medically underserved communities or areas in which the average poverty rate is at least 150% of the average poverty rate in the state involved ) . chipra required the secretary to design the demonstration project within one year of enactment and to submit to congress a report describing the demonstration project and evaluating its effectiveness not later than three years after project implementation . chipra authorized the appropriation of $25 million for the period of fy2009 through fy2013 to fund the demonstration project . aca section 4306 replaced the authorization of appropriations with a total appropriation of $25 million for the period of fy2010 through fy2014 . in 2011 , the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) awarded funding to four grantees to conduct a four - year childhood obesity research demonstration ( cord ) project . funding was not appropriated for fy2015 . macra section 304 ( a ) appropriated $10 million to fund the demonstration project for fy2016 and fy2017 . the cdc launched an expansion to the first demonstration project titled cord 2.0 , which provided funding to two grantees for 2016 through 2018 , focusing on clinical and weight management program interventions .