funds could not be used for land acquisition . the funds would be available for expenditure only when appropriated by congress . the monies would be used for "high - priority deferred maintenance needs of the service that support critical infrastructure and visitor services" and could not be used for land acquisition . the national parks centennial act ( p.l . this report addresses frequently asked questions about nps dm . the discussion is organized under the headings of general questions , funding - related questions , management - related questions , and questions on congress's role in addressing the backlog . congress has addressed nps's maintenance backlog through oversight , funding , and legislation . for example , in the 115 th congress , both the house and the senate have held oversight hearings to investigate options for addressing nps dm . annual appropriations for nps are discussed in crs report r42757 , national park service: fy2017 appropriations and ten - year trends . several recent laws and proposals outside of annual appropriations , including the national parks centennial act of 2016 and bills introduced in the 115 th congress , are discussed under the following questions . 114-289 ) , enacted in december 2016 , contained a variety of provisions aimed at addressing the nps maintenance backlog as well as meeting other park goals . the law created two funds that may be used to reduce dm — the national park centennial challenge fund and the second century endowment for the national park service . both funds receive federal monies from the sale of senior recreation passes , as well as donations . dm projects are a prioritized use of the centennial challenge fund and are among the potential uses of endowment funds . the law also made changes to extend eligibility for the public land corps and increase the authorization of appropriations for the volunteers in the parks program . participants in these programs perform a variety of duties that help address dm , among other activities . in addition , the law authorized appropriations of $5.0 million annually for fy2017-fy2023 for the national park foundation to match nonfederal contributions . contributions to the foundation are used for a variety of nps projects and programs , including projects on the maintenance backlog . bills in the 115 th congress related to nps deferred maintenance include the following . 1577 , the national park service transparency and accountability act , would require the secretary of the interior to submit to congress a report evaluating the nps's capital investment strategy and its results , including a determination of whether the strategy is achieving its intended outcomes and any recommendations for changes . 2584 / s. 751 , the national park service legacy act of 2017 , would establish a national park service legacy restoration fund with funding from mineral revenues . annual amounts deposited into the fund would begin at $50.0 million for fy2018-fy2020 and would rise gradually to $500.0 million for fy2027-fy2047 . the funds would be available to nps for expenditure without further appropriation .