during or after a disaster , some debris will likely become mixed with hazardous constituents . improperly managing debris can have detrimental long - term repercussions . for example , under flooding conditions , household hazardous waste or sewage may contaminate otherwise benign personal property or building materials , such as drywall or carpeting . fema encourages state , territorial , tribal , and local governments to establish a debris management plan ( dmp ) , written procedures and guidance that the governments will use to manage debris in an expeditious , efficient , and environmentally sound manner . fema provides technical assistance to communities to develop dmps and will approve plans that meet its required criteria . among other elements , a fema - approved dmp must identify the types of incidents likely to occur in the region and the types of debris that would likely be handled after those incidents . it must also identify the existing state or federal laws that would apply to the handling and disposal of the types of debris likely handled . on january 29 , 2013 , president obama signed into law the sandy recovery improvement act of 2013 ( p.l . the law amends the stafford act to add section 428 , which authorizes "alternative procedures" for fema's public assistance program through a pilot program . more specifically , the law directed fema to adopt alternative procedures that would further the goals of: reducing costs to the federal government of providing assistance , increasing flexibility in administering assistance , expediting the process of providing assistance , and providing financial incentives and disincentives for the timely and cost - effective completion of projects . section 428 allows fema to take a number of actions to meet those goals with respect to debris removal activities . for example , fema is authorized to fund debris management planning and to provide incentives to state , tribal , or local governments to prepare a dmp for fema approval . the incentive for having a fema - approved dmp is a one - time , 2% increase in funding above the approved federal cost share for debris removal activities . currently , fema is implementing debris - related alternative procedures in accordance with pilot programs authorized through june 27 , 2018 . the following information may be useful to understand requirements and federal agency roles in various aspects of disaster debris removal: fema , april 2017 public assistance program and policy guide , https: / / www.fema.gov / media - library / assets / documents / 111781 . see particularly the discussion of issues and requirements related to debris removal on pages 43-61 and "appendix d: debris management plan job aid. fema , public assistance: debris management guide , fema - 325 , july 2007 , https: / / www.fema.gov / media - library / assets / documents / 25649 . fema , "debris removal and demolition fact sheet," https: / / www.fema.gov / media - library / assets / documents / 90745 . fema , "alternative procedures" , https: / / www.fema.gov / alternative - procedures . army corps of engineers , "debris management," http: / / www.usace.army.mil / missions / emergency - operations / national - response - framework / debris - management / .