appendix a . the six assurances appearing before the house and senate to explain the august 17 , 1982 , u.s. - prc joint communiqué , then - assistant secretary of state john h. holdridge wove into his prepared statement a set of assurances that corresponded to what taiwan's ministry of foreign affairs said were assurances the reagan administration had offered privately to taiwan's president a month earlier . a portion of holdridge's testimony is reproduced below . crs has used bold text to highlight the statements in the testimony that later became known as the "the six assurances. excerpt of testimony of john h. holdridge , assistant secretary , bureau of east asian and pacific affairs , department of state , before the senate committee on foreign relations , august 17 , 1982 "turning to the [august 17 , 1982 u.s. - prc joint communiqué] itself , let me recapitulate and emphasize a few key features , and then i will be happy to take your questions..... fourth , we did not agree to set a date certain for ending arms sales to taiwan , and the statements of future u.s. arms sales policy embodied in the communiqué do not provide either a timeframe for the reduction of u.s. arms sales or for their termination . the u.s. statements are fully consistent with the taiwan relations act and we will continue to make appropriate arms sales to taiwan based on our assessments of their defense needs . "... as to our position on the resolution of the taiwan problem , we have consistently held that it is a matter to be worked out by the chinese themselves . our sole and abiding concern is that any resolution be peaceful . it follows that we see no mediation role for the united states nor will we attempt to exert pressure on taiwan to enter into negotiations with the prc . "i would also like to call your attention to the fact that there has been no change in our longstanding position on the issue of sovereignty over taiwan . the communiqué , paragraph 1 , in its opening paragraph simply cites that portion of the joint communiqué on the establishment of diplomatic relations between the united states and the prc in which the united states acknowledged the chinese position on this issue ; that is , that there is but one china , and taiwan is a part of china. it has been reported in the press that the chinese at one point suggested that the taiwan relations act be revised . we have no plans to seek any such revisions . "finally , in paragraph 9 the two sides agree to maintain contact and hold appropriate consultations on bilateral and international issues of common interest . this should be read within the context of paragraphs 8 and 9 , which deal with the two sides' desire to advance their bilateral and strategic relations . it should not be read to imply that we have agreed to engage in prior consultations with beijing on arms sales to taiwan .