these income limits are not adjusted for inflation . one criticism of education tax benefits is that the taxpayer is faced with a confusing choice of deductions and credits and tax - favored education savings plans , and that these benefits should be consolidated . tax reform proposals have consolidated these benefits into a single education credit in some cases . taxpayers may use this deduction instead of education tax credits for the same student . 115-123 ) extended the exclusion through the end of 2017 . the rationales for extending the exclusion are to minimize hardship for households in distress and lessen the risk that nontax homeowner retention efforts are thwarted by tax policy . it may also be argued that extending the exclusion would continue to assist the recoveries of the housing market and overall economy . opponents of the exclusion may argue that extending the provision would make debt forgiveness more attractive for homeowners , which could encourage homeowners to be less responsible about fulfilling debt obligations . the exclusion may also be viewed by some as unfair , as its benefits depend on whether a homeowner is able to negotiate a debt cancelation , the income tax bracket of the taxpayer , and whether the taxpayer retains ownership of the house following the debt cancellation . 114-113 ) extended the exclusion through the end of 2016 . the act also allowed for debt discharged after 2016 to be excluded from income if the taxpayer had entered into a binding written agreement to sell his or her house before january 1 , 2017 . the other two individual extender provisions are housing related . the provision allowing homeowners to deduct mortgage insurance premiums was first enacted in 2006 ( effective for 2007 ) . the provision allowing qualified canceled mortgage debt income associated with a primary residence to be excluded from income was first enacted in 2007 . both provisions were temporary when first enacted , but in recent years have been extended as part of the tax extenders . in recent years , congress has chosen to extend most , if not all , recently expired or expiring provisions as part of "tax extender" legislation . the most recent tax extender package is the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba18 ; p.l . information on costs associated with extending individual income tax expired provisions is provided in table 1 . the provisions that were extended in the bba18 were extended for one year , retroactive for 2017 . the estimated cost to make expired provisions permanent is reported by the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) . the jct reports estimated deficit effects of extending expired and expiring tax provisions through the 10-year budget window ( 2018 – 2027 ) . historically , when all or part of a taxpayer's mortgage debt has been forgiven , the amount canceled has been included in the taxpayer's gross income . this income is typically referred to as canceled mortgage debt income . canceled ( or forgiven ) mortgage debt is common with a "short sale.