investment . unlike many chapters in nafta which have analogous counterparts in the wto agreements , the investment chapter in the wto does not provide the level of protection for investors as does nafta , subsequent u.s. trade agreements , or bilateral investment treaties . if the united states withdrew from nafta , u.s. investors would lose protections in canada and mexico . countries would have more leeway to block individual investments . u.s. investors would not have recourse to the investor - state dispute settlement ( isds ) mechanism , but would need to deal with claims of expropriation through domestic courts , or recourse to government - to - government consultation . canada and mexico likely would maintain investor protection between them through the prospective cptpp or through maintenance of nafta provisions . the timeline for congressional consideration of the proposed usmca remains unclear in part because of the tpa timeline and also because of issues voiced by congress related to various provisions of the agreement and other ongoing trade issues with canada and mexico . the agreement would have to be approved by congress and ratified by mexico and canada before entering into force . on august 31 , 2018 , pursuant to tpa , president trump provided congress a 90-day notification of his intent to sign an fta with canada and mexico . on january 29 , 2019 , as required by tpa 60 days after an agreement is signed , u.s. trade representative robert lighthizer submitted to congress changes to existing u.s. laws that will be needed to bring the united states into compliance with the proposed usmca . a report by the itc on the possible economic impact of tpa is not expected to be completed until april 20 , 2019 due to the 35-day government shut down . the report has been cited by some members of congress as key to their decisions on whether to support the agreement . some policymakers have stated that the path forward to passage of the usmca by congress is uncertain partially because the three countries have yet to resolve disputes over u.s. steel and aluminum tariffs . the united states , canada , and mexico are currently in a trade dispute over u.s. actions to impose tariffs on such imports due to national security concerns as discussed earlier in the report , the conclusion of the proposed usmca did not resolve the section 232 tariff dispute . the u.s. business community , industry groups , some congressional leaders , and mexican government officials have publicly stated that the tariff issues must be resolved before the usmca could enter into force . questions surrounding passage of mexico's proposed labor reforms could be a key issue for congress as lawmakers consider the proposed usmca . under annex 23-a of usmca's labor chapter , mexico has commitments to adopt and maintain measures necessary for the effective recognition of the right to bargain collectively , including the establishment of an independent labor court for the adjudication of labor disputes . the reforms were expected to be passed into law before january 1 , 2019 in order to avoid a delay of the usmca's entry into force . mexico has not yet passed the reforms .