in halo v . pulse , the supreme court emphasized that the award of enhanced damages lies within the discretion of the district judges in view of all of the circumstances . although not subject to a "rigid formula," the award of enhanced damages may depend on such factors as whether the infringer intentionally copied the patent proprietor's product ; whether the infringer acted in accordance with the standards of commerce for its industry ; whether the infringer made a good faith effort to avoid infringing ; whether there is a reasonable basis to believe that the infringers had a reasonable defense to infringement ; and whether defendants tried to conceal their infringement . the supreme court also clarified that the evidentiary threshold for an award of enhanced damages is the "preponderance of the evidence" and that the federal circuit should review awards of enhanced damages under the "abuse of discretion" standard . commentators have widely viewed the halo v. pulse ruling as making awards of enhanced damages easier to obtain . although bills directly addressing the topic of enhanced damages have not been placed before congress in many years , these earlier proposals were more restrictive than the standards adopted in halo v. pulse . indeed , in support of its ruling in halo v. pulse , the supreme court noted that congress had considered bills calling for a higher standard of proof for willful infringement but had not enacted them . for example , in the 111 th congress , the patent reform act of 2009 ( h.r . 1260 ) would have authorized a court to find willful infringement only where the patent proprietor proved by clear and convincing evidence that ( 1 ) the infringer received specific written notice from the patentee and continued to infringe after a reasonable opportunity to investigate ; ( 2 ) the infringer intentionally copied from the patentee with knowledge of the patent ; or ( 3 ) the infringer continued to infringe after an adverse court ruling . in addition , under h.r . 1260 , willful infringement could be found where the infringer possessed an informed , good faith belief that its conduct was not infringing . the leahy - smith america invents act ( aia ) , p.l . 112-29 , incorporated a single provision relating to the law of willful infringement . section 17 of the aia incorporated 35 u.s.c . ยง298 into the patent act . that provision provides: the failure of an infringer to obtain the advice of counsel with respect to any allegedly infringed patent , or the failure of the infringer to present such advice to the court or jury , may not be used to prove that the accused infringer willfully infringed the patent or that the infringer intended to induce infringement of the patent . this provision was intended "to protect attorney - client privilege and to reduce pressure on accused infringers to obtain opinions of counsel for litigation purposes. the aia did not otherwise address the topic of willful infringement . patent law's willful infringement doctrine has proven controversial . some observers believe that this doctrine ensures that patent rights will be respected in the marketplace .