these issues are discussed in further detail below . this report first reviews the basics of international tax rules . it then discusses the various action items organized into action item 1 , which relates to the digital economy and proposes standards only with respect to vats ; action items 2-5 , 7 , and 8-10 , items related primarily to profit shifting ; action item 5 , which relates to harmful tax practices ; action item 6 , regarding tax treaties ; and action items 11-15 , which are primarily administrative in nature . action 1 focuses on the general issue of the effects of the digital economy . it discusses the broad set of consequences of a digital economy that may exacerbate base erosion and profit shifting issues or even render existing rules obsolete . the discussion deals with three types of taxes: ( 1 ) corporate profits taxes ; ( 2 ) withholding taxes on income such as dividends , interest , and royalties ( in this case , royalties ) ; and ( 3 ) the value added tax ( vat ) . standards , however , are provided only with respect to the vat . the digital economy is an economy based on digital technologies . it refers to numerous online activities , such as advertising , broadcasting and media , production monitoring , retailing , and tracking , as well as financial services , remote education and health care diagnosis and records , software , and cloud computing . digital activity also involves gathering customer data and converting it into revenue ( such as through sales of advertising ) and user - generated content . these activities are characterized by mobility , reliance on intangible assets , network effects that may lead to oligopoly or monopoly , and in some cases low barriers to entry that lead to volatility . the oecd analysis also raises questions of whether income from certain activities , such as cloud computing , should be considered profit or royalties . the digital economy issues are particularly important to u.s. multinationals because u.s. firms are the major firms in this industry . with many aspects of the digital economy rendering the physical presence rules for nexus irrelevant , this discussion focuses on new approaches for establishing nexus as well as tightening ( but not abandoning ) physical presence ( addressed in the permanent establishment standards under action item 7 ) . the oecd considered , but abandoned , using economic presence rather than physical presence as the standard nexus test . economic presence might be measured by sales , having a local domain name or website , having a local payment option , the volume of data collected , contract conclusion with customers , and monthly active users . action item 1 also considered allocating income through fractional apportionment , and a modified deemed profit ratio on presumed expenses . in addition , the action item discussed a withholding tax on digital transaction payments and an equalization levy ( an excise tax , for example , on gross sales ) . none of these approaches were provided as a standard , although countries are free to adopt such an approach if needed to address beps issues .