and regulating . production is , of course , fundamental . to do both is an affront to "the very nature of things," especially due process . the court determined that due process of law is violated if the entity is " ( 1 ) a self - interested entity ( 2 )  with regulatory authority over its competitors. are these entities considered private or governmental actors ? does such delegation of authority implicate due process concerns ? are managing directors and employees who govern a government - created corporation considered "officers of the united states" subject to the requirements of the appointments clause ? this report will explore these questions by reviewing how courts apply constitutional principles to privatization differently , depending on whether the authority is delegated to governmental entities , private entities , or government - created corporations . to define what constitutional limits could apply when congress delegates authority to an entity to perform a governmental function , courts must first determine whether the entity in question is a private or governmental entity . the answer to this threshold question is central to how a court would review the constitutional issues underlying the delegation of authority to that entity . as one legal scholar explained , "the public - private distinction is primary — all other legal distinctions are subsumed beneath this first - order division of legal life. for example , constitutional provisions , such as the due process clause , apply only to governmental entities , while the private nondelegation doctrine that prohibits the delegation of governmental functions to nongovernmental entities is relevant only if congress improperly delegates authority to private entities . congress's authority to delegate and privatize governmental functions and services is potentially limited by constitutional principles , including the nondelegation doctrine , the due process clause , and the appointments clause . courts have applied these principles in legal challenges to ( 1 ) the scope of congress's authority to delegate its legislative power ; ( 2 ) the manner in which congress delegates these powers ; ( 3 ) the types of entities that exercise delegations of authority ; ( 4 ) the nature and scope of the delegated powers or functions ; and ( 5 ) the authority to appoint the individuals that exercise certain powers . under article i of the constitution , "[a]ll legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a congress of the united states. the supreme court has broadly defined "legislative power" as "the power to make laws. although the court has interpreted the constitution to prohibit congress from delegating its legislative authority , the court has explained that congress may "delegate to others at least some authority that it could exercise itself. the "nondelegation doctrine" has traditionally been applied to limit congress's authority to delegate "legislative power" to the other governmental entities . this doctrine is based on the larger doctrine of separation of powers and exists primarily to prevent congress from abdicating its core legislative function as established under article i of the constitution . how courts apply the nondelegation doctrine depends on whether an entity is considered a private or governmental entity .