such legislation could be considered under tpa . tpa currently is in effect until july 1 , 2021 , provided that congress does not pass an extension disapproval resolution in the 60 days prior to july 1 , 2018 . the federal government's senior trade advisory panel , the advisory committee for trade policy and negotiations ( actpn ) , issued its report and recommendations for modernizing nafta on june 28 , 2017 , stating that "it is time to bring nafta into the 21 st century and to turn it into a high standards agreement in accordance with the negotiating objectives of the 2015 trade promotion authority ( tpa ) . actpn did not make specific recommendations with regard to motor vehicle trade , but its report does address some of the specific issues raised by motor vehicle industry and union organizations . for example , with regard to rules of origin , the majority of actpn members — but not its labor union members — urge caution in making changes to the rules of origin to ensure that they do not disrupt efficient supply chains and raise production costs , undercut u.s. competitiveness , and potentially backfire and lead to job losses in the u.s. and less sourcing because companies will import components and pay the most favored nation ( mfn ) tariff . the actpn report also discusses general recommendations for other policy issues of interest to the motor vehicle industry and unions , including government procurement , customs procedures , environmental and labor standards , worker rights , currency manipulation , and investor state dispute settlement . each of these issues was raised when the ustr held a series of public hearings seeking recommendations on nafta negotiating objectives from june 27 to june 29 , 2017 , taking testimony from a broad range of witnesses . the ustr hearings were conducted by the nafta modernization panel and included officials who sit on the trade policy staff committee , including representatives from ustr and the departments of commerce , treasury , state , and agriculture . the industry representatives — alliance of automobile manufacturers , the association of global automakers , motor and equipment manufacturers association ( mema ) , the auto care association , and the american automotive policy council ( aapc ) — spoke about the evolution of the current supply chain and the benefits they see it has brought to the north american vehicle market . they advocate changes to enhance the agreement and support the current nafta rules of origin , which they say strike the right supply chain balance , promote exports from north america , and reduce costs . the motor vehicle associations argued for nafta modernization , including changes that would update customs procedures , including e - commerce , to reduce border delays ; expand intellectual property protection ; remove technical barriers to trade by improving regulatory cooperation on future vehicle standards and recognize current u.s. federal motor vehicle safety standards so u.s. - certified vehicles will be accepted across the region ; align data protection and privacy laws so data can be exchanged across borders more easily ; and update labor and environmental provisions consistent with more recent free trade agreements .