the constitution does not mention "separation of powers. but it is generally considered inherent in the constitution's tripartite division of federal power to the executive , legislative , and judicial branches that each branch of government has discrete powers that no other branch can invade . additionally , the founders envisioned a separation of the three branches of government as an "essential precaution in favor of liberty. furthermore , the framers viewed the need to separate the legislative and judicial powers as a "sharp necessity. in the days before the constitution , the framers had observed that many states did not separate the judiciary from the legislature and , as a result , the adjudication of individual rights was subject to a "tyranny of shifting majorities. consequently , in designing an independent judiciary , the framers , at least in part , were reacting to a common practice in the colonies , and then the states , of "legislative correction of judgments," in which legislative bodies would set aside judgments through legislation . still , the framers recognized that separation of the three branches of government would not be perfect or complete . a rticle iii of the constitution establishes the judicial branch of the federal government . for example , article iii's exceptions clause , which allows congress to make exceptions to the supreme court's appellate jurisdiction , traditionally has been viewed as authorizing congress to remove a class of cases from federal jurisdiction . and because article iii grants congress the power to establish inferior federal courts , those inferior courts have only the jurisdiction that congress affirmatively grants by statute . additionally , congress's power to regulate federal court jurisdiction and to enact substantive laws that the judiciary must then apply , in practice , allows congress to control the work of the courts . this principle extends to laws that retroactively change legal rights , as the supreme court has long recognized that courts generally must apply retroactive laws to pending cases , even when the law was different at the litigation's outset . thus , congress "can always revise the judgments of article iii courts in one sense: when a new law makes clear that it is retroactive , an appellate court must apply that law in reviewing judgments still on appeal that were rendered before the law was enacted , and must alter the outcome accordingly. similarly , congress can lawfully influence litigation by enacting legislation that necessarily impacts the effect , going forward , of injunctions issued by a federal court . thus , the tension in article iii , which creates an independent federal judiciary but also subjects the judicial branch , at times , to legislative control , generates difficult questions related to separation of powers , and the court has had to determine when congress's powers impermissibly invade the powers of the judiciary . despite the recent trend to limit the scope of klein , the 1871 case remains good law and its progeny provides some useful guideposts for congress in fashioning jurisdiction - stripping legislation and measures that target pending litigation . based on the language of klein , congress cannot "prescribe a rule for the decision of a cause in a particular way.