those sections are discussed below . the subtitle's savings clauses and sunset dates are key to understanding its potential impacts and limitations . the application of those provisions is discussed below . subtitle j of the wiin act likely will continue to receive congressional attention . in its oversight capacity , congress may be interested in the trump administration's implementation of subtitle j , with particular focus on whether the interpretation of these provisions is in accordance with congressional intent in passing the wiin act . of particular interest may be the wiin act's application to the operations of the cvp and federal support for the construction of new surface water storage projects , among other things . in addition to overseeing the implementation of the bill's provisions , congress also may consider their amendment , extension , or repeal . according to reclamation , the relatively wet hydrology that followed enactment of the wiin act has largely limited opportunities to implement some of the act's operational authorities since the bill's passage . for example , section 4004 consultation authorities have been used to allow for increased communication and transparency for some operational decisions , resulting in reduced or rescheduled pumping restrictions on some occasions . additionally , in 2018 the wiin act's allowance for relaxed restrictions on inflow - to - export ratios ( section 4001 ) were used to transfer water , resulting in additional exports of 50,000-60,000 af , and section 4003 has been used to increase export pumping levels by 5,500 acre - feet during a temporary storm event in march 2018 . attention has focused on extending these and other water supply authorities under the wiin act , most of which are set to expire in december 2021 . extension of the wiin act is supported by a bipartisan coalition of some california lawmakers who believe the act provides the proper balance of support for water users and the environment . however , some other members of congress , as well as some environmental groups , oppose extending certain authorities under the act on the grounds that an extension will facilitate high levels of delta pumping and other projects that could leave less water for fish and damage the environment . congress has appropriated funding authorized for reclamation ( both for the cvp and for other projects ) under the wiin act . crs estimates that from fy2017 to fy2019 , congress appropriated approximately $576 million for reclamation projects and programs authorized under the wiin act . some of these authorities have met their appropriations ceilings ; thus , they may be proposed for extension or amendment . table 2 , below , provides additional information on appropriations received to date under several wiin act subtitle j authorities . at the same time , some federal operational changes pursuant to the wiin act reportedly were proposed but deemed incompatible with state requirements . however , some changes authorized under the act have been implemented . a number of provisions in the bill addressed drought in california and the operations of the central valley project . some may also propose adding to or repealing parts of subtitle j . legislation considered in the 115 th congress ( eg , h.r .