the legislative history of the caa was similarly "unilluminating. however , the ambiguous legislative history was "consistent with the view that the epa should have broad discretion in implementing the policies of" the caa . ultimately , the court decided that the epa had "advanced a reasonable explanation" for determining that its definition of "source" advanced the policy concerns that had motivated the caa's enactment , and upheld this "permissible construction. the court gave three related reasons for deferring to the epa: congressional delegation of authority , agency expertise , and political accountability . accordingly , courts often refer to statutory purpose . they also regularly cite legislative history at chevron step one . similarly , to help determine congressional intent , courts have looked to past agency practice as well as agency interpretations that were advanced prior to the dispute before the court . finally , judges may sometimes invoke normative or substantive canons of statutory interpretation , distinct from the textual canons mentioned above . courts and scholars debate not only which methods of statutory construction constitute the "traditional tools" embraced in chevron 's step one , but also when application of those tools may render a statute sufficiently clear to conclude that congress has "directly addressed the precise question at issue. it is an open question whether chevron 's first step presents a normal question of statutory interpretation , in which the court should look for ambiguity or clarity as it would any other time it interprets a statute , or whether instead a determination that a statute is unambiguous for the purposes of chevron step one requires some higher level of clarity . different judges may undertake a more or less searching inquiry , deploying different tools of statutory interpretation and , perhaps as a result , reaching different conclusions regarding whether to proceed to chevron step two . some decisions have implied that if a court needs to resort to a greater number of tools in the search for a clear meaning , this in itself suggests that a statute is ambiguous . confusion about the level of statutory ambiguity required to trigger chevron 's step two is compounded by supreme court decisions that seemingly blur the line between the two steps . the court has sometimes held only that an agency's interpretation is "reasonable" or "permitted" without expressing an opinion on whether the statute is sufficiently clear to indicate that congress in fact unambiguously addressed the specific question before the court . if a court determines at step one that the statute is ambiguous or silent on the particular issue in question , the chevron framework next requires consideration of whether the agency's construction of the statute is "permissible. under chevron 's step - two analysis , if congress has delegated authority to an agency to fill in the gaps of a statute , courts will give "controlling weight" to reasonable agency interpretations of a statutory ambiguity . accordingly , at chevron 's second step , courts may not substitute their own interpretation of a statutory provision for an agency construction that is reasonable .