mali . in his 2017 africom posture statement , general waldhauser stated that "we continue to support france's counterterrorism operations in mali ... and seek to increase our synchronization and coordination with their efforts . continued [u.s.] airlift and logistical support is essential to france's efforts , and we must continue to provide this support if progress is to happen in this volatile region. senegal . a u.s. - senegal bilateral defense access agreement was notified to the senate in 2016 , and was described by the then - u.s . ambassador in remarks to the press . somalia . the june 2017 wpr report stated that , "in somalia , united states forces continue to counter the terrorist threat posed by al - qa'ida and its somalia - based associated force , al - shabaab , and isis - somalia . united states forces also advise , assist , and accompany regional forces , including somali and african union mission in somalia ( amisom ) forces , during counterterrorism operations. tunisia . general waldhauser , during a press briefing on march 24 , 2017 , stated in response to a question , "flying intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance drones out of tunisia has been taking place for quite some time ... it's not a secret base . and it's not our base , it's the tunisians' base. central africa . the june 2017 wpr report noted that the six - year u.s. advisor mission to help regional forces counter the lord's resistance army , known as operation observant compass , ended in april 2017 and that the approximately 410 military personnel who remained at that point deployed to the subregion — in uganda , central african republic , south sudan , and democratic republic of the congo — were "conducting retrograde activities. general waldhauser also told reporters in april that , "we will continue to work with those countries with training and exercises ... we do not want to leave a void there. the future u.s. military footprint remains to be seen . in the initial aftermath of the october 4 attack , news reports questioned whether dod had adhered to a "golden hour standard" for medical evacuation . the "golden hour" is described as the first 60 minutes following trauma or the onset of acute illness , where chances of a patient's survival are considered greatest if advanced trauma life support can be provided . dod notes that , "historically , wound data and casualty rates indicate that more than 90 percent of all casualties die within the first hour of severe wounding without advanced trauma life support. u.s. military medical support is generally structured to meet this standard of one hour or less . transporting a soldier to advanced trauma care within 60 minutes is viewed , however , as a standard but not an absolute requirement . lack of medical assets — particularly aerial medical evacuation — along with distances from the site of wounding or injury to a military medical facility , the tactical situation on the ground ( eg , hostile fire ) , the nature of the mission ( eg , clandestine or in a remote or denied area ) , and adverse weather might make the one hour advanced treatment standard difficult to achieve .