wmata faces a number of difficulties . the administration did not request any funding for tiger grants for fy2018 . 115-141 , which included increased spending for most agencies . it funds new fixed - guideway transit lines and extensions to existing lines . in february 2017 , fta notified leaders of the three jurisdictions that it would withhold 5% of their fy2017 transit urbanized area formula funds until they meet the requirements to create a new state safety oversight program to replace the tri - state oversight committee . the jurisdictions passed legislation establishing a new safety oversight agency soon after , but the agency must be in operation before fta will release the funding . under this agreement , congress has provided $150 million to wmata in each of the past nine years . it is dealing with a backlog of maintenance needs due to inadequate maintenance investment over many years , and it has experienced several fatal incidents , most recently in january 2015 . a number of other incidents have raised questions about the safety culture of the agency . an investigation that found numerous instances of mismanagement of federal funding led fta to restrict wmata's use of federal funds . an fta audit of wmata's safety practices in 2015 produced many recommendations for change , and in october 2015 fta assumed oversight of wmata's safety compliance practices from the tri - state oversight committee , the agency created by the governments of the district of columbia , maryland , and virginia to oversee wmata safety performance . fta continues to exercise safety oversight of wmata , conducting inspections , leading accident investigations , and directing that federal funds received by wmata are used to improve safety . the national transportation safety board has recommended that oversight of wmata's rail operations be assigned to fra , which has a long history of safety enforcement , rather than fta , which is primarily a grant management agency . however , congress would have to act to give fra authority to oversee wmata , while fta already has such authority . for fy2018 , the final year of the grant authorization , both the house and senate appropriations committees recommended the full $150 million annual grant for wmata . the senate committee report expresses frustration at the slow progress wmata has made in providing wireless service throughout its system , which congress mandated in 2008 . the senate committee report also notes that the fy2018 grant is the final installment of the $1.5 billion funding commitment congress made in 2008 , but that wmata's budget assumes that the annual funding will continue to be provided . the enacted bill provided the $150 million , and made grants to wmata contingent on improvements to its safety management system . in 2008 , congress directed railroads to install positive train control ( ptc ) on certain segments of the national rail network by the end of 2015 . ptc is a communications and signaling system that is capable of preventing incidents caused by train operator or dispatcher error .