this would have to be done before the tolls are collected . a major increase in the extent of toll facilities or a decision to convert the interstate system to toll roads would likely bring calls for greater federal involvement in the regulation of tolling rates and strategies . deeper federal involvement might include federal standards for tolls or a more precise definition of the requirement in current law that tolls be "just and reasonable," along with provision for the enforcement of that requirement . in such a case , congress would need to clarify which federal agency would be responsible for enforcing tolling regulations and overseeing toll rates . 84-627 ; 70 stat . 374 ) , which authorized 13 years of funding for construction of the interstate highway system , created the highway trust fund ( htf ) as the source of federal funds for state road construction , and raised tax rates on motor fuels to help fund it . the fuel and other highway taxes that were now dedicated to the htf were seen as a close proxy for a user - payer system of financing federal - aid roads . the increased flow of federal funds , heavily weighted toward the interstate highways , effectively stopped the development of new toll roads by the states . thirty - five years later , the intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of 1991 ( istea ; p.l . 102-240 ) opened non - interstate federal - aid highways to tolling , but allowed existing roads or bridges to be tolled only after being reconstructed . this effectively linked tolling to capacity additions or road improvements . both the 1998 transportation equity act for the 21 st century ( tea - 21 ; p.l . 105-178 , as amended by p.l . 105-206 ) and the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( p.l . 109-59 ; safetea ) allowed tolling on high - occupancy vehicle ( hov ) lanes , established pilot projects for tolling of a limited number of interstate system routes , and allowed limited use of tolls that vary according to the level of traffic , known as congestion pricing . the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 ; p.l . 112-141 ) , enacted in 2012 , reinforced the encouragement of tolls on hov lanes and congestion pricing . it allowed tolling of new interstate system routes , route extensions , and additional lane capacity , but continued to block tolling of most existing interstate highway lane capacity . map - 21 retained two pilot programs , one encouraging the use of pricing to control congestion and another allowing interstate route segments in three states to be converted to tolling as part of their reconstruction . the fixing america's surface transportation act ( fast act ; p.l . 114-94 ) , enacted in december 2015 , clarified that public authorities generally , as opposed to solely state agencies , may impose tolls on single - occupant vehicles using hov lanes .