in this way , they are tools of reorganization . where two or more agencies have overlapping or closely related responsibilities , such an agreement might be used to specify the division of responsibility , establish processes or structured protocols for sharing information , and make mutual , lasting commitments for cooperating in a shared policy area . as noted by an observer of these agreements , they might serve one or more different purposes: ( 1 ) delineating jurisdictional lines , ( 2 ) establishing procedures for information sharing or information production , ( 3 ) agreeing to collaborate in a common mission , ( 4 ) coordinating reviews or approvals where more than one agency has authority to act in a particular substantive area , and ( 5 ) in rarer cases ( and potentially subject to additional procedures under the administrative procedure act ) ... agreeing on substantive policy . alternatively , agencies might enter into more formal interagency agreements or contracts . in some instances where interagency mous or contracts shift significant responsibilities for carrying out statutory functions from one agency to another , congressional action might be necessary to authorize or appropriate accompanying shifts in resources . another kind of interagency mechanism might be used to increase adherence to the president's policy direction . modern presidents have sometimes tried to coordinate policy development and implementation among departments and agencies from the white house . to the extent that such efforts shift the locus of authority and decisionmaking from one agency to another , they might be considered reorganization actions . presidents have , for example , sometimes appointed high - level presidential advisors and given them such a role . such advisors have been referred to , by the administration in some cases , and by the media , as "czars. the precise role and authority of such individuals in the policy development and implementation processes is often difficult for congress and the public to discern . in some cases , this lack of clarity of role and authority and the perceived lack of accountability to congress have been the source of controversy . government reorganization is often cast in terms of potential administrative benefits . for example , whenever congress has delegated general reorganization authority to the president ( see " presidential reorganization authority " above ) , it has clearly stated in the statutory provisions that the objective of reorganization is administrative improvement , and it has often required that reorganization plans submitted by the president articulate the plan's means of achieving such improvements . administrative goals of reorganization include , for example , improved program effectiveness , greater efficiency , reduced cost , and improved policy integration across related programs . in addition to these administrative goals , reorganization efforts often have spoken or unspoken political goals and outcomes . the political nature of reorganization arises from the fact that it redistributes power and resources . although it may have beneficial outcomes over time , it is axiomatic that a government reorganization is disruptive , at least in the short term , to the functioning of the organizations involved . implementation of a reorganization plan can affect existing power dynamics , rearrange relationships , create uncertainty , and generally interrupt the flow of work .