appendix a . changes to regulatory structure since 2008 the dodd - frank act of 2010 created four new federal entities related to financial regulation — the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) , office of financial research ( ofr ) , federal insurance office ( fio ) , and consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) . what powers do regulators have ? what policy goals are regulators trying to accomplish ? through what means are those goals accomplished ? there are also targeted regulators for specific financial activities ( consumer protection ) and markets ( agricultural finance and housing finance ) . the table does not include interagency - coordinating bodies , standard - setting bodies , international organizations , or state regulators , which are described later in the report . appendix a describes changes to this table since the 2008 financial crisis . financial firms may be subject to more than one regulator because they may engage in multiple financial activities , as illustrated in figure 1 . for example , a firm may be overseen by an institution regulator and by an activity regulator when it engages in a regulated activity and a market regulator when it participates in a regulated market . the complexity of the figure illustrates the diverse roles and responsibilities assigned to various regulators . furthermore , financial firms may form holding companies with separate legal subsidiaries that allow subsidiaries within the same holding company to engage in more activities than is permissible within any one subsidiary . because of charter - based regulation , certain financial activities must be segregated in separate legal subsidiaries . however , as a result of the gramm - leach - bliley act in 1999 ( glba ; p.l . 106-102 ) and other regulatory and policy changes that preceded it , these different legal subsidiaries may be contained within the same financial holding companies ( i.e. , conglomerates that are permitted to engage in a broad array of financially related activities ) . for example , a banking subsidiary is limited to permissible activities related to the "business of banking," but is allowed to affiliate with another subsidiary that engages in activities that are "financial in nature. as a result , each subsidiary is assigned a primary regulator , and firms with multiple subsidiaries may have multiple institution regulators . if the holding company is a bank holding company or thrift holding company ( with at least one banking or thrift subsidiary , respectively ) , then the holding company is regulated by the fed . figure 2 shows a stylized example of a special type of bank holding company , known as a financial holding company . this financial holding company would be regulated by the fed at the holding company level . its national bank would be regulated by the occ , its securities subsidiary would be regulated by the sec , and its loan company might be regulated by the cfpb . these are only the primary regulators for each box in figure 2 ; as noted above , it might have other market or activity regulators as well , based on its lines of business .