the document was not publicly released . instead , the administration provided to the public a two - page summary of the report . a version of the secretary's full report , marked "draft deliberative — not for distribution," subsequently became available to the public through the media . in the final report , interior secretary ryan zinke stated that each of the reviewed monuments is unique , and that some monuments are currently supported strongly by the local communities . however , some monument designations remain controversial for a variety of reasons , according to the secretary . among the controversial aspects of proclaimed monuments , the final report cited the size of the areas , types of objects protected , effect on land uses , extent of public access , sufficiency of public consultation , adequacy of protection of resources , inclusion of private lands within monument boundaries , and "overlap" with other federal land designations . in the final report to the president , the interior secretary made individual recommendations for 10 of the 27 monuments that were reviewed . ( see table 2 . ) according to the secretary , these recommendations were made with the concurrence of the secretary of agriculture and the secretary of commerce . some members and stakeholders supported the recommendations , whereas other lawmakers and stakeholders opposed them . the recommendations included amending monument proclamations regarding protection and management of resources , and , for some areas , revising monument boundaries . the secretary of the interior called for these changes to be made "through the use of appropriate authority , including lawful exercise of the president's discretion granted by the [antiquities] act. congress has authority to modify management of lands within , and boundaries of , monuments established by presidential proclamation under the antiquities act . the secretary did not fully detail the changes to be made to monument proclamations or identify the precise locations and sizes of the boundary alterations . rather , the final report provided that "[r]ecommendations for specific monument modifications reflecting the above considerations will be submitted separately from this final report should you concur with my recommendations. the number of recommendations per monument ranged from one recommendation for each of three marine monuments ( northeast canyons and seamounts , pacific remote islands , and rose atoll ) , to six recommendations for each of two monuments ( bears ears and organ mountains - desert peaks ) . the most common recommendation was to amend the proclamations for specified purposes . for 8 of the 10 monuments , the secretary recommended amending the proclamations , whereas for the other 2 monuments — pacific remote islands marine and rose atoll marine — the secretary recommended either amending the proclamations or making boundary revisions . six of the 10 proclamations would be amended for several purposes , namely "to protect objects and prioritize public access ; infrastructure upgrades , repair , and maintenance ; traditional use ; tribal cultural use ; and hunting and fishing rights. the six monuments are bears ears , cascade siskiyou , gold butte , grand staircase - escalante , organ mountains - desert peaks , and rio grande del norte .