cybersecurity . highly autonomous vehicles will rely on computers , sensors , and cameras to navigate , so cybersecurity protections will be necessary to ensure vehicle performance . however , a manufacturer would be allowed to exclude processes from its privacy policy that encrypt or make anonymous the sources of data . the federal trade commission would be tasked with developing a report for congress on a number of vehicle privacy issues . although s. 1885 would not explicitly require privacy plans by developers and manufacturers , it would require nhtsa to establish an online , searchable motor vehicle privacy database that would include a description of the types of information , including personally identifiable information ( pii ) , that are collected about individuals during operation of a motor vehicle . this database would cover all types of vehicles — not just autonomous vehicles — and would include the privacy policies of manufacturers . the database would also include an explanation about how pii would be collected , retained , and destroyed when no longer relevant . consumer and infrastructure information . 3388 , dot would be directed to complete a research program within three years that would lay the groundwork for a consumer - education program about the capabilities and limitations of highly automated vehicles . although h.r . 3388 passed the house of representatives without objection and its senate counterpart , s. 1885 , was ordered reported by voice vote of the commerce , science , and transportation committee , these subsequent developments have delayed further action . five senators , including three members of the senate commerce , science , and transportation committee , wrote to senator john thune , the committee's chairman , in march 2018 seeking changes to provisions governing state preemption , vehicle safety issues , cybersecurity , consumer privacy , and regulation of partially automated vehicles . as there are currently few federal standards for autonomous vehicles , some states have begun enacting their own rules . this represents a departure from the traditional arrangement leaving regulation of vehicles to the federal government and authority over driver - related matters to the states . both bills seek to identify a new regulatory arrangement by preempting new state and local safety standards for autonomous vehicles , but state and local governments have sought a role in federal advisory committees , notification of proposed exemptions from federal motor vehicle safety standards , and clarification that traditional state and local authority over matters such as enforcing traffic laws will not be infringed . 3388 and s. 1885 would allow large increases in the number of vehicles that could be exempted from nhtsa's federal motor vehicle safety standards . the bills do not specify time limits on such exemptions and do not require that nhtsa review them after issuance , raising concerns that pedestrians and passengers in autonomous vehicles may not have the same level of protection as they do in conventional vehicles , current crashworthiness standards may be suspended for autonomous vehicles , and too many exempt vehicles will be allowed on the roads . although both pending bills contain cybersecurity provisions , these call for manufacturers to address cybersecurity without specific federal involvement .