title ii of p.l . 92-500 authorized grants to states for wastewater treatment plant construction under a program administered by epa . federal funds were provided through annual appropriations under a state - by - state allocation formula contained in the act . the formula ( which has been modified several times since 1972 ) was based on states' financial needs for treatment plant construction and population . states used their allotments to make grants to cities to build or upgrade categories of wastewater treatment projects , including treatment plants , related interceptor sewers , correction of infiltration / inflow of sewer lines , and sewer rehabilitation . amendments enacted in 1987 ( p.l . 100-4 ) initiated a new program to support , or capitalize , clean water state revolving funds ( cwsrfs ) . states continue to receive federal grants , but now they provide a 20% match and use the combined funds to make loans to communities . monies used for construction are repaid to states to create a "revolving" source of assistance for other communities . in fy1989 and fy1990 , congress provided appropriations for both the title ii and title vi programs . the cwsrf program fully replaced the title ii program in fy1991 . however , during the transition from title ii to title vi , congress began to provide earmarked water infrastructure grants to individual communities and regions . in subsequent years , the earmarked funds accounted for a significant amount of the total appropriation . general opposition to congressional earmarking stopped the practice in fy2011 . special project appropriations since that time have supported alaska native village and u.s. - mexico border projects . federal contributions to cwsrfs were intended to assist a transition to full state and local financing by fy1995 . cwsrfs were to be sustained through repayment of loans made from the fund after that date . the intention was that states would have greater flexibility to set priorities and administer funding in exchange for an end to federal aid after 1994 , when the original cwa authorizations expired . however , although most states believe that the cwsrf is working well today , early funding and administrative problems plus remaining funding needs ( discussed below ) delayed the anticipated shift to full state responsibility . congress has continued to appropriate funds to assist wastewater construction activities . figure 1 illustrates the history of epa wastewater infrastructure appropriations in both nominal dollars and constant ( 2018 ) dollars . the increase in fy2009 is due to a $4.0 billion increase in supplemental funds under the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l . as the figure indicates , the funding level remained relatively stable during the past seven fiscal years . in both fy2016 and fy2017 , congress provided $1.394 billion for the cwsrf program . however , funding for the cwsrf program increased by about 22% in fy2018 . the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l . 115-141 ) , provided $1.694 billion to the cwsrf program . the federal government directly funds only a small portion of the nation's annual wastewater treatment capital investment . state and local governments provide the majority of needed funds .