this is evaluated by three different measures . in addition , 58% of canola prices were below their plc reference price . for the remaining program crops , mafps were below their respective plc reference prices for 34% to 42% of the observations . one potential approach to establishing parity of relative price protection across program crops would be to adjust each crop's respective mal loan rate or plc reference price until an equal portion of monthly farm price observations is below the adjusted level . first , support prices ( mal loan rates and plc reference prices ) are compared with average farm prices under the 2014 farm bill . how do current support prices vary across major program crops in comparison to market price trends ? then , the level of "price protection" provided under the mal and plc programs is measured as the percent of monthly farm price observations below the mal loan rates and plc reference prices established under the 2014 farm bill for each program crop . finally , monthly market price data are used to evaluate the policy parameters needed to obtain equal levels of price protection across program crops since january 2008 . mal loan rates and plc reference prices are expressed as a percentage of monthly average farm prices ( mafps ) under the 2014 farm bill ( 2014 through 2016 ) ( see also table 5 ) . an extended nine - year period from january 2008 through may 2017 — intended to reflect long - term market conditions — is used to evaluate this second measure . a comparison , by commodity , of mafps with mal loan rates provides a general sense of the level of relative price protection across program crops ( figure 16 ) for the crop years 2014 through 2016 . upland cotton and rice prices are evaluated against monthly averages of their respective awps . the mal program does not use monthly prices as a basis for payments but rather weekly awps for cotton and rice and daily posted county prices for the other program crops . using a monthly national average price data smooths out daily ( or weekly ) and regional variation from the market price data and provides only a general approximation for how often a commodity has been eligible for mal benefits . however , mafp and awp data is readily available and facilitates ease of comparison for this exercise . the mal loan rates for program crops range between 29% and 99% of the mafps or awps . upland cotton , peanuts , and oats appear to have loan rates that are higher compared with their awps or mafps during the 2014-2016 period , whereas loan rates for barley , chickpeas , mustard seed , and rapeseed are lower as a percentage of monthly prices . similarly , a comparison , by commodity , of mafps with plc reference prices provides a general sense of the level of relative price support across program crops ( figure 17 ) . the plc program uses 12-month season average farm prices ( safps ) to calculate the level of payments ( if any ) , rather than monthly prices .