it is expressing contradictory views . it is unashamedly endorsing a vast array of commercial products and services . and it is providing delphic advice to the consuming public. three justices joined other portions of justice alito's opinion examining whether the trademark registration program is akin to a government subsidy for speech for which it can make content - based distinctions ( eg , government funding for the arts ) , or participation in a government program for which it has discretion to set the criteria for inclusion ( eg , programs that collect union dues for public employee unions ) . justice alito found that neither analog was appropriate because trademark registration is more comparable to a limited public forum for private speech , wherein the first amendment prohibits viewpoint - based discrimination . justice alito's opinion also considered whether trademarks might constitute commercial speech , subject to a lesser degree of scrutiny , but opined that the disparagement clause fails even under less stringent scrutiny because it was not "narrowly drawn" to serve "a substantial interest. in so doing , justice alito noted , "speech that demeans on the basis of race , ethnicity , gender , religion , age , disability , or any other similar ground is hateful ; but the proudest boast of our free speech jurisprudence is that we protect the freedom to express 'the thought that we hate.' three justices joined justice kennedy's concurring opinion , which agreed with the opinion of the court to the extent it suggested that the disparagement clause amounts to unconstitutional viewpoint discrimination . for justice kennedy , however , this ultimate outcome "render[ed] unnecessary any extended treatment of other questions raised by the parties" ( i.e. , the government subsidy , government program , and commercial speech arguments ) . it is saying many unseemly things . justice thomas filed a separate concurring opinion arguing that the regulation of commercial speech to suppress truthful ideas should be subject to strict scrutiny . the supreme court's decision in tam has consequences for other pending cases , such as pro - football , inc. v. blackhorse , a case challenging the pto's cancellation of the "redskins" trademarks as disparaging to native americans . in pro - football , the district court upheld the cancellations against a first amendment challenge almost identical to tam's , concluding that "the federal trademark program is government speech under the supreme court's analysis in walker . while on appeal to the fourth circuit , pro - football filed a petition for a writ of certiorari before judgment to the supreme court , which would have allowed the case to be heard alongside tam , but the petition was denied . on june 21 , 2017 , pro - football submitted the tam opinion to the fourth circuit and requested that judgment be entered in its favor , after which the court requested the parties' positions as to whether oral argument on this request was necessary . in response , all parties conceded that tam controls the pro - football case and consented to the court's entering of judgment in favor of pro - football . the tam decision will also likely have consequences for the trademark regime as a whole .