if the waiting period expires , the parties may complete the transaction . the ftc and doj employ shared guidelines to assess whether a proposed merger is permissible under the ftc and clayton acts . these standards apply to various types of transactions , including mergers between competing entities or potentially competing entities in a relevant market ( horizontal mergers ) and mergers between non - competing entities that operate within related industries ( vertical mergers ) . because horizontal and vertical mergers raise somewhat different competitive concerns , they are discussed separately below . upon completing its review of a proposed merger , the reviewing agency decides whether ( 1 ) to permit the merger to consummate ; ( 2 ) to take any action to block the merger ; or ( 3 ) to negotiate with the transacting parties to place conditions on the merger's completion that alleviate the agency's anticompetitive concerns . the agencies permit most proposed transactions to complete without conditions . if the reviewing agency seeks to block a merger , the agency may bring an action against the transaction in a judicial and / or administrative proceeding ( depending upon whether the doj or the ftc is the reviewing agency ) . in these circumstances , the transacting parties may abandon the deal or contest the government's case before a federal or administrative law judge . federal antitrust law prohibits mergers and acquisitions that may substantially lessen competition . as the primary federal agencies charged with enforcing federal antitrust laws , the doj and ftc follow a congressionally mandated process that requires parties exceeding certain sizes to notify the agencies of sizable transactions so that one of the agencies may determine whether the planned transaction would violate antitrust laws . highly fact - specific , the doj and ftc apply section 7of the clayton act and section 5 of the ftc act , respectively , by assessing the proposed transaction's likely impact on competition within relevant markets identified by the agencies . after examining any evidence , the agencies may permit the transaction to proceed , negotiate with the parties to reach an agreement that alleviates antitrust concerns , or block the transaction . section 5 of the ftc act prohibits unfair methods of competition and includes any activity that violates section 7 of the clayton act . the ftc generally applies standards similar to doj's when assessing transactions under section 7 of the clayton act pursuant to section 5 of the ftc act . by prohibiting mergers that negatively affect competition , the clayton and ftc acts aim to preserv e rather than enhance competition and to protect overall market competition rather than individual competitors . accordingly , mergers may injure market competitors but not violate antitrust laws . moreover , because section 7 of the clayton act and section 5 of the ftc act aim to prevent anticompetitive harms from occurring , they look to the likelihood of future harm . to violate these statutes , therefore , the transaction must be likely , rather than certain , to have an anticompetitive effect .