ssa method . the borrower is entitled to ssdi or ssi and is scheduled to receive a medical review once every five to seven years ( i.e. , ssa assigns the individual a medical improvement not expected [mine] continuing disability review [cdr] diary ) . physician 's certification method . the borrower is certified by a physician that he or she is unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity due to any medically determinable physical or mental impairment that has lasted , or is expected to last , for at least 60 months or is expected to result in death ( i.e. , the individual meets the definition of disability for adults under the social security act , except that the duration of the impairment must be for at least five years instead of one ) . ssdi beneficiaries and ssi disability recipients with a mine cdr diary may request a benefits planning query ( bpqy ) statement from ssa to demonstrate to ed that their medical review is scheduled once every five to seven years . in july 2017 , about 40% of all ssdi beneficiaries and ssi disability recipients had a mine cdr diary ( see figure 8 ) . there are three advantages to able accounts . first , earnings in an able account can grow tax - free annually until they are withdrawn . second , distributions ( i.e. , withdrawals ) from an able account are tax - free if they are used to pay for qualified disability expenses . third , assets in and distributions from an able account for qualified disability expenses are disregarded in determining a designated beneficiary's eligibility for and the amount of assistance provided by most federal assistance programs . under the ssi program , however , only the first $100,000 in an able account is excluded . the balance of an able account above $100,000 is treated as a resource to the designated beneficiary and is counted against the program's resource limit . if a designated beneficiary becomes ineligible for ssi due solely to excess able funds , his or her cash payments are suspended ( without a time limit ) until the balance of the able account falls to or below $100,000 . this suspension does not affect the beneficiary's eligibility for medicaid . in addition , a distribution from an able account for housing - related expenses is counted against the resource limit unless the distribution is spent in the month of receipt . able accounts allow ssi disability recipients to save for disability - related expenses without such savings jeopardizing their ssi and medicaid eligibility . although able accounts have no effect on an individual's entitlement to ssdi , the accounts may allow beneficiaries to save and establish or maintain their eligibility for other federal programs , such as medicaid or snap . the social security administration ( ssa ) , the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , and the department of agriculture's food and nutrition service ( fns ) have all issued guidance on the treatment of able accounts under ssi , medicaid , and snap , respectively .