appendix a . supplemental appropriations several one - time appropriations for hhs , and phs agencies in particular , are discussed below . ebola and zika response in late 2014 , congress provided almost $2.8 billion in supplemental fy2015 appropriations to hhs agencies for response to the ebola outbreak . in september 2016 , congress provided $933 million in supplemental fy2016 appropriations to hhs agencies for response to the zika virus outbreak . both appropriations were designated as emergency spending and made available for a mix of domestic and international response activities . the hhs secretary and / or agency directors were granted specific transfer authorities in each act . also in each act , additional funds were provided to other departments and agencies for aspects of the international response to each outbreak . in may 2017 , congress provided $10 million to fda to "prevent , prepare for , and respond to emerging health threats , including the ebola and zika viruses , domestically and internationally and to develop necessary medical countermeasures and vaccines , including the review , regulation , and post market surveillance of vaccines and therapies , and for related administrative activities ... to remain available until expended. table a - 1 summarizes the amounts and purposes of hhs funds as appropriated for the ebola and zika outbreaks , and emerging health threats . as the zika outbreak was unfolding , some unobligated funds for the ebola response were reprogrammed to the zika response mission . details of those transfers are discussed elsewhere . lead poisoning prevention in december 2016 , in a continuing resolution ( p.l . 114-254 ) , congress provided $55 million in fy2017 appropriations to hhs for the response to lead exposures in water , in addition to the annual appropriations for these activities that were continued by the law . table a - 2 summarizes the amounts and purposes of these funds . appendix b . community health center fund affordable care act ( aca ) section 10503 established a community health center fund ( chcf ) to provide supplemental funding for community and other health centers and the national health service corps ( nhsc ) . the law provided annual appropriations to the chcf totaling $11 billion over the five - year period fy2011 through fy2015 . of that total , $9.5 billion was for health center operations , and the remaining $1.5 billion was for the nhsc . the medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 ( macra ) appropriated two more years of funding for the chcf . for both fy2016 and fy2017 , macra provided $3.6 billion for health center operations and $310 million for the nhsc . the president's fy2018 budget proposes extending chcf funding for two more years . chcf funding has partially supplanted discretionary funding for the health center program and entirely replaced discretionary funding for the nhsc ( see table 7 ) . table b - 1 shows the amounts appropriated to the chcf for each fiscal year , as well as the post - sequestration levels for fy2013-fy2015 and fy2017 . as discussed earlier in this report , the fy2016 chcf funding was not subject to sequestration .