supporters of h.r . 2361 contend that the current model code process requires costly products and materials , which could be corrected by requiring a shorter payback period . opponents of a simple payback limited to 10 years state that the approach neglects benefits that occur after the period , ignores the benefits beyond the initial investor , does not account for mortgage financing , and thus does not accurately measure the full benefits and overall profitability . the lifetimes of major building components generally exceed a 10-year time frame and often exceed the time span of 15-year and 30-year mortgages . the average residential building lifetime in the united states is 61 years , and typical building component ( eg , insulation , windows , roof ) lifetimes exceed 10 years . for example , the warranty period for windows is often 20 to 25 years depending upon the type and can last throughout the building lifetime with maintenance . products with shorter lifetimes such as water heaters or refrigeration equipment are not typically included when determining building energy code cost - effectiveness , as they have separate energy - efficiency standards . congress might consider whether to prioritize affordability for the first building owner relative to realizing larger building energy savings that may benefit multiple owners or occupants throughout the lifetime of a building . s. 1460 is a comprehensive energy and natural resources bill . title i of the bill addresses energy efficiency , and many of the sections within title i align with the contents of s. 385 / h.r . 1443 ( see table in appendix a for similar provisions ) . it contains several differences that may be of interest to congress . many of the differences between s. 385 / h.r . 1443 and s. 1460 address building energy codes , and congress might consider how these differences may affect the energy - efficiency goals of the legislation . 1443 use the term "model building energy code," s. 1460 uses the term "voluntary building energy code," which is currently in section 303 of the energy conservation and protection act ( ecpa ) ( 42 u.s.c . s. 1460 would further emphasize the voluntary aspect of the building energy codes by adding the following to section 304 of ecpa ( 42 u.s.c . 6833 ) : ( a ) voluntary building energy code. — nothing in this section or section 307 makes a voluntary building energy code established under this section or an updated voluntary building energy code under section 307 binding on a state , local government , or indian tribe as a matter of federal law . s. 1460 also emphasizes that the energy - savings targets that doe would establish are "consensus - based," which is consistent with the definition of "model building energy code" used in s. 385 / h.r . 1443 and s. 1460 expand the current certification requirements for states and indian tribes regarding reviewing and updating building energy codes . under current law , states are required to certify that they have compared new model building energy codes with their existing building energy codes within two years of a determination by doe that the updated version of a model building energy code is appropriate .