113-2 was enacted . the budget control act ( bca ) changed the way congress accounted for federal funding for disaster response and recovery . in previous years , congress provided funds over and above limits on discretionary appropriations by designating additional appropriations as being for emergency needs . budget authority provided in this manner did not count against funding limitations on discretionary spending in budget resolutions . although the bca included legislation allowing for emergency appropriations , the new law included provisions that outlined separate treatment for disaster relief , as distinct from emergency funding . funding designated as disaster relief in future spending bills could be "paid for" by adjusting upward the discretionary spending caps . this allowable adjustment for disaster relief is limited , however , to an amount based on the 10-year rolling average of what has been spent by the federal government on relief efforts for major disasters . this disaster relief allowable adjustment for fy2013 was $11.8 billion . under the continuing resolution signed into law on september 28 , 2012 ( p.l . 112-175 ) , the amount of disaster relief ( as defined under the bca ) that would be provided if the resolution were extended for the full fiscal year was $6.4 billion . this was the first time under the bca that in the wake of a major disaster more relief funding was sought than could be accommodated under the allowable adjustment . the administration proposed designating all of the supplemental funding it sought as an emergency requirement , with the exception of a portion of the request for the disaster relief fund ( drf ) , which would be designated as being for disaster relief under the bca . the administration noted in the letter accompanying the request that it was unclear how much of the disaster relief allowable adjustment might be available pending the finalization of general fy2013 appropriations , and that therefore these numbers could require adjustment . senate - passed h.r . 1 proposed that $5,379 million in drf funding be designated for disaster relief under the bca , with all but $3,461 million ( for army corps of engineers construction activities ) of the remaining funding in the bill designated as emergency funding . 113-2 contained $41,669 million in emergency funding , $5,379 million for the drf designated as disaster relief , and $3,461 million for army corps of engineers construction activities that would count against the discretionary budget caps . one potential method for accommodating disaster response and recovery costs beyond the allowable adjustment for disaster relief would be offsetting the additional spending through rescissions or other means that would reduce the net budgetary scoring of the bill . some comparisons spoke to the loss of life , others to the disruption of daily activities of citizens , and other to the relative impacts on the local and regional economies . while these comparisons helped provide a level of perspective on the scale of devastation , it is important to note that all disasters , and especially disasters of the magnitude of hurricane sandy , are produced by a set of unique circumstances that result in an equally unique set of needs for assistance from the federal government .