naval . the north korean navy ( nkn ) is the smallest of the kpa's three main services . this coastal force is composed primarily of numerous , though aging , small patrol craft that carry a variety of anti - ship cruise missiles , torpedoes , and guns . the nkn maintains one of the world's numerically largest submarine forces , with around 70 attack - , coastal - , and midget - type submarines . in addition , the nkn operates a large fleet of air - cushioned hovercraft and conventional landing craft to support amphibious operations and sof insertion . does the president require prior authorization from congress before initiating hostilities on the korean peninsula ? if so , what actions , under what circumstances , ought to be covered by such an authorization ? the kim regime may continue to take aggressive action short of directly threatening the united states and its territories while it continues its path to acquire a nuclear icbm capable of reaching the united states . how are these issues affected , if at all , by the fact that the korean war was conducted under u.n. authority and that the armistice suspended hostilities but did not formally end the state of war between the dprk and united nations forces , which included u.s. forces ? if the executive branch were to initiate and then sustain hostilities against north korea — a nuclear - armed country — without congressional authorization , what are the implications for the preservation of congress's role , relative to that of the executive branch , in the war powers function ? how , in turn , might the disposition of the war powers issue in connection with the situation with north korea affect the broader question of congress's status as an equal branch of government , including the preservation and use of other congressional powers and prerogatives ? if so , what actions , under what circumstances , ought to be covered by such an authorization ? what might be the international legal ramifications for undertaking a preventive or preemptive strike without a u.n. security council mandate ? few analysts believe that north korea would launch an unprovoked attack on u.s. territory . nonetheless , as the crisis on the korean peninsula continues to evolve , congress could confront significant questions regarding its role in shaping u.s. policy in the region . ultimately , congress may have face two determinations . first , whether or not it believes the united states could or should manage and deter a nuclear - armed north korea if it becomes capable of attacking the u.s. homeland . second , whether taking decisive action to prevent the emergence of such a dprk capability , including the use of military forces , might be necessary . such determinations potentially carry considerable risks for the united states , its allies , regional stability , and global order . particularly given emerging questions about the u.s. role in the world , how the united states chooses to contend with the dprk nuclear weapons and icbm programs also raises broader strategic questions with which congress may grapple: how would any particular course of action impact u.s. interests , both regionally and globally ?