but the court has other options . it may hold that paspa's prohibition of the "authoriz[ation]" of sports gambling is severable from its rule against governmental entities sponsoring , operating , advertising , promoting , or licensing sports gambling , leaving those federal regulations in place . and even if the court were to strike down the entire subsection of paspa concerning governmental entities , it may sever that subsection from a provision regulating participation in sports gambling by private persons . the petitioner in carpenter was convicted of a series of robberies . at trial , to tie him to the general location where the robberies took place , the government presented data about the towers to which his cell phone connected during calls made around the time of the robberies . such data is known as cell site location information ( csli ) . instead of acquiring a warrant supported by probable cause , the government obtained carpenter's csli from his wireless carrier under section 2703 ( d ) of the stored communications act ( sca ) of 1986 . that provision allows the government to obtain a court order for wire or electronic communication records by offering "specific and articulable facts showing that there are reasonable grounds to believe" that the records "are relevant and material to an ongoing investigation. the probable cause needed for a warrant , in contrast , imposes a higher standard on the government . carpenter moved to exclude the csli evidence on fourth amendment grounds , but the trial court denied the motion and the federal court of appeals for the sixth circuit ( sixth circuit ) affirmed . in carpenter's case , the sixth circuit , relying on the third - party doctrine , held that the government's warrantless collection of the historical csli did not constitute a fourth amendment search . just as a person does not have a protected privacy interest in dialed phone numbers , the circuit court reasoned , carpenter did not have a protected interest in the location data that his phone transmitted to his carrier . the court framed the distinction as one between the "content of personal communications" and the "routing information" that transmission of those communications reveals: a reasonable expectation of privacy generally exists as to the first , but not the second type of information . the sixth circuit decision aligns with decisions of other federal appellate courts rejecting fourth amendment challenges to the warrantless collection of historical csli . but some judges on these courts , while accepting that the supreme court's third - party cases require this outcome , have nonetheless voiced doubts as to whether cases about phone booths , pen registers , and microfilm provide an adequate framework for analyzing privacy expectations in the smartphone era . one of the sixth circuit judges who decided carpenter went even further . in a concurring opinion expressing disapproval of "the nature of the tests [courts] apply in this rapidly changing area of technology," the judge declined to apply the third - party cases . instead , she declined to join the majority opinion holding that no fourth amendment search had occurred and , instead , voted to uphold carpenter's convictions on an independent ground .