the texts of h.r . 4792 , however , were not included in the fsgg portion of the bill . instead they were in titles viii and ix in a separate division s. none of the language bringing financial regulators under the appropriations process was included in the law as enacted . the house and senate committees on appropriations reorganized their subcommittee structures in early 2007 . each chamber created a new financial services and general government subcommittee . in the house , the jurisdiction of the fsgg subcommittee is composed primarily of agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the subcommittee on transportation , treasury , housing and urban development , the judiciary , the district of columbia , and independent agencies , commonly referred to as tthud . in addition , the house fsgg subcommittee was assigned four independent agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the science , state , justice , commerce , and related agencies subcommittee: the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , and the small business administration ( sba ) . in the senate , the jurisdiction of the new fsgg subcommittee is a combination of agencies from the jurisdiction of three previously existing subcommittees . most of the agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the transportation , treasury , the judiciary , and housing and urban development , and related agencies subcommittee were assigned to the fsgg subcommittee . in addition , the district of columbia , which had its own subcommittee in the 109 th congress , was placed under the purview of the fsgg subcommittee , as were four independent agencies that had been under the jurisdiction of the commerce , justice , science , and related agencies subcommittee: the fcc , ftc , sec , and sba . as a result of this reorganization , the house and senate fsgg subcommittees have nearly identical jurisdictions , except that the cftc is under the jurisdiction of the fsgg subcommittee in the senate and the agriculture subcommittee in the house . table 4 below lists various departments and agencies funded through fsgg appropriations and the names and contact information of the crs expert ( s ) on these departments and agencies . nearly all of h.r . 3280 's text was included as division d of h.r . 3354 when it was considered by the house of representatives beginning on september 6 , 2017 . the bill was amended numerous times , shifting funding among fsgg agencies but not changing the fsgg totals . 3554 as passed by the house , from the senate appropriations chairmen's draft bill , and the enacted amounts combined from p.l . although financial services are a focus of the fsgg bill , the bill does not actually include funding for the regulation of much of the financial services industry . financial services as an industry is often subdivided into banking , insurance , and securities .