these issues are summarized below . the trump administration's fy2018 budget request for oe appropriations was $123 million , approximately 41% less than the agency's estimated direct obligations of $208 million in fy2017 . within oe , the budget request would fund cybersecurity for energy delivery systems at $42 million compared to an estimated $62 million in fy2017 , a reduction of approximately 32% . given recent assertions by federal agencies ( including doe ) and the private sector about an increase in energy sector cybersecurity risks , some analysts have expressed concern about this proposed reduction in oe's cybersecurity budget . as noted above , the house and senate appropriations bills would fund oe at $218.5 million and $213.1 million , respectively , both an increase from fy2017 funding . if oe's appropriation is enacted above its current level , the agency presumably could continue its current cybersecurity program on its current trajectory — and potentially fund some additional cybersecurity activities if they emerge as agency priorities . additional authorizations under s. 1460 and h.r . 3050 , if enacted and funded , would significantly expand resources for doe's energy delivery cybersecurity initiatives beyond historical levels . given the ever - changing cybersecurity environment in the energy sector , congress may continue to examine oe's cybersecurity resources to ensure that they are adequate and being deployed appropriately to address the most important energy delivery risks . as discussed earlier , the fast act includes a variety of provisions concerning the general security of energy systems . these provisions include considerations for cyber as well as physical attacks and electromagnetic pulse attacks . the provisions include requirements for the secretary of energy to examine the strategic transformer reserve , coordinate energy sector security as the ssa , and prepare for energy supply disruptions . congress may consider how effectively doe is implementing the law , and whether additional authorities or changes to the law may be needed . the fast act does not require the doe inspector general ( ig ) , the comptroller general , or another agency to review the implementation of doe's authorities and its progress in carrying out the direction of congress . however , congress may still oversee doe's efforts by holding hearings , requiring new reports from the ig or comptroller general , or requesting specific reports or information from the agency itself . with doe - provided or independently provided information , congress may have a more - informed basis for considering whether to adjust the provisions of the fast act or clarify , expand , or contract the authorizations it contains . the operational interdependency of the electric power and natural gas sectors , especially with respect to reliability and cybersecurity , has been a growing concern among many federal agencies , members of congress , and industry groups . the second installment of doe's quadrennial energy review ( qer ) , published in january 2017 , states that the electricity sector's increasing reliance on natural gas raises serious concerns regarding the need to secure natural gas pipelines against emerging cybersecurity threats . thus , the adequacy of cybersecurity protections for natural gas pipelines directly impacts the reliability and security of the electric system .