numerous federal agencies have the authority to dispose of some or all of the properties they hold . some agencies have very broad authority to dispose of properties by any method , while others only have the authority to dispose of certain types of properties , or to only use certain disposal methods . under this decentralized structure , agencies have identified unneeded assets and disposed of them in piecemeal fashion , often limited by the budgetary resources available for disposition activities . the federal assets sale and transfer act of 2016 ( fasta , p.l . 114-287 ) , by contrast , requires a more centralized process , whereby disposal decisions will be based on the recommendations of a newly created board rather than individual agencies . moreover , the board may recommend the disposal of hundreds or even thousands of properties at one time . real property disposition historically has been a relatively decentralized process . numerous provisions of fasta have the potential to mitigate weaknesses in the real property disposal process and enhance oversight . there are also potential drawbacks to certain provisions , and some real property weaknesses are only tangentially addressed . fasta primarily addresses the disposal of unneeded properties , but its objectives include reducing the government's reliance on leased space . as discussed earlier in this report , one of the primary reasons gao has listed federal real property management as a high - risk area since 2003 is that the government increasingly acquires space through leases rather than by constructing or purchasing buildings . the prospectus approval process provides congress with an opportunity to exercise oversight of gsa's lease decisions . these assets have been acquired over a period of decades to help agencies fulfill their diverse missions . agencies own and lease buildings , for example , that provide space for offices , health clinics , warehouses , and laboratories . as agencies' missions change over time , so , too , do their real property needs , thereby rendering some assets less useful or unneeded altogether . health care provided by the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , for example , has shifted in recent decades from predominately hospital - based inpatient care to a greater reliance on clinics and outpatient care , with a resulting change in space needs . similarly , the department of defense ( dod ) reduced its force since the cold war ended and has engaged in several rounds of base realignments and installation closures . as a consequence of shifting space needs , federal agencies hold thousands of properties — particularly buildings — that they no longer need . in fy2016 , federal agencies owned 3,120 buildings that were vacant ( unutilized ) , and another 7,859 that were partially empty ( underutilized ) . agencies are required to dispose of unneeded space and have a range of options for disposal , including transfer to another federal agency , demolition , sale , and conveyance to a state or local government or qualified nonprofit . federal agencies have indicated , however , that their disposal efforts are often hampered by legal and budgetary disincentives , and competing stakeholder interests .