table 1 shows the history of appropriations for the program . changes made by the essa amendments may present implementation issues . one possible area concerns the impact of dual eligibility on the awarding of grants . essa provided new authority allowing an lea eligible under both the srsa and rlis programs to choose the program from which they prefer to receive funds . this could greatly complicate grant administration at both the federal and state levels . the new law requires the secretary to establish a date by which leas must declare their choice ; however , this may be a difficult decision to make by a certain date because estimated grant amounts will change due to the number and characteristics of other participating leas . specifically , the ratable reduction and hold harmless provisions in srsa will be greatly impacted by the number of leas that choose this program . similarly , rlis amounts will depend largely on the popularity of this choice . currently , srsa awards are much larger than rlis awards . in fy2016 , the average per pupil grant amount was $78 for srsa , compared to $23 for rlis . however , that could change substantially if a large number of former rlis recipients decided to take srsa funds . congress created reap to meet many of the challenges facing rural schools . according to the statute , the purpose of reap is to address "the unique needs of rural school districts that frequently ( 1 ) lack the personnel and resources needed to compete effectively for federal competitive grants ; and ( 2 ) receive formula grant allocations in amounts too small to be effective in meeting their intended purposes. reap authorizes two rural education programs under esea title v - b . subpart 1 authorizes the srsa program , which focuses on leas with less than 600 students . subpart 2 authorizes the rlis program , which focuses on larger rural leas with relatively high poverty rates ( at least 20% of children from families below the poverty line ) . recipients of grants from these programs may use their funds to support a fairly broad set of educational programs and activities authorized by several esea programs . essa authorized reap at $169,840,000 for the fiscal years 2017 through 2020 , to be distributed equally between subparts 1 and 2 . however , in the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 ( p.l . 115-31 ) congress appropriated $175,840,000 for reap . even though it appears that most dual - eligible leas were formerly not in the rlis program , there still may be a significant impact due to the essa changes . perhaps most importantly , the changes appear to force a choice based upon limited information . this is likely to create some uncertainty for leas and administrative complications for ed and state officials . this report discusses the challenges facing rural schools and the manner in which reap attempts to address these challenges . congress created this program to address the unique needs of rural schools that disadvantage them relative to non - rural schools . to compensate for the challenges facing rural schools , reap awards two types of formula grants .