alvarez - machain , discussed below . the significance of these requirements is as follows: 1 . a c ivil action : the ats allows only for civil ( rather than criminal ) liability . by an alien : a crucial , distinctive feature of the ats is that it provides jurisdiction for u.s. courts to hear claims filed only by aliens ( i.e. , non - u.s. nationals ) . the ats does not provide jurisdiction for suits alleging torts in violation of the law of nations by u.s. nationals — although other statutes may allow for such claims . for a tort : as a general matter , a tort is "a civil wrong , other than breach of contract , for which a remedy may be obtained , [usually] in the form of damages[.] in violation of the law of nations or a treaty of the united states : the ats requires that the tort asserted be considered a violation of either the "law of nations" or a treaty ratified by the united states . the term "law of nations" is now often understood to refer to "customary international law. as a general matter , customary international law is international law that is derived from "a general and consistent practice of states followed by them from a sense of legal obligation. state practices that form the basis for customary international law are often referred to as international "norms. but the process of identifying what norms are actionable under the ats is a complex judicial function that was the subject of much debate and was addressed by the supreme court in sosa v . but while numerous suits premised on the ats were filed by foreign nationals in the aftermath of filártiga , the supreme court has never ruled in the plaintiff's favor in an ats case . instead , the high court placed significant limitations on the scope of viable ats claims through decisions in sosa , kiobel , and , most recently , jesner . some commentators see the supreme court's ats jurisprudence as having limited the statute's jurisdictional reach so significantly as to result in the end of the ats's era of importance . others interpret the high court's rulings as having left the door open for certain limited categories of cases against natural persons or u.s. corporate defendants . ultimately , the jesner court emphasized the need for "further action from congress" before recognizing an expansion of ats jurisdiction beyond its 18th century roots , and therefore the future of ats litigation may be dictated by the legislative branch rather than the courts . under article iii of the constitution , congress is empowered ( but not obligated ) to create a system of federal courts inferior to the supreme court . as one of its first official duties , the first congress passed legislation , now known as the judiciary act of 1789 ( judiciary act ) , creating a system of federal district and circuit courts . the original iteration of the ats was included in section 9 of the judiciary act — a provision which broadly addressed the jurisdiction of the federal district courts . congress made minor modifications to the ats in 1873 and 1911 .