businesses have no tax liability in a loss year . in addition , under current law a business can use an nol to obtain a refund for taxes paid in prior years or to reduce taxes owed in the future . hence , firm b would prefer to carry its loss back instead of forward because it has greater value to the company . it may be the case , however , that a loss must be carried forward because a firm has had little or no income in recent years that a loss can be used to offset . this is most likely to happen with start - ups and firms that are financially struggling . in some cases , these firms may never be able to carry their losses forward if they eventually go out of business . the following options and considerations could be helpful to policymakers interested in changing the treatment of nols . the intent of allowing loss to be carried back and carried forward is to give taxpayers the ability to smooth out changes in business income , and therefore taxes , over the business cycle . extending the carryback period would enhance the ability to smooth income by allowing losses to be offset against a longer period of past profits rather than having them carried forward . the extension would , however , increase revenue losses to the federal government . economic theory suggests that , under certain conditions , extending the carryback period indefinitely would minimize the distorting effects taxation has on investment decisions and , in turn , increase economic efficiency . with loss carrybacks , the government effectively enters into a partnership with businesses making risky investments , sharing both the return to investment ( tax revenue gain ) and the risk of investment ( tax revenue loss ) . extending the carryback period indefinitely would reduce the tax burden on these investments and reduce the private risk associated with investing , presumably resulting in greater investment . the reduction in private risk would be shifted to the government . new businesses and those experiencing financial problems may have no income to benefit from carrying back a loss , and also a low probability of generating income in the future for some time . in extreme cases , these firms may not benefit from carrying losses forward , with or without interest , if they go out of business . house speaker paul ryan's "a better way" blueprint proposes eliminating the loss carryback period and allowing losses to be carried forward indefinitely while accruing interest . the proposal is part of a more general tax reform framework that includes , among other things , the introduction of a destination - based cash flow tax ( dbcft ) with a border adjustment . the restriction on loss carrybacks may have been due to concern that large exporting companies would generate significant tax losses as a result of the adjustment . not allowing any loss carryback would negatively impact the ability of some firms that have been profitable in the past to smooth their income or address cash - flow problems . the firms differ , however , in the timing of their annual income and costs .