appendix a . two measures ( s.j.res . 104 ) would forbid the transfer of any air - to - ground munitions to saudi arabia unless the president certifies that all coalition partners are "taking all feasible precautions to reduce the risk of harm to civilians," allowing the delivery of humanitarian aid , and targeting terrorist organizations like al qaeda and the islamic state as part of their operations in yemen . in addition , the legislation would require a briefing on saudi operations in yemen before the transfer or notification of proposed sale of such weapons . one legal analysis has concluded that sales of arms , especially those used in airstrikes , to saudi arabia "should not be presumed to be permissible" under either the aeca and / or the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( faa ) , each of which limit to whom , and for what kinds of use , the united states may sell arms . bahrain's governing elite ( dominated by minority sunnis and led by the ruling al khalifa family ) is accused of widespread human rights violations against the shiite majority . in early 2016 , bahrain submitted a request to purchase a number of f - 16s and to upgrade its existing aircraft in a deal worth as much as $4 billion . however , when the obama administration informally pre - notified the sale to congress , it explained that the sale would not move forward unless bahrain took steps toward improving its record on human rights . the trump administration dropped those conditions in march 2017 , even though u.n. investigators have asserted a "sharp deterioration" of human rights over the past year in bahrain . congress was formally notified of the sale in september 2017 . in his above - referenced march 2017 committee testimony , general votel explicitly mentioned the case of bahrain . he said that "the slow progress on key fms cases , specifically additional f - 16 aircraft and upgrades to bahrain's existing f - 16 fleet , due to concerns of potential human rights abuses in the country , continues to strain our relationship. critics of the sale have argued that the bahrain defense force ( which largely excludes shiites in favor of non - bahraini sunnis ) itself contributes to instability in the country , and that the condition - free provision of u.s. weapons only exacerbates the problem . in the 114 th congress , legislation was introduced ( h.r . 3445 and s. 2009 ) to prohibit the transfer of weapons that could be used for crowd control purposes , including small arms , ammunition , and humvees , unless the state department could certify that the government had implemented all recommendations made by the report of the government - established bahrain independent commission of inquiry ( bici ) . egypt is another example of the challenging dynamics around human rights . in october 2013 , several months after president sisi's seizure of power , the obama administration announced the indefinite suspension of delivery of certain major defense articles ( such as f - 16s and m1a1 tanks ) until the egyptian government demonstrated progress toward democracy .