thus , neither would be limited or prohibited . the united states deployed nuclear weapons on the korean peninsula between 1958 and 1991 . however , as with the pre - 1991 period , the united states would need to retain operational control of the weapons at all times . in europe , the threat the weapons were to deter—soviet and warsaw pact attacks in europe—had diminished with the collapse of the warsaw pact in 1989 . many analysts note that these meetings , along with the broader political relationship between the united states and south korea , are critical to addressing south korea's concerns . on october 1 , 1953 , shortly after the end of the conflict on the korean peninsula , the united states and south korea ( officially known as the republic of korea , or rok ) signed a mutual defense treaty , which provides that if either party is attacked by a third country , the other party will act to meet the common danger . to meet its obligations under this treaty , the united states has maintained a continuous military presence on the korean peninsula and is committed to helping south korea defend itself , particularly against any aggression from the north . at the present time , the united states maintains about 28,500 troops in south korea , while south korean armed forces total over 625,000 troops , with about 490,000 in the army , 70,000 in the air force , and 65,000 in the navy . the united states deployed nuclear weapons in south korea between 1958 and 1991 . it deployed a number of different types of systems for use on the battlefield , including nuclear landmines , nuclear shells for howitzers , short - range surface - to - surface missiles , short - range cruise missiles , and some medium - range systems that could reach further into north korea . these included nuclear bombs for delivery by fighter - bombers and the dual - mission nike hercules anti - air and surface - to - surface missiles . the number of nuclear weapons on the peninsula eventually reached nearly 950 warheads in the mid - 1960s . some of these weapons were deployed for just a few years , while others stayed for decades . most of these weapons were intended to deter a ground invasion from north korea , both by providing capabilities needed to slow or stop advancing troops and by convincing north korea that any attack would not only be unsuccessful but would also invite unacceptable damage on the north in retaliation . in the mid - 1970s , the pentagon conducted a major review of the security of u.s. nuclear weapons storage sites in the pacific and found that , in some cases , security was unsatisfactory and that the number of weapons deployed exceeded the requirements of the war plans . as a result , the united states began to withdraw some of its weapons systems ; by 1977 , it had deactivated the nuclear weapons storage facility at osan air base just south of seoul , leaving nuclear weapons only at the base at kunsan air base in the southwestern part of the country .