this was not necessarily always the case . the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) reported in 1999 that "[d]uring the past 30 years , the vast majority — but not all — of the deadly terrorist attacks occurring in the united states have been perpetrated by domestic extremists. the u.s. government reacted to 9 / 11 by greatly enhancing its counterterrorism efforts . this report discusses how domestic terrorists broadly fit into the counterterrorism landscape , a terrain that since 9 / 11 has been largely shaped in response to terrorists inspired by foreign ideologies . this report focuses especially on how domestic terrorism is conceptualized by the federal government and issues involved in assessing this threat's significance . today ( perhaps in part because of the government's focus on international terrorist ideologies ) , it is difficult to evaluate the scope of domestic terrorist activity . for example , federal agencies employ varying terminology and definitions to describe it . possibly contributing to domestic terrorism's secondary status as a threat at the federal level , a large number of those labeled as domestic terrorists do not necessarily use traditional terrorist tactics such as bombings or airplane hijackings . additionally , many domestic terrorists do not intend to physically harm people but rather rely on alternative tactics such as theft , trespassing , destruction of property , and burdening u.s. courts with retaliatory legal filings . rather , in broad terms , doj has identified a number of general threats that embody this issue . while plots and attacks by foreign - inspired homegrown violent jihadists have earned more media attention , domestic terrorists have been busy as well . it is worth noting that in terms of casualties on u.s. soil , an act of domestic terrorism is second only to the events of 9 / 11 . timothy mcveigh's bombing of the alfred p. murrah federal building in oklahoma city on april 19 , 1995 , claimed 168 lives and injured more than 500 others . some estimates suggest that domestic terrorists are responsible for carrying out dozens of incidents since 9 / 11 . much like their jihadist counterparts , domestic terrorists are often internet savvy and use the medium as a resource for their operations . domestic terrorists feature prominently among the concerns of some law enforcement officers . for example , los angeles deputy police chief michael p. downing recently described violent islamists such as al qaeda , hezbollah , and hamas as los angeles's main terrorist threats "along with three other terrorist categories: black separatists , white supremacist / sovereign citizen extremists , and animal rights terrorists. a 2014 national survey of state and local law enforcement officers found that among terrorist threats , sovereign citizens were "the top concern. in one 2008 study , state police agencies "overwhelmingly reported" dangerous domestic extremist groups present in their jurisdictions . first , federal agencies employ varying terminology to describe the threat . second , the federal government lacks a public and official method for either designating specific domestic groups as terrorists or formally and openly describing particular extremist movements as threats . finally , there is no clear sense of how many domestic terrorism plots and attacks the government has investigated in recent years .