appendix a . navy briefing slides from july 25 , 2017 , ffg ( x ) industry day event this appendix reprints some of the briefing slides that the navy presented at its july 25 , 2017 , industry day event on the ffg ( x ) program , which was held in association with the request for information ( rfi ) that the navy issued on july 25 , 2017 , to solicit information for better understanding potential trade - offs between cost and capability in the ffg ( x ) design . the reprinted slides begin on the next page . appendix b . competing industry teams this appendix presents additional background information on the industry teams competing for the ffg ( x ) program . february 16 , 2018 , press report about five competing industry teams a february 16 , 2018 , press report about the five competing industry teams reportedly competing for the ffg ( x ) program ( i.e. , the five industry teams shown in table 1 ) stated the following: the navy would not confirm how many groups bid for the [ffg ( x ) ] work . at least one u.s. - german team that was not selected for a [conceptual] design contract , atlas usa and thyssenkrupp marine systems , told usni news they had submitted for the [dd&c] competition.... during last month's surface navy association [annual symposium] , several shipbuilders outlined their designs for the ffg ( x ) competition . austal usa shipyard: austal usa in mobile , ala. parent design: independence - class [i.e. , lcs - 2 class] littoral combat ship one of the two littoral combat ship builders , austal usa has pitched an upgunned variant of the independence - class lcs as both a foreign military sales offering and as the answer to the navy's upgunned small surface combatant and then frigate programs . based on the 3,000-ton aluminum trimaran design , the hull boasts a large flight deck and space for up to 16 mk - 41 vertical launching system ( vls ) cells . fincantieri marine group shipyard: fincantieri marinette marine in marinette , wisc . parent design: fincantieri italian fremm as part of the stipulations of the ffg ( x ) programs , a contractor can offer just one design in the competition as a prime contractor but may also support a second bid as a subcontractor . fincantieri elected to offer its 6,700-ton italian fregata europea multi - missione ( fremm ) design for construction in its wisconsin marinette marine shipyard , as well as partner with lockheed martin on its freedom - class pitch as a subcontractor . the italian fremm design features a 16-cell vls as well as space for deck - launched anti - ship missiles . general dynamics bath iron works shipyard: bath iron works in bath , maine parent design: navantia álvaro de bazán - class f100 frigate the 6,000-ton air defense guided - missile frigates fitted with the aegis combat system have been in service for the spanish armada since 2002 and are the basis of the australian hobart - class air defense destroyers and the norwegian fridtjof nansen - class frigates .