they refuse , and that's fine . mcmaster with officials who have been critics of the jcpoa . secretary of state mike pompeo , sworn in on april 26 , 2018 , and national security adviser john bolton , who began his appointment on april 9 , 2018 , both , prior to assuming their current posts , argued in favor of military action against iran's nuclear program and for u.s. efforts to change iran's regime . the may 8 announcement signaled that the administration seeks to encourage further efforts to address its concerns about the jcpoa and broader iran issues , possibly in a revised nuclear agreement . according to the may 8 statement as we exit the iran deal , we will be working with our allies to find a real , comprehensive , and lasting solution to the iranian nuclear threat . this will include efforts to eliminate the threat of iran's ballistic missile program , to stop its terrorist activities worldwide , and to block its menacing activity across the middle east.... iran's leaders will naturally say that they refuse to negotiate a new deal . the united states is a veto - wielding permanent member of the u.n. security council , and the dispute resolution mechanism enables any veto - wielding member to block a u.n. security council resolution that would continue the lifting of u.n. sanctions . the dispute resolution mechanism generally refers to the ability of any party to complain about potential nonperformance of only those issues that are directly addressed in the jcpoa . a u.s. accusation of iranian noncompliance , in the absence of supporting evidence from the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) , would undoubtedly raise questions about the use of this mechanism to leave the agreement . the inara law gives the administration options to cease u.s. implementation of the jcpoa . however , the may 8 presidential statement on the jcpoa did not invoke inara provisions , but instead was based on presidential authority to reimpose those sanctions that were suspended . separately from inara , the president has the option to reimpose sanctions by refusing to renew waivers of the various sanctions laws , reissuing executive orders that were revoked , or imposing new sanctions by executive order . a refusal to certify iranian compliance under inara does not automatically cause the reimposition of any iran sanctions . on may 8 , president trump announced that he was withdrawing from the jcpoa by using his authority to reimpose all sanctions that were suspended or revoked . the sanctions , to go fully back into effect by no later than november 6 , 2018 ( 180 days from may 8 ) , are analyzed in significant detail in crs report rs20871 , iran sanctions , by [author name scrubbed] . the may 8 statement was in advance of the may 12 expiration of the waiver in place for the fy2012 ndaa ( 120-day waiver period ) . the waivers of the other 3 laws that were waived were scheduled to expire in mid - july 2018 ( 180-day / 6-month waiver periods ) .