this section answers questions on the nature of opioid abuse in the united states . these questions provide background on the drugs that are abused , the associated harm to the population , and the extent of opioid abuse . states are also developing opioid - related education initiatives . for example , in december 2014 ohio enacted a law that required the health curriculum of each ohio school district to include instruction in prescription opioid abuse prevention . in june 2017 , governor wolf of pennsylvania announced support for a bill that would establish a mandatory school - based substance abuse prevention and intervention program for all students in every grade from kindergarten through grade 12 . state officials have been involved in a number of national initiatives including the drafting of coordinated policies and recommendations from the national governors association ( nga ) , reports on state legislation to increase access to treatment for opioid overdose from the national association of state alcohol and drug abuse directors ( nasadad ) , and participation in the president's commission on combating drug addiction and the opioid crisis . across the country , states have adapted elements of their criminal justice responses — including police , court , and correctional responses — in a variety of ways due to the opioid epidemic . while this section does not provide a state - by - state analysis , it highlights several examples of how states' justice systems have responded to the opioid crisis . in recent years , several states have also enacted legislation increasing access to medication - assisted treatment for drug - addicted offenders who are incarcerated or have recently been released . many states are increasing law enforcement officer access to naloxone , an opioid overdose reversal drug . officers receive training on how to identify an overdose and administer naloxone , and they carry the drug so they can respond immediately and effectively to an overdose . the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) , part of hhs , is the primary federal agency supporting drug treatment and prevention . the federal government also has several programs ( many of which are grant programs ) that may be used , or are specifically designed , to address opioid abuse . this report does not provide a comprehensive overview of opioid abuse as a public health or criminal justice issue . instead , it answers common questions that have arisen due to rising drug overdose deaths in the nation and the ensuing federal response . this section does not address other federal agencies that support — but are not focused on — drug enforcement , treatment , or prevention . for example , u.s. customs and border protection , part of the department of homeland security , concentrates on customs , immigration , border security , and agricultural protection . while drug control is a part of what it does ( through drug interdiction at the border ) , it is not a central focus of the agency's mission . other agencies across the federal government also take part in drug control activities , but they are beyond the scope of this report .