these programs would be based on vehicles that are commercially available . this is in order to reduce costs and the time it takes to field combat vehicles associated with traditional developmental efforts . congress may be concerned with the effectiveness of ground forces over the full spectrum of military operations . brigade combat teams ( bcts ) are the basic combined - arms formations of the army . they are permanent , stand - alone , self - sufficient , and standardized tactical forces consisting of between 3,900 to 4,100 soldiers . there are three types of bcts: armored brigade combat teams ( abcts ) ; stryker brigade combat teams ( sbcts ) ; and infantry brigade combat teams ( ibcts ) . bcts are found both in the active component and the u.s. army national guard ( usarng ) . in february 2017 the army announced it would establish six security force assistance brigades ( sfabs ) — five in the active component and one in the army national guard ( arng ) . sfabs are to be capable of conducting security force assistance ( sfa ) operations at the tactical ( brigade and below ) level . while not combat brigades per se , the army plans for sfabs to be expanded , if the need arises , into fully operational abcts or ibcts capable of conducting major combat operations . the army describes ibct critical capability gaps as the ibct lacks the ability to decisively close with and destroy the enemy under restricted terrains such as mountains , littorals , jungles , subterranean areas , and urban areas to minimize excessive physical burdens imposed by organic material systems . the ibct lacks the ability to maneuver and survive in close combat against hardened enemy fortifications , light armored vehicles , and dismounted personnel . ibcts lack the support of a mobile protected firepower capability to apply immediate , lethal , long - range direct fires in the engagement of hardened enemy bunkers , light armored vehicles , and dismounted personnel in machine gun and sniper positions ; with all - terrain mobility and scalable armor protection ; capable of conducting operations in all environments . in its current configuration , army officials note that ibcts "can get there fast with low logistics demand , and they can work in severely restricted terrain , but they lack mobility and protected firepower" to "enter a foreign territory , immediately overcome armed opposition and hold an area that enables further troops to enter , like an airfield. the army's concept of operation for these vehicles is to increase ground tactical mobility in the ibct ; allow infantry squads and rifle companies to quickly move extended distances over difficult terrain to seize assault objectives ; allow rapid deployment into contested areas while providing high mobility and flexibility upon arrival ; and limit the impact on strategic mobility of the ibct .