discoveries. nonetheless , the rights associated with patents do not arise automatically . rather , to obtain patent protection , the patent act of 1952 requires inventors to file a patent application with the pto . in addition to the effects of the patent decisions issued by the supreme court during its october 2016 term , there are a number of patent - related issues on the horizon . finally , should the court hold that inter partes review proceedings are unconstitutional , the question of the impact on the caseload of the federal courts looms large . as noted , about 7,000 petitions for inter partes review proceedings have been filed in the last five years . while it is unlikely that all such petitions would amount to infringement complaints lodged in the federal courts , it seems likely that the elimination of pto revocation proceedings will have a tangible effect on the dockets of the federal courts . notably , as of the date of this report , the only other patent case scheduled to be heard during the court's october 2017 term also involves inter partes review proceedings . in sas institute v. matal , the court granted certiorari to answer the following question: does 35 u.s.c . § 318 ( a ) , which provides that the [ptab] in an inter partes review "shall issue a final written decision with respect to the patentability of any patent claim challenged by the petitioner," require that board to issue a final written decision as to every claim challenged by the petitioner , or does it allow that board to issue a final written decision with respect to the patentability of only some of the patent claims challenged by the petitioner , as the federal circuit held ? under current pto practice , a petitioner may challenge a patent "on all or some of the challenged claims," and the pto may institute a proceeding on a subset of the petition's challenged claims . obviously , the challenge as to whether the pto must address all patent claims challenged by a petitioner will become moot if the court strikes down inter partes review proceedings as unconstitutional in oil states . standing alone , however , sas institute also has implications for the pto because it has the potential to eliminate a practice of the agency that allows it to manage its workload by limiting the number of challenged claims it must analyze . as noted , patent reform appears to be of perennial concern to congress . for instance , prior to the enactment of the aia in 2011 , there were several years of legislative activity in this area . with regard to patent reform , issues that have received attention include , but are not limited to: ( 1 )  remedies for patent infringement , including the availability of damages , injunctive relief , and attorney fees ; ( 2 ) administrative proceedings before the pto , such as those enacted in the aia ; ( 3 ) the issue of non - practicing entities ( i.e.