shall have no force or effect. the supreme court has suggested that the vacancies act renders any noncompliant actions "void ab initio ," meaning that the action was "null from the beginning. the consequences that flow from a determination that an action is "void" are more severe than if a court were to announce that the action was merely "voidable. a "voidable" action is one that may be judged invalid because of some legal defect , but that "is not incurable. for instance , before a court strikes down a voidable agency decision , it will often inquire into whether the legal defect created actual prejudice . if an error is harmless , the court may uphold the agency action . critically , acts that are "void" may not be ratified or rendered harmless , meaning that another person who properly exercises legal authority on behalf of an agency may not subsequently approve or replicate the act , thereby rendering it valid . the vacancies act affirms this consequence by explicitly specifying that an agency may not ratify any acts taken in violation of the statute . as is discussed in more detail later in this report , the vacancies act has primarily been enforced through the courts , when a person with standing challenges an agency action on the basis that it was undertaken by an officer who was performing a function or duty of a vacant office in violation of the vacancies act . if such a challenge is successful , a court would be likely to vacate the challenged agency action . section 3348 of the vacancies act allows only certain officers or employees to perform the "functions and duties" of a vacant advice and consent office . unless an acting officer is serving in compliance with the vacancies act , only the agency head can perform a nondelegable duty of a vacant advice and consent office . the vacancies act creates two primary types of limitations on acting service: it limits ( 1 ) the classes of people who may serve as an acting officer , and ( 2 ) the time period for which they may serve . the vacancies act provides "the exclusive means" to authorize "an acting official to perform the functions and duties" of a vacant office — unless another statute "expressly" ( a ) authorizes the president , a court , or the head of an executive department , to designate an officer or employee to perform the functions and duties of a specified office temporarily in an acting capacity ; or ( b ) designates an officer or employee to perform the functions and duties of a specified office temporarily in an acting capacity[. across the executive branch , there are many statutes that expressly address who will temporarily act for specified officials in the case of a vacancy in the office . however , if a statute expressly prohibited delegation of a duty , that would likely render that duty nondelegable for the purposes of the vacancies act . courts have also recognized that some statutes may limit the class of officers to whom a duty is delegable , meaning by implication that the duties are not delegable outside of that specified class .