whipple to a judgeship for the southern district of georgia . senator thomas w. hardwick returned a negative blue slip , stating "i object to this appointment — the same is personally offensive and objectionable to me , and i cannot consent to the confirmation of the nominee. at that time , a negative blue slip did not necessarily prevent committee action on a nomination . as such , whipple's nomination was reported , albeit adversely , to the full senate . the nomination was rejected by the senate without a recorded vote on april 23 , 1917 . from 1917 to 1955 the blue slip was used "to merely request the opinion of senators , regardless of political party , about judicial nominations in their home - states.... no chair of the judiciary committee allowed even one negative blue slip to automatically veto a nomination. in contrast , from 1956 through 1978 — under the chairmanship of senator james o. eastland — a nominee was required to receive two positive blue slips from his home state senators before the nomination was to be considered by the committee . during this period , which encompassed both unified and divided party control of the presidency and the senate , if a home state senator had some objection to the nominee and wanted to stop committee action , he or she could decide not to return the blue slip or return it with a negative response . under such circumstances the withholding of a blue slip or a single negative response would halt all further action on a nomination . since 1979 , the blue slip policy used the judiciary committee has varied . the remainder of the report focuses on the period since 1979 , with an emphasis on discussing the policies used during recent presidencies . there have been recent years when the blue slip policy used by the senate judiciary committee stopped consideration of any nomination for which a home state senator did not return a positive blue slip . when this is the committee's policy , a home state senator's opposition to a judicial nomination through use of a negative or withheld blue slip prevents it from being reported out of committee ( in effect , preventing the nomination from being approved by the full senate ) , unless the senator can be persuaded to drop his or her opposition to the nomination . there have also been recent years during which the policy of the judiciary committee has been to allow , in some instances , committee consideration of a judicial nomination that received a negative blue slip , or no blue slip , from one or both of the nominee's home state senators ( as long as the president has consulted with a nominee's home state senators ) . this type of policy has been used to prevent home state senators from having a "veto" over the fate of a nominee from his or her state . other senators have suggested , however , that the committee's blue slip policy should not distinguish between circuit and district court nominations . one argument against treating the two types of nominations differently is that it might cede too much institutional power to a president , regardless of his party affiliation .