currently , the venue statute ( 28 u.s.c . § 1391 ) provides as a fallback venue "any judicial district in which any defendant is subject to the court's personal jurisdiction with respect to such action. congress could then amend federal statutes addressing venue ( i.e. , the district or county where a lawsuit may be brought ) to address any concerns with fairness to foreign defendants . presumably , congress would need to amend this provision if it wanted to authorize nationwide personal jurisdiction ; otherwise , venue would lie in any federal judicial district . of course , any legislation authorizing nationwide personal jurisdiction would still have to comport with the demands of constitutional due process . the supreme court has specifically declined to address whether the due process clause of the fifth amendment may limit the federal courts' exercise of personal jurisdiction . authorizing federal courts to exercise nationwide personal jurisdiction over foreign defendants who have , in the aggregate , substantial contacts with the united states might satisfy the court's due process - related concern that a u.s. tribunal possess lawful power over a defendant . however , such a proposal may still raise concerns about unfairness to foreign defendants that may result from requiring them to defend a lawsuit in a distant forum , particularly when the lawsuit does not arise out of the defendant's activity in the united states . such fairness concerns may be particularly important in light of suggestions from the supreme court that the courts should consider several specific factors when evaluating the reasonableness of subjecting a foreign defendant to suit , including the burden on the foreign defendant , the policies of other nations , and the potential effect of such lawsuits on international relations between the united states and its trading partners . in this regard , the court's personal jurisdiction jurisprudence that generally limits the powers of states may provide insight into the limits on congress's power to expand the personal jurisdiction of federal courts . one potential obstacle to such civil lawsuits is the doctrine of personal jurisdiction . businesses that are incorporated in foreign countries and conduct a large portion of their operations outside of the territorial jurisdiction of the united states may nevertheless cause injury to u.s. persons . for example , a foreign company might manufacture in its home country a machine that another company later distributes in the united states , ultimately resulting in an injury to a u.s. consumer . as a further example , a foreign subsidiary of a u.s. corporation might make a product that allegedly causes the death of u.s. persons traveling in a foreign country , but that subsidiary might otherwise have no significant connection to the united states . although foreign companies may engage in actions or omissions that injure u.s. persons — or even foreign plaintiffs — such injured persons may face various procedural challenges in obtaining judicial relief from a foreign company defendant in u.s. courts . the supreme court has long interpreted the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment to limit the power of state courts to render judgments affecting the personal rights of defendants who do not reside within the state's territory .