this report will describe each of these regulatory exclusivities below . legislation introduced in the 115 th congress would modify the current system of regulatory exclusivities . in comparison with the broadly oriented patent system , which pertains to virtually every innovative industry in the united states , regulatory exclusivities allow congress to direct attention to more focused issues . this shift holds a number of implications for innovation and public health policy . in particular , the growing number of regulatory exclusivities has caused the fda to move beyond its traditional focus upon food and drug safety , and instead become an agency that must administer numerous intellectual property rights . they have also created a more complex landscape of proprietary rights in the area of pharmaceuticals and biologics . the ultimate assessment of regulatory exclusivities depends upon whether they have encouraged the discovery and public availability of new medicines . orphan and pediatric drug exclusivity have been widely lauded as successful programs , although some observers have expressed concern over their operation . more recently established exclusivities , such as those pertaining to enantiomers and qualified infectious disease products , have arguably not attracted the same level of interest from industry . continued congressional monitoring may help ensure that regulatory exclusivities provide appropriate incentives for innovation in the crucial area of public health . the fda maintains the test data incorporated into an nda in confidence . in addition , because the required test data is usually quite costly to generate , sponsors of new pharmaceuticals ordinarily do not disclose them to the public . otherwise the sponsor's competitors could file their own ndas using that test data , and thereby avoid the expenses of developing the information themselves . until 1984 , federal law contained no separate provisions addressing lower - cost generic versions of brand - name drugs that the fda had previously approved for marketing . the result was that a would - be generic drug manufacturer had to file its own nda in order to market its drug . some generic manufacturers could rely on published scientific literature demonstrating the safety and efficacy of the drug . because these sorts of studies were not available for all drugs , however , not all generic firms could file these so - called "paper ndas. further , at times the fda would request additional studies to address safety and efficacy questions that arose from experience with the drug following its initial approval . the result was that some generic manufacturers were forced to prove independently that their pharmaceuticals were safe and effective , even though their products were chemically identical to those of previously approved drugs . the u.s. government regulates the marketing of pharmaceuticals in the interest of public health . the developer of a new drug — known as its "sponsor" — must demonstrate that the product is safe and effective before it can be distributed to the public . this showing requires a sponsor to conduct both preclinical and clinical investigations of drugs that have not been previously tested . in deciding whether to issue marketing approval or not , the fda evaluates the test data that the sponsor submits in a so - called new drug application ( nda ) .