sexual violence is not a problem confined to the military . actual prevalence in the civilian sector is difficult to estimate as many experts believe sexual assault is an underreported crime . some national surveys suggest that up to 19.3% of women and 1.7% of men in the united states have been victims of sexual assault at some point in their lives . there is a continued national dialogue with regard to sexual violence at universities , and other government and private organizations . such prevention efforts work to modify and / or entirely eliminate the events , conditions , situations , or exposure to influences ( risk factors ) that result in the initiation of sexual violence and associated injuries , disabilities , and deaths . the cdc has identified four types of risk factors that are correlated with higher incidence of sexual assault , ( 1 ) individual risk factors ( eg , general aggressiveness and acceptance of violence , alcohol / drug use ) ; ( 2 ) relationship risk factors ( eg , association with sexually aggressive , hypermasculine , and delinquent peers ) ; ( 3 ) community risk factors ( eg , general tolerance of sexual violence , lack of institutional support ) ; and ( 4 ) societal risk factors ( eg , weak gender - equity laws / policies ) . uniformed members of the military services who allegedly commit sexual assault crimes are subject to prosecution under the military justice system . a full list of these risk factors is displayed in the appendix in table a - 2 . military leaders have repeatedly stated a "zero tolerance" philosophy toward military sexual assault . nevertheless , dod's prevention strategy acknowledges that the potential for assault exists , "individuals within the dod come from a wide variety of backgrounds and their past experiences shape their attitudes and behavior in response to life events . individuals may express themselves in different ways , and for some , violence may be a choice. dod's prevention actions in this regard have been focused on reducing risk factors for sexual assault . questions of congressional concern include: are military leaders adequately trained for , committed to , and held accountable for developing an organizational culture that reduces risk factors for sexual assault ? are sexual assault prevention training programs in the military timely , effective , and appropriate for the target audiences ? does dod have the appropriate authorities and are they taking adequate actions to screen out or deter potential perpetrators ? a third area of congressional focus is the provision of protection , advocacy and support services for victims of sexual assault — those currently serving and those who have been discharged or retired from military service . although this analysis does not include congressional actions with relation to veteran services for victims of military sexual assault , it does include provisions associated with military discharges and the correction of discharge paperwork . while this section focuses on dod services to victims of sexual assault , servicemembers may also be eligible for department of justice - funded programs in their respective states of residence . congressional actions to protect and support victims of sexual assault fall under four main categories .