congress has acted to incentivize such testing . current programs stem from the best pharmaceuticals for children act ( bpca ) , the pediatric research equity act ( prea ) , and the pediatric medical device safety and improvement act ( pmdsia ) . bpca provides an incentive in the form of a six - month extension of regulatory exclusivity for a drug whose manufacturer completes fda - requested pediatric studies . prea requires pediatric assessments to support pediatric use information in product labeling . pmdsia requires certain reports for pediatric medical devices , provides incentives for manufacturers to create pediatric medical devices , and gives fda the authority to require postmarket studies of approved pediatric devices to ensure their continued efficacy and safety . prior to the enactment of the incentive provisions in 1997 , more than 80% of approved drugs contained no pediatric - specific labeling information . since then , there have been more than 600 approved labeling changes with pediatric - specific information , 149 of which were completed following fdasia . bpca and prea studies have resulted in information on new dosing , new indications of use , new safety information , and new data on effectiveness that inform labeling changes for pediatric dosing , warnings , and instructions on how to prepare formulations for pediatric populations . however , gaps continue to exist , especially for pediatric cancer , with fda noting that because children's cancers often occur in different organs than adult cancers , manufacturers are able to obtain a waiver from prea requirements . pmdsia added an annual reporting requirement to congress on pediatric medical devices , including the number of pediatric device approvals per year and the review time for these devices . in august 2017 , fda published the seventh report pursuant to this requirement . in general , title v , pediatric drugs and devices , makes the following amendments: amends phsa section 409i ( a ) ( 2 ) ( a ) ( ii ) to require the secretary , in developing the list of priority issues in pediatric therapeutics that require study , to consider where identification of biomarkers for particular pediatric diseases , disorders , or conditions may be beneficial in pediatric populations ( ยง501 ) . amends phsa section 409i ( c ) ( 6 ) to require that reports on pediatric studies completed in accordance with an award under this section be posted on the national institutes of health ( nih ) website , as specified , and that any interested person be allowed to submit comments on these studies to the fda commissioner and eliminates the requirement that the secretary publish in the federal register summaries of reports that request a labeling change ( ยง501 ) . amends phsa section 409i ( d ) to reauthorize the appropriation of $25 million for each of fy2018 through fy2022 for the program for pediatric studies of drugs at nih ( ยง501 ) .