appendix a . textile industry overview appendix b . top 10 states in textile employment appendix c. selected apparel and textile duties appendix d. selected textile and apparel industry comments on nafta negotiating objectives links to several statements by industry representatives for u.s. fiber and textile manufacturers , u.s. fashion brands , and u.s. apparel retailers are listed here . these statements reflect a consensus from all stages of the textile and apparel supply chain that nafta should continue because it helps maintain both sectors' overall competitiveness . without nafta , according to these statements , current textile and apparel production and jobs could be shifted to other regions of the world , especially low - cost markets in asia . formal talks with canada and mexico began in august 2017 . if a new nafta deal is reached , it would be subject to ratification by the legislatures of all three countries . another possibility is that president trump may decide to withdraw from nafta , which the united states can do with six months' notice to the other parties . the textile industry is one of the oldest manufacturing industries in the united states . since nafta took effect more than two decades ago , there have been substantial changes in the u.s. textile industry — perhaps most notably , it has become highly automated and capital - intensive . in addition , textile businesses have arranged their north american production around the agreement's terms . nafta has been criticized for causing a loss of production and employment in u.s. manufacturing . the effects of nafta with respect to textiles and apparel , however , are not straightforward , and the drop in domestic textile and apparel production and jobs cannot be blamed solely on the agreement . making it difficult to isolate the impact of nafta are the many other factors that have contributed to the shrinking size of the domestic textile and apparel sectors over the past quarter - century , among them automation , industry consolidation , currency fluctuations , and economic growth . as the nafta renegotiations progress , there are at least three possible outcomes: ( 1 ) no change to the textile and apparel provisions in nafta ; ( 2 ) adjustments to nafta , such as changes to rules of origin ; or ( 3 ) full u.s. withdrawal from nafta . over the long run , global textile and apparel supply chains would adjust to a modified nafta or to its elimination , but it is unclear how long that may take . under a withdrawal scenario , some analysts believe u.s. textile manufacturers could see a reduction in net income by as much as 1 percentage point if the result is less demand for u.s. - made yarns and fabrics within the nafta region . according to one textile and apparel industry expert , ending nafta would likely result in u.s. apparel brands and retailers importing more garments from other suppliers , such as china and vietnam . moreover , u.s. textile manufacturers could lose export sales to mexico , the united states' single largest export market . it is possible that asian textile and apparel suppliers would benefit the most from nafta's dismantlement by taking market share from mexico .