amtrak owned no infrastructure at the time of its creation . it was structured as a contracting agency , and amtrak trains were operated by private railroads over tracks they owned . several years later , as congress was dealing with the bankruptcy of the penn central railroad , congress decided to give amtrak much of the trackage owned by the penn central in the 450-mile corridor running from washington , dc , north through philadelphia and new york city to boston , along with shorter lines serving harrisburg , pa , and springfield , ma . the line running from washington to boston , known as the northeast corridor ( nec ) , traverses 8 states and hosts 2,200 daily trains carrying over 800,000 passengers ( mostly on commuter trains ) . the line includes more than 200 bridges , tunnels dating to the 1870s , and electric traction systems relying on 1930s - era components . while amtrak owns the vast majority of the right - of - way and track , there are sections owned by state governments and commuter rail agencies . in addition to amtrak , eight commuter rail agencies operate on the nec , as well as four freight railroads . the nec is amtrak's flagship corridor , with its fastest service . most of its corridor routes are financially supported by states they serve . amtrak also operates commuter service under contract with state and local commuter authorities in various parts of the country . amtrak's expenses exceed its revenues each year . in fy2016 , amtrak's revenues totaled $3.2 billion , against expenses of $4.3 billion , for a net loss of $1.1 billion ( see table 2 ) . the change is intended to increase transparency of the costs of amtrak's two major lines of business and eliminate cross - subsidization between them ; operating profits from the nec and state access payments for use of the nec will be reinvested in that corridor , and passenger revenue , state payments , and federal grants for the national network will be used for that account . the premium - fare acela service attains speeds of up to 125 miles per hour on the southern section between washington , dc , and new york city , and up to 150 mph on the northern section between new york city and boston . but those high speeds are possible only in limited stretches: the average speed of the acela service is around 70 to 80 miles per hour . travel time improvements on the nec likely would be valuable . a 2008 analysis by the dot inspector general estimated that reducing the new york - washington travel time from nearly three to two and a half hours and the new york - boston travel time from over three and a half to three hours would result in an average of $500 million in annual benefits ( in 2006 dollars ) . most of that was estimated to come from air passengers shifting to the train as its travel times shrank . the impact might be less now , as amtrak's share of the combined air / rail market in the northeast has increased since that report was written .