54 on the floor . during debate , arguments centered on a number of issues , ranging from concern over exacerbating yemen's humanitarian crisis to reasserting the role of congress in authorizing the use of armed force abroad . after then - foreign relations committee chairman senator bob corker promised to propose new legislation and hold hearings scrutinizing u.s. policy in yemen , a majority of senators voted to table a motion to discharge the foreign relations committee from further consideration of s.j.res . senator robert menendez made remarks expressing conditional support for senator corker's approach , a view shared by some other senators who voted to table the motion . the foreign relations committee held a hearing on yemen a month later . in parallel testimony before congress , u.s. defense officials stated that while the united states refueled saudi aircraft and provided advice on targeting techniques , centcom did not track coalition aircraft after they were refueled and did not provide advice on specific targets . then - assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs robert s. karem testified that "it's correct that we do not monitor and track all of the saudi aircraft aloft over yemen. during the same hearing , u.s. officials acknowledged that pressure from congress has altered how the administration deals with the coalition over the yemen conflict . acting assistant secretary of state for near eastern affairs david satterfield told senator todd young and the sfrc the following: senator , your efforts , the efforts of your colleagues in this body and on this committee have been exceedingly helpful in allowing the administration to send a message from whole of government regarding the very specific concerns we have over any limitations , restrictions , constraints on the ability of both humanitarian and commercial goods specifically to include fuel to have unrestricted and expeditious entry into yemen . and that messaging which comes from us , the executive branch , also comes from this body is extremely important . after the promised hearing , the senate foreign relations committee also proposed new legislation to place conditions on u.s. assistance to the coalition . in may , the committee reported s.j.res . 58 to the senate ; it would have prohibited the obligation or expenditure of u.s. funds for in - flight refueling operations of saudi and saudi - led coalition aircraft that were not conducting select types of operations if certain certifications cannot be made and maintained . the senate armed services committee incorporated the provisions of the sfrc - reported text of s.j.res . the trump administration disagreed . in february 2018 , the acting department of defense general counsel wrote to senate leaders describing the extent of current u.s. support , and reported that "the united states provides the ksa - led coalition defense articles and services , including air - to - air refueling ; certain intelligence support ; and military advice , including advice regarding compliance with the law of armed conflict and best practices for reducing the risk of civilian casualties. on march 20 , 2018 , the senate considered s.j.res . 115-232 in mid - august , giving the administration until mid - september 2018 to make certain certifications . in a statement accompanying the president's signing of p.l .