appendix a . variable and grouping descriptions appendix b . traditional banking organization criteria and leverage ratios compared the grouping of banks as traditional banking organizations , or tbos , in this report and the grouping that would occur under fdic vice chairman hoenig's proposal are not necessarily a 1-to - 1 match . as with all groupings in this report , the data comes from that reported as of june 30 , 2017 , but bank's balance sheets continually change overtime . in addition , data considerations necessitate altering the criteria for the purposes of this report . the criteria in fdic vice chairman hoenig's may 2017 proposal to classify banks as a tbo are as follows: 1 . the bank holds no trading assets or liabilities ( other than permissible derivatives ) ; 2 . the bank holds no derivative positions other than interest rate and foreign exchange derivatives ; 3 . the total notional value of all the bank's derivatives exposures — including cleared and non - cleared derivatives — is less than $8 billion ; and 4 . the bank maintains a ratio of generally accepted accounting principles equity - to - assets of at least 10% ( there is a two - year transition period to meet this ratio ) . the criteria used in this report to classify banks as tbo are as follows: 1 . the bank holds no trading assets or liabilities ; 2 . the bank holds no derivative positions other than interest rate and foreign exchange derivatives ; 3 . the total notional value of all its derivatives exposures — including cleared and non - cleared derivatives — is less than $8 billion ; and 4 . the bank maintains a ratio of equity - to - assets ratio ( with equity defined as assets minus liabilities ) of at least 10% ( this ratio is as reported as of june 30 , 2017 ) . possible discrepancies for qualification under each criteria could occur when ( 1 ) a bank that has trading assets and liabilities exclusively consisting of interest rate and foreign exchange derivatives held for trading or ( 2 ) a bank could report the ratio of equity - to - assets under generally accepted accounting principles differs from the ratio of asset minus liabilities - to - equity and that difference is large enough so that the bank crosses the 10% threshold . in addition , the leverage ratio data used in this report may be calculated differently than those defined in different proposals . this report uses the tier 1 leverage ratio reported by bhcs in the y - 9c forms submitted to the federal reserve . vice chairman hoenig's proposal would use the generally accepted accounting principles equity - to - assets ratio . the financial choice act ( h.r . 10 ; the fca ) defines the leverage ratio for traditional banking organization as "total assets ( minus any items deducted from common equity tier 1 capital ) as calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and as reported on the traditional banking organization's applicable regulatory filing with the banking organization's appropriate federal banking agency" divided by tangible equity .