during floor consideration of h.r . 3354 , which includes as division h the text of h.r . 3353 , hud - related floor amendments were approved: increasing funding for: cdbg , shop , public housing capital fund , housing for persons with aids , and housing for the elderly ( section 202 ) . offsetting those increases with decreases for: public housing operating fund , information technology , fha administrative expenses , and research and technology . making policy changes to block hud's implementation of some manufactured housing regulations and guidance ( sec . 424 ) and to allow for the study of certain foundation materials ( amendment to the community development fund account ) . as reported by the senate appropriations committee , s. 1655 would provide the following for hud: $49.9 billion in gross discretionary appropriations for hud's programs and activities , which is 4% more than was enacted for fy2017 and 23% more than was proposed by the president ( $40.2 billion in net discretionary appropriations ) . increases in funding for the section 202 housing for the elderly program ( +14% over fy2017 enacted ) , the project - based rental assistance account ( +6% ) , and the tenant - based rental assistance account ( +5% ) . level funding , relative to fy2017 , for the grant programs slated for elimination in the president's budget request ( cdbg , home , and the programs included in the shop account ) . several new policy changes , including an expansion of the rental assistance demonstration ( eliminating the cap on the number of units that may convert , modifying the terms of conversion for some properties and expanding the program to section 202 housing for the elderly properties ( section 236 of the general provisions ) ) and new penalties for hud if the agency does not issue reports to the committee about properties that fail inspection ( section 202 of the general provisions ) . table 8 shows appropriations levels for the various related agencies funded within the transportation , hud , and related agencies appropriations bill . the surface transportation board was transferred from the dot title to the related agencies title starting with fy2017 . the president's fy2018 budget request included that congress begin the process of winding down the interagency council on homelessness ( usich ) , which was created in 1987 to coordinate across government agencies to reduce and end homelessness . the requested funding level — $57 a more than 80% reduction from fy2017 — is intended to cover salaries , benefits , and operational costs for permanently closing the agency by november 2017 . the usich has a statutory sunset date — currently , october 1 , 2018 — that has generally been extended in annual appropriations acts . the house committee bill would adopt the president's request , allowing for the termination of the usich ; the senate committee bill would not , funding the usich at fy2017 levels and permanently eliminating the statutory sunset .