appendix a . types of de weapons high energy lasers ( hels ) from the center for strategic and budgetary assessments ( csba ) 2012 , "changing the game: the promise of directed - energy weapons," in contrast to light bulbs that emit "white light" ( photons with a multitude of different wavelengths and phases in all directions ) , lasers produce narrow beams of monochromatic ( single - wavelength ) light in coherent beams ( all photons traveling in the same direction with the same phase ) . these narrow beams can focus energy precisely on a designated point . there are three primary types of hels: chemical lasers ; solid - state lasers ; and free electron lasers . beyond differences in the lasing media , each type has fundamental attributes that affect their ability to mature into operational weapon systems . in addition to the actual lasers , target tracking , laser pointing , thermal management , and beam control systems are required to place as much laser energy as possible on a target over operationally relevant distances . chemical lasers from csba: chemical lasers are the only current de systems able to achieve the power needed to interdict targets such as ballistic missiles over hundreds of kilometers . as a result , chemical lasers have until recently been the basis for dod's most mature hel concepts . chemical lasers use exothermic ( energy - liberating ) reactions of various chemicals in the gas phase to create atoms or ions in excited states within a lasing medium . since these reactions must occur at very low pressures — typically only a couple percent of atmospheric pressure — chemical lasers are large devices requiring vacuum pumps , complex chemical management systems , and low - pressure reaction chambers contained inside a laser resonator . solid - state lasers ( ssls ) from csba: the first laser invented in 1960 was an ssl . today , low - power ssls with outputs of milliwatts are used in a wide variety of consumer products , such as dvd players and laser jet printers . watt - class ssls are used in numerous military applications , including target range finders ( laser radars , also known as ladars ) , imagers , target designators , and dod's large aircraft infrared countermeasure ( laircm ) defensive system . ssls use ceramic or glass - like solids , rather than a gas , as their lasing media . free electron lasers ( fels ) from csba: free electron laser ( fel ) systems accelerate beams of electrons to nearly the speed of light in racetrack - like accelerator rings and use powerful magnets to "wiggle" the electron beams to generate high - energy beams of laser photons . fels are of interest to the navy due to their potential to achieve the high power outputs needed to interdict hardened targets such as incoming ballistic missile reentry vehicles , and their unique ability to "tune" their beams to different wavelengths to different wavelengths so they can better transmit through the dense , humid atmospheres of maritime environments . current developmental fels are extremely large and inefficient .