colombia . the act appropriates "not less than" $391.3 to support security and development efforts and the implementation of the peace accord in colombia . this is $139.9 million more than the administration requested and $5 million more than colombia received in fy2017 . the act requires 20% of fmf aid for colombia to be withheld until the state department certifies that the colombian government is addressing several human rights issues . mexico . according to the explanatory statement , the act appropriates $152.7 million for mexico , which is $65 million more than the administration requested and $14.1 million more than mexico received in fy2017 . the additional aid is intended to combat the production and trafficking of heroin , fentanyl , and other opioids into the united states . the act requires 25% of fmf aid for mexico to be withheld until the state department certifies that the mexican government is addressing a series of human rights concerns . cbsi . according to the explanatory statement , the act appropriates $57.7 million to continue cbsi . this is $21.5 million more than requested and the same amount that was allocated to the initiative in fy2017 . cuba: according to the explanatory statement , the act appropriates $20 million for democracy programs in cuba . this is the same amount that was appropriated for such programs in fy2017 . the administration did not request any funding for democracy promotion in cuba in fy2018 . venezuela . the act appropriates $15 million for programs to promote democracy and the rule of law in venezuela . this is $8 million more than was provided for such programs in fy2017 . the trump administration's desire to scale back u.s. foreign assistance could have significant implications for u.s. policy in latin america and the caribbean in the coming years . in particular , it could accelerate u.s. efforts to transition countries in the region away from traditional development assistance and toward other forms of bilateral engagement . it also could result in the department of defense ( dod ) taking on a larger role in u.s. security cooperation with the region . moreover , the administration's proposed foreign assistance cuts , combined with other policy shifts , could contribute to a relative decline in u.s. influence . over the past three decades , many latin american and caribbean countries have made major strides in consolidating democratic governance and improving living conditions for their citizens . the trump administration's desire to reduce foreign assistance funding could contribute to a new round of aid transitions . the fy2018 budget request would have zeroed out traditional development assistance for brazil , jamaica , nicaragua , and paraguay and would have reduced it significantly for several other countries in the region . although many of those assistance cuts were not enacted in the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 , it appears as though the administration may push for further cuts in the coming years . the administration's national security strategy , released in december 2017 , asserts that the united states "will shift away from a reliance on assistance based on grants to approaches that attract private capital and catalyze private sector activity.