the changes introduced in h.r . 10 would generally allow for increased congressional oversight of the fsoc . increased congressional oversight can ensure greater accountability of the fsoc . at the same time , increased oversight by congress likely reduces the fsoc's independence from congress and from political considerations , which may affect regulatory decisions . fsoc members can vote to put a stay on cfpb rules if they believe that the rules would put the safety and soundness of the banking system or financial stability at risk . 10 would remove this fsoc power , in addition to making other significant changes to the cfpb . fsoc recommendations to other agencies are nonbinding . some have argued that unlike other financial regulators , who are charged with balancing consumer protection and financial stability , the cfpb is only charged with protecting consumers and therefore is not as concerned with potential tradeoffs between consumer protection and financial stability . as such , it may be beneficial for the fsoc to have the power to stay rules if there is a threat to financial stability . the cfpb is the one agency subject to this additional check from the fsoc , and repealing this fsoc authority would put the cfpb on par with other regulators . currently , most property , casualty , and life insurances are regulated at the state level . both the department of the treasury's federal insurance office ( fio ) and an independent insurance expert serve on the fsoc . the independent insurance expert is a voting member ; treasury's fio is not . the treasury office can serve as a single negotiator in harmonizing regulation of insurance internationally . 10 would combine the treasury office and the office of the independent insurance expert into one office distinct from treasury . alternative legislation ( h.r . 4061 ) was marked up and ordered to be reported by the house financial services committee on january 18 , 2018 . 4061 would modify fsoc's consideration criteria for designating firms as systemic . in addition to the current criteria fsoc considers when designating a nonbank financial company laid out in the " statutory factors " above , the bill would require fsoc to consider the "the appropriateness of the imposition of prudential standards as opposed to other forms of regulation to mitigate the identified risks. the bill would make changes to the evaluation process , providing for more contact between companies under consideration and fsoc . the evaluation process would be modified to allow for more input from the company under consideration throughout the process , providing for numerous opportunities for the firm to provide materials to fsoc and opportunities for in - person hearings . additionally , fsoc would be required to provide written notice to the company at each stage of the evaluation process , including when a company is initially identified for evaluation , following a proposed determination by fsoc , and after the final determination . the bill would give companies under evaluation by fsoc an opportunity to present a plan to fsoc to alter their business , structure , or operations with a specified implementation period .