by 2016 , the number was just over 668,000 . the sponsoring family members in the united states , or "petitioner," must wait for the department of state's national visa center to invite them to apply for the program . citizenship and immigrations services ( uscis ) within dhs anticipates conducting 5,000 hfrp program interviews per year . as of september 30 , 2017 , uscis reported that of 9,758 applications accepted , it had denied 1,672 , approved 6,864 , and had 1,222 pending . voter turnout was 21% . runoff elections for some parliamentary and local elections were completed on january 29 , 2017 . although phtk has the most seats of any party in the legislature , with 31 of 119 in the chamber of deputies and 11 of 30 in the senate , no single party has a majority . phtk may have to rely on alliances to enact legislation and fulfill its policy agenda . as a political newcomer , this might prove challenging for moïse to sustain , but he has had some success so far . among the challenges the new president faces are ongoing recovery from the 2010 earthquake and 2016's hurricane matthew , a cholera epidemic , stalled economic growth , and a highly polarized political climate . other obstacles moïse faces during his five - year term include a weak mandate due to low voter turnout , and the possibility of social unrest due to continued poverty and lack of job opportunities . moïse arrived under the shadow of an ongoing haitian government investigation into his possible involvement in money laundering and irregular loan arrangements , which moïse denies . in march , the haitian congress approved the president's choice for prime minister , dr. jack guy lafontant , and later that month it approved lafontant's cabinet . the legislature then approved the policy agenda presented by lafontant . authorities announced they will initially focus on reviving the agricultural sector , rolling out a comprehensive national health care insurance system , bringing alternative energy to haiti , and infrastructure repair . other items on the policy agenda include redeveloping the capital , port - au - prince , including the presidential palace and other government buildings that were destroyed during the 2010 earthquake . the government took a step toward funding these objectives in may by ending government fuel subsidies , thereby increasing fuel prices by 20% , but freeing up resources for other programs . in september 2017 , the legislature approved the president's budget , which included several tax increases for revenue generation . the public greeted these tax increases with violent street protests , however . since may , workers have conducted strikes for higher wages , especially in the textile manufacturing sector . street protests have become "a fixture of mr. moïse's administration," according to the economist intelligence unit ( eiu ) . national and local transportation unions held strikes in september and october , leading the president to withdraw certain transport - related tax increases he had proposed . in november , hundreds protested the remobilization of the army and government corruption . the united nations ended its 13-year - long united nations stabilization mission in haiti ( minustah ) in october 2017 .