an important aspect is the evaluation of projects . another option for congress is to increase direct funding for or otherwise adjust the tifia program . the fast act cut direct funding to the tifia program , while allowing states to trade formula grant funding for a larger loan . at the moment states do not have to make that trade because the tifia program is not in danger of running out of budget authority . there are three main potential benefits of p3s . first , p3s are a way to attract private capital to invest in transportation infrastructure . this can be particularly important when public - sector budgets are heavily constrained . the opportunity to invest in equity or taxable debt may lure pension funds and foreign investors , which generally are not subject to u.s. federal income tax and thus do not benefit from the tax exclusion of interest on municipal bonds . second , p3s may be able to build and operate transportation facilities more efficiently than the public sector through better management and innovation in construction , maintenance , and operation . private companies may be more able to examine the full life - cycle cost of investments , whereas public agency decisions are often tied to short - term budget cycles . third , through p3s the public sector can transfer to the private - sector partner many of the risks of building , maintaining , and operating transportation infrastructure ( table 1 ) . one major risk is that a facility will cost more to operate and maintain than budgeted , particularly if initial construction is poor . many parts of the interstate highway system , those in urban areas and some in rural areas , have traffic levels that would make it financially viable to have toll - supported p3s . the need for reconstructing interstates is likely to accelerate in the years ahead , as many reach their approximately 50-year design life . another is that a facility to be financed by tolls will have less demand than estimated , and will fail to generate the expected revenue . transferring these and other risks to the private sector may not save money , as the private partner requires compensation for assuming them , but the risk transfer may provide greater certainty for the public sector . concerns with p3s include the types of projects involved , the risks retained by the public sector , and transportation planning . private - sector investors are drawn to projects that have the greatest potential financial returns , adjusted for risk . p3s that are reliant on tolls or other user fees , therefore , are unlikely to address transportation issues in rural areas or on lightly traveled routes . however , p3s in these areas may be viable if based on state and local government availability payments . although some risks are typically transferred to the private sector in a p3 , the public sector may retain significant risk . in some p3s , the public sector retains revenue risk , thus putting itself on the line to repay creditors if the project fails to generate anticipated revenue .