ch . 19 , governing the operations of fdlp , "has been eclipsed in some areas by technology , which today provides for more flexibility and innovation in meeting the public's needs for access to government information. in light of the technological changes of the past four decades , a relevant question for congress might arise: to what extent can these 19 th century authorities and work patterns meet the challenges of ubiquitous digital creation of government information ? this question is further complicated by the lack of a stable , robust set of digital information resources and management practices like those that were in place when congress last considered current government information policies . this report examines three areas related to the production , distribution , retention , and management of government information in a primarily digital environment . these areas include the joint committee on printing ; the federal depository library program ; and government information management in the future . jcp was established by congress in 1846 to oversee the management of private printers who competed to provide printing and publishing services to the government . with the creation of gpo in 1861 , jcp was charged with overseeing and regulating government printing in all three branches of the national government , and overseeing the new agency in its efforts to provide government - wide printing services . as assigned by congress , jcp's statutory duties with regard to the management of gpo were ( and remain ) granular . some of those responsibilities include overseeing gpo finances , facilities , and staffing for the various printing and other industrial trades necessary to produce printed works when those authorities were conferred in the 19 th century . in statute , jcp is the final authority on wage setting for gpo staff , assessing the quality of paper gpo would purchase , and determining which work gpo might produce within the agency or by contract with outside vendors . the joint committee's authority to oversee and enforce statutory authorities that mandate government printing through gpo was essentially unchallenged for more than a century . this began to change in the 1980s and 1990s following a 1983 supreme court decision in immigration and naturalization service v. chadha . the court ruled unconstitutional a one - chamber veto because it deviated from the constitutionally specified lawmaking process of bicameral consideration and presentation of legislation by congress to the president for his consideration . soon thereafter , a number of executive branch entities , including the department of justice ( doj ) , department of defense ( dod ) , and the office of management and budget ( omb ) , began to question jcp's regulatory and statutory authority on the basis of chadha and enduring concerns about the separation of powers . of particular interest to those agencies was the requirement specified in 44 u.s.c . 501 that all printing , binding , and blank - book work for every government entity other than the supreme court is to be done at gpo .