the fy2017 appropriations law ( p.l . in such cases , congress faces a decision as to whether to reimburse the accounts from which funding was transferred or to otherwise provide supplemental appropriations . the reimbursement or supplemental appropriation often is provided in the following fiscal year . fish and wildlife service ( fws ) . congress also provides funding for wildfire - related activities through the federal emergency management agency , such as emergency financial assistance for some nonfederal wildfires through fire management assistance grants and the disaster relief fund ; those funds and activities are discussed in other crs products . wildfire management appropriations began to increase in the late 1990s and rose significantly after fy2000 , beginning with the severe 2000 fire season ( see figure 1 ) . since then , wildfire appropriations have varied between a low of $2.9 billion in fy2012 and a high of $5.2 billion in fy2008 ( as measured in constant fy2017 dollars ) . the majority of wildfire management appropriations go to fs . from fy1994 to fy2017 , fs received around 71% of the total wildfire management appropriations annually on average and doi received 29% . fs has received a slightly larger share more recently , though , receiving 76% annually on average over the past 10 years ( while doi's share has decreased to 24% over that time period ) . fs wildfire management appropriations constitute a relatively large portion of total fs discretionary funding . in the past , when wildfire suppression funding was exhausted during a fiscal year , the agencies sometimes have had to transfer funds from non - wildfire management suppression accounts . this practice may impact the performance of the activities under those other accounts . fire transfers often may disrupt the regular budget cycle and complicate discussions about how much suppression funding is needed for the current fiscal year . for example , over the past 10 years , wildfire appropriations have made up approximately 50% of the agency's discretionary funds , on average ( see figure 2 ) , although not all of those funds counted against discretionary spending limits . in comparison , wildfire appropriations account for about 8% of doi's total discretionary appropriations , on average . table 1 displays annual total wildfire management appropriations for the past 10 years , from fy2008 to fy2017 . over that time period , combined fs and doi wildfire management appropriations have averaged $3.7 billion . doi and fs each have two similarly structured accounts for wildfire funding: a wildland fire management ( wfm ) account and a federal land assistance , management , and enhancement act ( flame ) account . flame is a reserve fund for wildfire suppression that requires certain conditions to be met to transfer funding from the flame account to the wfm account . programs within these accounts generally correspond to the different categories of wildland fire management activities . the wfm appropriation is distributed among two programs: fire operations and other fire operations . the fire operations program receives the bulk of the wfm appropriation and funds two activities: preparedness and suppression .