revise . some scientists considered the correlation merely coincidence . callendar's calculations provided early quantitative indications of a climate warming as a result of human activity . at the time , however , the relative contribution of human activity compared with natural factors could not be determined . david keeling later established more consistent and repeatable measurements of atmospheric co 2 in the 1950s . keeling's precise measurements provided strong evidence of a connection between increasing human - related co 2 emissions and the increasing co 2 concentrations in the atmosphere . the measurements established a quantitative benchmark for later studies examining the linkage between increasing co 2 concentrations and rising global temperatures . keeling's concentration data facilitated additional research on the global carbon cycle , the oceans , and the effects of human activities . in the middle of the 20 th century , scientists ( and many in the public ) recognized that a general warming of the climate had occurred ( table a - 1 ) . this was followed by a 30-year period of relatively flat or decreasing global average temperatures from around 1946 to 1977 ( figure 1 ) . arguably , the apparent change in trajectory heightened scientific uncertainty about the direction of future climate changes and any human influence on them . it coincided with concerns about "global dimming," at least in part attributed to sulfur and particulate pollution , which increased rapidly during that period before leveling off around 1980 . current assessments indicate that the mid - 20 th century warming hiatus may have been due to a combination of human ( ghg , pollution ) and natural influences ( solar variability , volcanoes ) . as temperatures began to rise again in the late 1970s , authoritative scientific assessments performed by various governmental and nongovernmental institutions , supported by an expanding body of peer - reviewed published research , pointed to an emerging consensus regarding a probable human contribution to climate change , primarily due to increasing ghg emissions . the relative role of human versus natural influences became more clear in the early 2000s . longer series of improved observations ( eg , solar radiation , clouds , land cover change ) , statistical methods , and computational models enabled more robust analyses and comparisons of research methods and results . major , collaborative , authoritative assessments — u.s . and international — were established to compile , debate , and consider the strengths or weaknesses of scientific analysis regarding climate change in order to inform policymakers . table a - 2 contains the relevant conclusions regarding human and natural influences on climate change from the major assessments conducted , with those of nas beginning in 1977 , ipcc beginning in 1990 , and the usgcrp beginning in 2001 . these inclusive assessments underpinned growing scientific confidence that human activities were likely the major cause of the observed global warming since the mid - 20 th century . many factors have contributed to increased scientific confidence in quantifying the human and natural contributions to climate change . longer records of observational data have provided more evidence of the concordance between higher ghg levels and temperature increases .