this bill was marked up by the committee on october 4 , 2017 . on october 30 , 2017 , the house rules committee posted an amendment in the nature of a substitute for h.r . division a of the championing healthy kids act also includes the following provisions as offsets: ( 1 ) a change to the qualified health plan grace period requirement for individuals who receive advanced premium tax credits for health insurance purchased on the exchanges and ( 2 ) reductions to the prevention and public health fund . although other pending legislation proposes extending some of the same public health programs included in division a of the championing healthy kids act champion act , a comparison of those bills is beyond the scope of this report . in revising the language of the champion act , the championing healthy kids act includes revised language for the champion act in division a . division a would extend funding for several public health programs that had received directed appropriations through fy2017 . it would also make a number of changes to these programs and would provide offsets for the proposed funding extensions . division b of this act would , among other things , extend funding for the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) . on november 1 , 2017 , the house rules committee adopted an amendment to this bill that would lessen the amount that would be reduced from the public health and prevention fund ( pphf ) . the house passed the championing healthy kids act on november 3 , 2017 , by a vote of 242 to 174 . on december 13 , 2017 , the chair of the house committee on appropriations , representative rodney frelinghuysen , introduced h.j.res 124 . this measure would extend temporary continuing appropriations for most federal agencies ( division a ) and provide full - year appropriations for the department of defense ( division b ) . division c , subdivision 1 ( §§21001-21202 ) , of this measure is largely identical to the text of division a of the house - passed championing healthy kids act ( h.r . this report summarizes the provisions in division a of the championing healthy kids act that would extend funding for certain public health programs and provide offsets for these funding extensions . division b — the extension of chip funding — is discussed in crs report r44989 , comparison of the bills to extend state children's health insurance program ( chip ) funding . according to congressional budget office ( cbo ) and the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) cost estimates for the championing healthy kids act language posted on the house rules committee website on october 30 , 2017 , division a is estimated to decrease federal spending by $4.1 billion and increase revenues by $0.7 billion , for a net savings of $4.8 billion over the period of fy2018 through fy2027 . division a of the championing healthy kids act would extend funding for a number of public health programs , which are discussed briefly below . because the bill would also make a number of changes to these programs , information for certain public health programs is provided for context .