nvra does not set requirements for state or local elections . the stated purposes of nvra are to establish procedures to increase the number of eligible citizens registered to vote in federal elections ; enable enhanced voter participation in federal elections ; protect the integrity of the electoral process ; and ensure accurate voter registration records . nvra was not the first piece of federal legislation addressing state electoral activities , but it did create a more significant federal presence in voter registration activities . some of these bills were narrowly tailored to address a particular part of voter registration , whereas other bills proposed broader policies affecting a number of components of election administration . nationwide , dmv offices have remained the most common source among those covered by nvra for voter registration applications received by state election officials . mail - based forms are consistently the second - most common source for voter registration applications . the eac notes that online voter registration has grown in recent years , accounting for 17.4% of new voter registration applications for the 2016 election . for the 2014 election , 6.5% of voter registration applications were submitted online , and for the 2012 election , 5.3% of voter registration applications were submitted online . bills that address voter registration are routinely introduced in congress . table a - 1 in the appendix lists 66 pieces of legislation that were introduced in the 115 th congress related to voter registration or to other elements of election administration covered by nvra . often , these bills sought to expand the ways in which individuals can register to vote or to update the technologies states use to share and store voter registration data . the sections below categorize some of the common types of policy proposals related to nvra and federal voter registration . given the variety and quantity of measures typically before congress , this is not meant to be a comprehensive discussion of all available voter registration policy options . voter registration has remained a subject of interest to congress in the years since the enactment of nvra . many proposals addressing federal voter registration have been introduced in congress , but federal policies have remained largely unchanged , with the notable exception of revisions made by hava in 2002 . many individuals believe that providing widespread access to voter registration opportunities is a worthy objective and in keeping with protecting the constitutional right to vote . in addition to providing voters with access to registration , state election officials face the continuing challenges of updating and maintaining accurate voter registration lists . technological advancements in the years since nvra have made it somewhat easier for election officials to keep up - to - date voter records , but the increased reliance on computer systems has also introduced new challenges regarding data security . some individuals may also question whether it is necessary to expand existing federal voter registration requirements for states , believing that existing provisions are sufficient , or that the perceived benefits of voter registration policy changes must be weighed against other considerations . it can be challenging , for example , to impose uniform regulations across states , which have each developed their own system of election laws .