fema has yet to finalize the proposed rule . the program supports short - term counseling of disaster survivors . however , in response to that request , fema invoked section 320 of the stafford act and suggested it chose not to violate the principles of section 320 . that section forbids a denial of assistance based solely ( emphasis added ) on an "arithmetic formula. while some formulas have been routinely used by fema in the process of making recommendations , according to fema , formulas have only been one factor among several considered . instead , fema indicates its desire that such formulas , when used as a part of the pda process , would influence a state's decision on whether to make a request , but would not remove the state's discretion . ia accounted for approximately 14.4% of all projected federal spending ( $9.1 billion of $63.2 billion ) from the disaster relief fund for stafford act declarations occurring from fy2007 through fy2016 , according to fema data as of august 10 , 2017 . some types of fema ia are subject to cost sharing , such as ona , which is subject to a cost share between fema and the state , territorial , or tribal government . fema covers 75% of eligible ona costs , and the state , territorial , or tribal government is responsible for the remaining 25% . transitional sheltering under mass care and emergency assistance is also subject to a 75 / 25 percent cost share . the factors fema uses to determine potential ia for disaster survivors have not been changed since originally published in 1999 . the factors include concentration of damages — fema evaluates the concentrations of damages to individuals , and high concentrations of damages generally indicate a greater need for federal assistance than widespread or scattered damages throughout an area , region , or state ; trauma — fema considers the degree of trauma to a state and communities , and some of the conditions that might cause such trauma include large numbers of injuries and death , large - scale disruption of normal community functions and services , and emergency needs such as extended or widespread loss of power or water ; special populations — fema considers whether special populations , such as low - income , the elderly , or the unemployed are affected , and whether they may have a greater need for assistance ; voluntary agency assistance — fema considers the extent to which voluntary agencies and state or local programs can meet the needs of the disaster victims ; insurance — fema considers the amount of insurance coverage in the disaster area because , by law , federal disaster assistance cannot duplicate insurance coverage ; and average amount of individual assistance by state — fema's regulations state that "[t]here is no set threshold for recommending individual assistance , but the following averages [see table 1 ] may prove useful to states and voluntary agencies as they develop plans and programs to meet the needs of disaster victims. when reviewing disaster declarations between january 2008 and july 2013 , fema found that requests with more than $7.5 million in assistance usually resulted in a declaration for ia .