disclosure requirements. however , the court held that claims based on misleading statements the bank had made about its posting method were not preempted , reasoning that such claims were based on "a non - discriminating state law of general applicability that does not conflict with federal law , frustrate the purposes of the [nba] , or impair the efficiency of national banks to discharge their duties. in arriving at this conclusion , the ninth circuit rejected the argument that the claims were preempted because a prohibition on misleading statements "necessarily touches on" the authority of national banks to provide checking accounts , explaining that "such an expansive interpretation . would swallow all laws. because a prohibition of fraudulent representations did not "subject [the bank's] ability to receive deposits , to set account terms , to implement a posting method , or to calculate fees to surveillance under a rival oversight regime , nor . stand as an obstacle to the accomplishment of the [nba's] purposes," the court allowed the misrepresentation claims to proceed . a provision of the nba providing that "[n]o national bank shall be subject to any visitorial powers except as authorized by federal law" has also been at the center of two major supreme court decisions concerning federal preemption of state banking law . in watters v. wachovia bank , n.a . , a 2007 case , the court held that this provision , together with an occ regulation providing that national banks may conduct authorized activities through "operating subsidiaries," preempted state licensing , reporting , and visitation requirements for the operating subsidiaries of national banks . the case involved a suit by wachovia mortgage , a state - chartered entity that was also a wholly owned subsidiary of wachovia bank ( a national bank ) against the commissioner of michigan's office of financial and insurance services ( ofis ) . in the suit , wachovia mortgage sought declaratory and injunctive relief prohibiting the ofis from exercising visitorial powers over it and from enforcing michigan's requirement that mortgage lenders register with the state . in affirming a lower court injunction against the ofis , the court explained that "in analyzing whether state law hampers the federally permitted activities of a national bank," the proper inquiry "focuse[s] on the exercise of the bank's powers , not on its corporate structure. because "duplicative state examination , supervision , and regulation would significantly burden" national banks' ability to engage in authorized activities , the court reasoned that such "state controls" would also unacceptably "interfere with [those] same activit[ies] when engaged in by an operating subsidiary. accordingly , the court held that the ofis was barred from exercising visitorial powers over wachovia mortgage , just as it was barred from exercising such powers over wachovia bank . as discussed later in this report , the dodd - frank act legislatively abrogated watters 's holding that states may not examine or regulate the activities of national bank subsidiaries . two years after watters , the court held in cuomo v. clearing house association , l.l.c . that the nba's preemption provision concerning "visitorial powers" does not implicate judicial law enforcement actions brought against national banks .