, percentage of individuals ) . ( italics added. ) rather than define the terms "executive," "administrative," or "professional," the flsa authorizes the secretary of labor to define and delimit these terms "from time to time" through regulations . the legislative history of the eap exemptions does not provide much information on their intended scope . although not necessarily elaborated upon at the time of enactment , the general rationale for including the eap exemptions in the flsa is often construed to be related to the type of work and the presumed labor market power of eap employees: ( 1 ) the nature of the work performed by eap employees seemed to make standardization difficult , and thus the output of eap employees was not as clearly associated with hours of work per day as the output for typical nonexempt work ( eg , manual labor ) ; and ( 2 ) bona fide eap employees were considered to have other forms of compensation ( eg , above - average benefits , greater opportunities for advancement , greater job security , greater mobility ) not available to nonexempt workers . thus , the compensating advantages of being an eap employee in 1938 ( a small portion of the workforce ) could have been seen as a tradeoff for being exempt from the overtime protections of the flsa . data in figure 1 and figure 2 compare the 2016 eap standard salary level to two reference points often used in contextualizing the eap salary levels — the consumer price index - all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) and the federal minimum wage . an individual is covered if they meet the criteria for either category . around 132 million workers , or 83% of the labor force , are currently covered by the flsa . it is important to note that while the flsa sets standards for minimum wages , overtime pay , and child labor , it does not regulate many other employment practices . for example , the flsa does not require certain practices or benefits often associated with an employment relationship , such as paid time off , premium pay for weekend work , or fringe benefits . in addition , the flsa does not limit the number of hours an employee may be required to work in a day or a week . rather , it requires that a covered employee be compensated with premium pay for overtime hours worked . section 7 ( a ) of the flsa specifies requirements for overtime pay for weekly hours worked in excess of the maximum hours . in general , unless an employee is specifically exempted in the flsa , he or she is considered to be a covered nonexempt employee and must receive pay at the rate of one - and - a - half times ( "time - and - a - half" ) the regular rate for any hours worked in excess of 40 hours in a workweek . employers may choose to pay more than time - and - a - half for overtime or to pay overtime to employees who are exempt from overtime pay requirements under the flsa .