defense authorization ( p.l . 115-232 ) and appropriation ( division a of p.l . 115-245 ) legislation enacted for fy2019 extends congressional authorization for u.s. training , equipping , and advisory programs for iraqi security forces until december 2020 and makes $850 million in additional defense funding available for security assistance programs through fy2020 . congress has limited the availability of these funds , authorizing the obligation or expenditure of no more than $450 million for iraq train and equip efforts until the administration submits required strategy and oversight reporting . the fy2018 ndaa [section 1224 ( c ) of p.l . the trump administration signaled that decisions about future u.s. assistance efforts will be shaped by the outcome of iraqi government formation talks . in september 2018 , u.s. officials suggested they would like to see prevailing patterns of u.s. assistance continue , but an unnamed senior u.s. official also said that the administration is prepared to reconsider u.s. support to iraq if individuals perceived to be close to or controlled by iran assume positions of authority in iraq's new government . legislation enacted and under consideration in the second session of the 115 th congress would require annual reporting on iraqi entities and individuals receiving iranian support and would codify authorities currently available to the president under executive order to place sanctions on individuals threatening the security or stability of iraq ( see " the united states and iran in iraq " below ) . negotiations among iraqi factions following the may 2018 election have not fully resolved outstanding questions about the future of u.s. - iraqi relations . prime minister abadi , with whom the u.s. government worked closely , could not translate his list's third - place finish into a mandate for a second term . his designated successor , prime minister - designate adel abd al mahdi served in abadi's government and is an individual with whom u.s. officials have worked positively in the past . yet , the nature and durability of the political coalition arrangements supporting his leadership are unclear , and he lacks a strong personal electoral mandate . similarly , iraqi president barham salih is familiar to u.s. officials as a leading and friendly figure among iraqi kurds , but his election comes at time of significant political differences among kurds and amid strained relations between kurds and the national government . there is little public indication at present that iraqi authorities intend to request that the united states dramatically alter its assistance approach to or end its military presence in iraq , including with regard to the kurdistan region . however , the united states could face countervailing requests from its various iraqi partners in the event that anti - u.s. political forces emerge more empowered from remaining government formation steps or through the new government's policies . it remains possible that the national government could more strictly assert its sovereign prerogatives with regard to the presence of foreign military forces and foreign assistance to sub - state entities , and / or that krg representatives could seek expanded or more direct foreign support .