appendix a . data used in this report the data used to create annual hourly wage distributions over the 1979-2017 period are from the current population survey ( cps ) outgoing rotation groups ( orgs ) . the cps is a large - scale household survey conducted monthly by the census bureau . cps participants are interviewed for four consecutive months , then leave the survey for eight months , when they reenter the survey for a final four months . the orgs are made up of respondents completing their fourth month in the survey ( i.e. , before they go out on an eight - month hiatus ) and those completing their eighth and final interview . unlike other groups , the orgs are asked about their usual earnings and hours worked , making them a particularly useful sample for hourly wage studies . our sample comprises individuals 25 to 64 years old who were employed in nonfarm , nonmilitary wage and salary jobs during the survey week and reported enough information to compute an hourly wage . excluded from our sample are self - employed workers , armed forces members , workers in agricultural occupations , and workers whose wages were imputed by the census bureau . as others have done , we exclude census - imputed wages due to the finding by hirsch and schumacher ( 2002 ) that a large portion of them were imputed with error . we estimate hourly wages by dividing workers' reported usual weekly earnings by their usual weekly hours of work . for workers who report they are paid by the hour , we use their reported hourly rate of pay . wages represent earnings before deductions . for workers who are not paid by the hour ( non - hourly workers ) , wages include tips , overtime pay , and commissions . unfortunately , this information on overtime , tips , and commissions is not collected for hourly workers before 1994 and is therefore not included in our hourly wage estimates for them . wages are weighted by the product of a worker's cps weight and their weekly hours ( i.e. , wages are hours - weighted ) . cps earnings data are "top - coded" — that is , any reported earnings above a given top - code value are replaced with the top - code value — to reduce the likelihood that any particular survey respondent can be identified in the data . in 1979 , the first year of data , weekly earnings are top - coded at $999 per week . the top - code changes twice over the 1979-2017 period: it was raised to $1,923 per week in 1989 and to $2,884.61 per week in 1998 . although necessary to maintain the anonymity of survey respondents , top - coding is problematic to studies that attempt to characterize the wage distribution on a year - by - year basis , because the wage distribution is not observable above the top - code value , and the top - code value changes over time . researchers have addressed top - coded values using a variety of methods .