appendix a . options for responding to unwanted robocalls because robocalls to consumers and businesses are not treated the same under existing laws and regulations , consumers and businesses have different options for responding to robocalls . both the ftc and fcc have published consumer guidance for how to deal with unwanted calls stop unwanted calls and texts , federal communications commission ; and blocking unwanted calls , federal trade commission . cutting down on unwanted robocalls most likely will reduce consumer exposure to fraudulent ones , along with every other type of unwanted robocall . reporting a violation ( consumers ) consumers can file a complaint with both the fcc and ftc . the agencies choose which robocallers to pursue for legal or regulatory enforcement based partly on these complaints . complaints can be filed with the fcc at https: / / consumercomplaints.fcc.gov / hc / en - us / requests / new ? blocking robocalls ( consumers and businesses ) both consumers and business can take advantage of a number of technical options for blocking robocalls . third - party blocking services for landlines blocking services provided by commercial firms can be used by individual consumers , small businesses , and large businesses . for voip services , some of these options may be "cloud - based," meaning they are managed from a remote location rather than on - site . consumers and businesses with a small number of lines may employ a third - party blocking service . one such example is nomorobo , a winner of the 2013 robocall challenge hosted by the ftc . ( see appendix b for information about the robocall challenge. ) nomorobo is a cloud - based solution that uses "simultaneous ringing," which routes incoming calls to a second telephone line managed by nomorobo . in the nomorobo solution , this second line would identify and hang up on the illegal robocall before it can ring through to the user . nomorobo uses a database of known robocallers compiled with the help of the ftc , user reports , and its own "honeypots. if a call gets a match in the nomorobo database , the call is not allowed to reach the intended recipient . if there is not a match , the call is allowed to go through . one example of an enterprise - wide service for large businesses is pindrop , which provides robocall solutions to secure phone communications . the company developed and deploys patented "phoneprinting" technology that can identify , locate , and authenticate phone devices just from the call audio , thereby detecting fraudulent calls as well as verifying legitimate callers . the service is used globally by banks , insurers , brokerages , and retailers . the company states that its service succeeds in detecting over 80% of fraud — even against first - time callers . third - party mobile phone applications both consumers and businesses can download software applications ( "apps" ) , often free , to their mobile phones to filter out calls from unidentified callers and / or numbers not in the person's contact list . one app is youmail . while youmail is primarily used for voicemail transcriptions , it also provides protection against robocalls .