section above. ) in its first 14 months the trump administration offered conflicting signals about preconditions , including in its initial discussion of president trump's agreement to meet with kim jong - un . talking is not the answer ! in another tweet days later , he called south korean president moon jae - in's efforts to resume dialogue "appeasement. president trump also tweeted on october 1 , 2017 , that then - secretary of state rex tillerson was "wasting his time trying to negotiate with little rocket man," using a disparaging nickname for north korean leader kim jong - un . at other times , however , president trump has appeared to support diplomacy . in early march 2018 , south korea's national security advisor announced that president trump had decided to accept dprk leader kim jong - un's offer to meet to have an "open - ended dialogue" with the united states to discuss denuclearization of the korean peninsula and the normalization of u.s. - dprk relations . previously , a joint statement released by the united states and south korea during president trump's november 2017 visit to south korea spoke of using "coordinated global pressure" to "bring north korea back to authentic and credible denuclearization talks. during the same visit , president trump said "i really believe that it makes sense for north korea to come to the table and to make a deal that's good for the people of north korea and the people of the world. other administration officials have emphasized the utility of dialogue with north korea . the administration's secretary of state , secretary of defense , and director of national intelligence issued a joint statement of administration policy in april 2017 indicating that the administration's approach of "maximum pressure" — through strengthened united nations security council sanctions , increased unilateral economic pressure , and ramped - up military cooperation with allies — is aimed at convincing pyongyang eventually "to de - escalate and return to the path of dialogue. other senior military officials have also said that their actions to bolster deterrence are in support of diplomacy . admiral harry b. harris , commander of u.s. pacific command , stated in august 2017 , "so we hope and we work for diplomatic solutions to the challenge presented by kim jong - un. additionally , f ormer secretary tillerson stated in september 2017 that , "we do not seek regime change , we do not seek a regime collapse , we do not seek an accelerated reunification of the peninsula , and we do not seek a reason to send our forces north of the demilitarized zone. kim jong - un's reported remarks to south korean officials in pyongyang in march 2018 that he would be willing to discuss denuclearization of the korean peninsula were notable . since kim rose to power in 2011 north korea has rejected the idea of denuclearization outright and reaffirmed the role of nuclear weapons in national policy . however , north korean officials also have long insisted that the nuclear issue cannot be settled until the united states ends its "nuclear threat" and "hostile policy" against north korea .