two recent bsa / aml enforcement actions stand out for their size . ( together , hsbc ) were assessed a $665 million civil money penalty , forfeited roughly $1.2 billion , and entered into a deferred prosecution agreement ( dpa ) based on , among other things , their failure to maintain an effective aml program and conduct appropriate due diligence on foreign correspondent account holders . in 2012 , hsbc holdings plc and hsbc bank usa n.a . the hsbc enforcement action was pursued concurrently by the doj , the occ , the federal reserve , and the department of the treasury . separately , the occ and fincen assessed civil money penalties of $350 million and $461 million , respectively , against jpmorgan for its madoff - related bsa violations . a second recent trend in bsa / aml enforcement is an increased emphasis by regulators on the acceptance of responsibility by institutions charged with bsa violations . in 2013 , fincen director jennifer shasky calvery indicated that fincen had changed its approach of generally allowing financial institutions charged with bsa violations to enter into settlements "without admitting or denying" the facts alleged in a penalty assessment . shasky calvery noted that in fincen's most recent enforcement actions , defendant institutions had been required to stipulate to a statement of facts , reflecting the agency's new position that "[a]cceptance of responsibility and acknowledgment of the facts is a critical component of corporate responsibility. two years later , fincen's director of enforcement confirmed the agency's changed approach when she indicated that fincen operates under a "presumption" that "a settlement of an enforcement action will include an admission to the facts , as well as the violation of law. along these lines , nera's 2016 study found that four of the six largest bsa / aml violations charged between 2010 and 2015 "required the [defendant] financial institution to admit the accuracy of government claims and accept responsibility for the actions of its officers , agents , and employees who violated bsa / aml regulations. finally , commentators have noted an increased risk of individual liability for bsa violations . in december 2014 , fincen assessed a $1 million civil money penalty against thomas haider , the former chief compliance officer of moneygram international for willful violations of the bsa's program requirements and failure to timely file sars concerning fraudulent telemarketing operations and other schemes . fincen's enforcement action led to litigation over the application of the bsa to individuals . in january 2016 , a federal district court held in u.s. department of treasury v. haider that individuals can be liable for violations of the bsa's aml program requirements . in that case , haider argued that individuals cannot be liable for violations of the bsa's program requirements because the relevant bsa provision provides that "financial institution[s] shall establish anti - money laundering programs," in contrast to the bsa's provision requiring the filing of sars , which provides that "any financial institution , and any director , officer , employee , or agent of any financial institution , [may be required] to report suspicious transactions relevant to a possible violation of law or regulation.