these states are geographically dispersed . the 10 states receiving the highest amount of chgme payments in fy2017 were generally states with large populations . among the 10 states , all had at least one large children's hospital that received more than $5 million annually in chgme payments ( eg , children's hospital of philadelphia in pennsylvania and boston children's hospital in massachusetts ) . table 2 presents the 10 states that received the highest payment amounts under this program . table 3 presents the number of residents that received chgme support since the program's inception in fy2000 . the number of residents trained has steadily increased , but the program's appropriation has varied over time . given this , the amount of funding awarded to support each individual resident has also varied . in addition , the table shows that the number of hospitals that participate in the program has fluctuated over time ; in some years , chgme funds are awarded to fewer hospitals that , on average , are training more residents . note that the 2013 reauthorization added new hospitals to the program , but it reserved a portion of the program's appropriation for these new hospitals to mitigate decreases in payment amounts for hospitals that were already participating in the program . chgme funds are one source of medical residency training support at children's hospitals . other sources exist , including patient care or other revenue , medicaid , state and local funds , and private donations . however , chgme payments are the only source for which a specific amount can be quantified . some have suggested that the availability of other sources of gme funding lessens , or obviates , the need for the chgme program . for example , the office of management and budget in a 2003 chgme program assessment stated that the program was performing adequately , but noted that the program is "fundamentally duplicative of other federal , state , and private efforts. the assessment went on to say that children's hospitals have higher profit margins than other hospitals , which could lead to more revenue available to support training programs . the assessment concluded with a recommendation to more closely track the accountability of children's hospitals receiving payments under the program and to assess whether the program should be continued . more recent data suggest that children's hospitals are still operating at higher profit margins than other hospital types . these data also suggest that despite these hospitals having tax - exempt status , some provide little charity care . given that profits in a nonprofit hospital are intended to be reinvested in the hospital , these funds are a potential source of gme support . however , no systematic data exist on the use of hospital revenue to support gme . given that these data do not exist , the congressional research service cannot determine whether , and to what extent , hospitals use their own revenue to support gme . despite data showing the impact of the chgme program on pediatric residency training , it is not clear whether the pediatric workforce would have increased without the program's explicit support , because many of the available funding sources existed prior to the program's inception .