exports. most u.s. food and agricultural groups , including some u.s. fruit and vegetable producer groups , also oppose seasonal proposals . some worry that efforts to push for seasonal protections , among other u.s. proposals , could derail agricultural provisions in the nafta renegotiation . some claim that the proposal is intended to favor a few "politically - connected , wealthy agribusiness firms from florida" at the expense of others in the u.s. produce industry and at the expense of both consumers and growers in other fruit and vegetable producing states , such california and washington . in general , the u.s. agricultural sectors have not broadly supported proposals that could potentially damage existing export markets under nafta . mexican trade officials do not support seasonal proposals , nor do they support limiting access for some products . reports indicate that the united states intended to table the proposal during the first round of the negotiations , but pushback forced it to hold the proposal back . other reports indicate that mexico is considering retaliation by including its own list of protected products in response to the u.s. proposal . such a list could include certain grain and pork products and other types of limitations to protect mexican products in certain production areas . some u.s. agricultural groups have expressed concerns about "negotiating at the edges" and carving out certain products for special treatment as part of the nafta renegotiation . former u.s. trade officials have also expressed skepticism about whether efforts to limit imports would benefit u.s. producers . american food and agricultural producers continue to express concerns about the trump administration's threats to withdraw from the agreement . opinions in congress are also divided . for example , at a house agriculture committee hearing in july 2017 , producer groups representing ffva broadly claimed that import competition from mexico of fruits and vegetables under nafta is affecting producers across the united states , claiming that "all the specialty crop producers in this country are having a problem with the current nafta trade relationship. this claim was in part countered by a committee member , representative jimmy panetta , who stated that nafta is benefitting fruit and vegetable producers in california and that countercyclical production between california and mexico is complementary , as some producers have production facilities in both the united states and mexico . information on the extent that u.s. companies may be engaged in fruit and vegetable production in mexico is not available . some in congress support ustr's seasonal proposal , claiming that it is necessary to address perceived unfair trading practices by mexican exporters of fresh fruits and vegetables . others in congress oppose including the proposal , contending that seasonal production complements rather than competes with u.s. growing seasons . they also worry that it could open the door to an "uncontrolled proliferation of regional , seasonal , perishable remedies against u.s . a broad coalition of u.s. agricultural groups claim that "withdrawal from nafta would result in substantial harm to the u.s. economy generally , and u.s. food and agriculture producers , in particular. agriculture groups also remain concerned about growing uncertainty in u.s. trade policy and the potential for the ongoing nafta renegotiation to disrupt u.s. export markets .