house and senate practice has interpretive import for two reasons . first , the supreme court has suggested that "[i]n the performance of assigned constitutional duties each branch of the government must initially interpret the constitution , and the interpretation of its powers by any branch is due great respect from the others. exclusion occurs when a body of congress refuses to seat a member - elect . unlike the two - thirds majority requirement of the expulsion power , a body of congress may exclude a member - elect with a simple majority . as the supreme court has explained , while exclusion and expulsion both bar an individual from holding a seat in congress , the two actions exist for different purposes and occur at different times . specifically , in powell v. mccormack , the court explored the constitutionality of representative adam clayton powell's exclusion from the house of representatives . the impetus for the case was an investigation of expenditures authorized by powell during the 89 th congress , which concluded that , as chairman of a house committee , the member had engaged in improper activities , including deceiving house authorities with regard to travel expenses and directing illegal payments to his wife . the house took no formal action with regard to those findings during that congress , but refused to administer the oath of office to powell at the start of the 90 th congress the following year . subsequently , a select committee , which was appointed at the outset of the 90 th congress to determine powell's eligibility to be seated as a member , recommended that powell be sworn into office as a member and subsequently disciplined . however , the house rejected that recommendation and instead adopted a resolution that would exclude powell , which it approved by a vote of 307 to 116 . powell sued to be reinstated and on appeal the supreme court held that powell's exclusion was unconstitutional , explaining that "exclusion and expulsion are not fungible proceedings. while the court recognized that the constitution grants broad authority to each of the houses of congress regarding expulsion and other discipline , it explained that congress's authority regarding exclusion was limited to the enumerated qualifications requirements . because of the distinct nature of each action , the court emphasized that the vote to exclude powell , despite exceeding a two - thirds majority , could not substitute for his expulsion . discerning the constitutional meaning of the expulsion clause requires an examination of the text of the clause , the historical background that undergirds the clause , the limited judicial decisions that have sought to interpret its text , and a brief evaluation of how the clause may be subject to limitation by other constitutional principles . in addition , and in light of the discretionary nature of the power , an assessment of house and senate practice is necessary for a full understanding of the expulsion power . in light of the scant evidence of the expulsion clause's historical basis and the limited judicial precedent in interpreting the clause , congress's own treatment of its expulsion power may play an important role in delineating the contours of the clause .