appendix a . policy simulation models this report examines four options for altering the cdctc: ( 1 ) making the credit refundable , ( 2 ) converting the credit to a deduction in determining agi , ( 3 ) raising the credit rate to 50% of qualified child care expenses , and ( 4 ) doubling the maximum qualified child care expenses allowed by the credit . the effect of each option was simulated by two microsimulation models . microsimulation models apply a set of program rules to individual or family units to estimate their federal and state taxes as well as eligibility and receipt of benefits from government programs . the first model is the trim3 microsimulation model that estimates federal income tax credits and liabilities for the entire population under current law and each policy proposal . the second microsimulation model used in this report is a tax calculator that determines federal income tax credits and liabilities for a specified type of tax filer under current law and each policy option . federal income tax calculator the effect of the four policy options to change the cdctc is illustrated in this report by examining how it would affect a specified type of family over a range of potential earnings ( $0 to $250,000 per year ) . the hypothetical family examined is a married couple with two children , ages one and seven . for three of the four options , the family is assumed to have $6,000 in annual child care expenses that qualify for the cdctc . thus , for these options a family is assumed to have the maximum allowable qualified child care expenses for the credit . to illustrate the effect of doubling the maximum expenses , the family is assumed for that option to have $12,000 in child care expenses . in order to calculate the cdctc and federal income tax liability for this hypothetical family , some additional assumptions are required . the family is assumed to take the standard deduction and not itemize deductions . all children are assumed to be dependents of the tax filer and be qualified children for the purposes of the cdctc . the taxpayer files as married , filing jointly . the calculator also assumes that both parents work and that earnings ( and , in some cases , hours ) are split evenly among the couple . at lower levels of income , it is also assumed that each parent earns per hour at least the federal minimum wage . if the parents' earnings are below that representing 40 hours per week at the federal minimum wage , their hours are determined by dividing their earnings by the federal minimum wage . if they are assumed to work less than 20 hours per week , they are assumed to use part - time child care , and their child care expenses are pro - rated to half of the child care expenses that they would incur if they used full - time child care . this assumption at lower levels most affects the proposal to make the cdctc refundable .