additional methods may be approved by tsa . however , the act provided that cargo documents and known shipper verification , by themselves , are not acceptable screening methods . tsa maintains that this is the only viable means for meeting the mandate for 100% physical screening , as the agency claims it lacks the resources to screen the volume of cargo placed on passenger aircraft using its own employees . the act , however , did not specify who is to conduct the screening . however , enforcement overseas is largely up to authorities in other countries . if they do not concur with the u.s. approach , disagreement over security standards could complicate u.s. foreign relations and could potentially impact foreign trade . shippers of international air cargo rely on a diverse set of operators and aircraft , including passenger aircraft . the united states currently enforces no general requirement for screening of cargo aboard all - cargo aircraft . according to industry estimates reported in 2010 , the overall percentage of international shipments screened prior to transit to the united states may be as low as 50% . while considerable policy attention has been focused on inbound international air cargo since then , the amount of cargo screened that is physically screened may not have increased significantly . rather , the approach pursued by u.s. policymakers and industry has focused on risk - based measures , relying on vetting protocols based on information provided in cargo manifests to identify and screen only that cargo considered to be high risk prior to its loading aboard aircraft destined for u.s. airports . so far , these risk - based protocols that trigger physical screening and inspection of cargo prior to loading are voluntary and have not yet been adopted or mandated industry - wide . tsa concedes that screening international cargo poses unique challenges and constraints due to shippers' limited control over their foreign supply chains , the scale and diversity of worldwide supply chains , and diplomatic considerations . to address these challenges , tsa's international air cargo workgroup developed a risk - based rating system and scheduling tool to prioritize air cargo facility inspections overseas . in 2008 , tsa entered into a bilateral agreement with the european union as well as a quadrilateral agreement on air cargo security with the european union , canada , and australia . more broadly , it has worked closely with the international civil aviation organization ( icao ) to draft worldwide standards for all - cargo security , which were adopted in november 2010 and emphasize more extensive screening of cargo as well as improved standardization of screening equipment . under cooperative agreements , tsa pays for the training , certification , and maintenance of the dogs and partially reimburses law enforcement agencies for handler salaries and other costs . these teams devote about 25% of their time to air cargo screening . in addition , tsa has about 166 of its own multimodal canine teams that , among other duties , screen cargo at the 20 busiest airports . these teams focus on large bulk cargo configurations that cannot be efficiently screened using currently available technologies .