final order . public hearing . the principal participants at the hearing are representatives of producers , handlers , and consumers , who appear as witnesses and present evidence on how a proposed change in an order would affect their interests . the hearing is presided over by a usda administrative law judge , who handles procedural questions and decides on the order of witnesses . except for official documents , the public hearing record is the sole source of information for appraising the issues . at the close of a hearing , the judge presiding over the case sets a time period within which witnesses may file written briefs . recommended decision issued by usda . after the hearing , the record is turned over to the ams dairy program for study and preparation of a recommendation on the issues . the preparation time varies depending on the complexity of the issues . a proposed decision is made public by the administrator of ams . interested persons appraise the potential effects of the proposed amended order and file written comments on the amended order . final decision issued by usda . the dairy program is required to reexamine the findings and conclusions in light of the exceptions received and then provide a draft final decision to the secretary of agriculture for review , approval , and publication . the provisions of the order contained in the decision are usda's final proposed regulations and are the provisions presented to producers for their approval . producer approval . before usda can issue an amended order , the affected producers and cooperatives must approve it by referendum . appendix b . the amendment process for federal orders amending an existing milk marketing order follows procedures similar to what would be followed to create a new marketing order . the process can be summarized in the following six steps: 1 . pre hearing procedures including preliminary investigation by usda . although any producer or handler can petition usda for a change in the federal order system , such a request usually emanates from dairy producers or their cooperative associations . usda then investigates their proposals and determines whether a hearing is necessary . the amendment process requires that a formal notice of a hearing be published in the federal register , giving the time and place of the hearing and the proposals to be considered . approval is contingent on a favorable vote either by two - thirds of the eligible producers or by producers who supply two - thirds of the milk sold in the marketing area . a dairy cooperative may bloc vote its membership on all questions involving new or amended orders . when this occurs , all producers within the cooperative are considered to have voted as the cooperative voted . in the event of a favorable vote , usda will publish the final order in the federal register . an important feature of the approval process is that producers are required to vote on the order as amended , not just the amendment to the order . this requirement is not explicit in the statute . instead , it represents a long - standing usda approach in carrying out the federal milk marketing order program .