the program ended in 2011 . these less successful and sometimes high - profile failures highlight darpa's willingness to invest in high - risk , high - reward r&d . despite such setbacks , the agency is frequently cited as a model for innovation that other agencies , outside groups , and congress have sought to replicate across the federal government . for example , both the intelligence advanced research projects activity ( iarpa ) within the office of the director of national intelligence and the advanced research projects agency – energy ( arpa - e ) within the department of energy were modeled after darpa with a focus on high - risk , high - reward research in their respective areas . a 2003 report by ida stated that "darpa's success depends not only on strong support from osd [office of the secretary of defense] , but also on clear guidance from it on strategic needs. for more information on the usd r&e see crs in focus if10834 , defense primer: under secretary of defense for research and engineering , by marcy e. gallo and moshe schwartz . developments in r&d and technology can raise ethical , legal , and societal ( els ) concerns . for example , some groups have expressed concern about the impact artificial intelligence and neurotechnologies could have on privacy , consent , and an individual's identity and agency ( i.e. , a person's bodily and mental integrity and their ability to choose their own actions ) . the application of these technologies in a military context has the potential to further elevate els concerns . for example , how would a neurotechnology that enhances a soldier's senses , stamina , or dexterity affect the ability of an individual to integrate into civilian life upon completion of their service ? in 2013 , darpa initiated a number of neurotechnology programs as part of the obama administration's brain research through advancing innovative neurotechnologies ( brain ) initiative , including r&d on implantable brain - computer interfaces that could restore neural and behavioral function or improve training and performance . the presidential commission for the study of bioethical issues recommended that institutions supporting neuroscience research integrate ethical considerations early on and explicitly throughout a research endeavor . darpa addressed the integration of ethical considerations into its work by requiring neuroscience research program managers to engage an independent ethical , legal , and social implications panel at the inception of an r&d project . darpa is also planning to host a national ethics workshop . however , some critics assert that darpa does not adequately examine the moral and ethical implications of the research it supports . see the box below , "darpa's insect allies program: some scientists and lawyers express concern," for an illustrative example . according to a 2014 report by the national academy of sciences ( nas ) knowledge regarding ethical , legal , and societal issues associated with r&d for technology intended for military purposes is not nearly as well developed as that for the sciences ( especially the life sciences ) in the civilian sector more generally .