economic conditions have deteriorated rapidly under president maduro . in november 2017 , the government's increasingly dire fiscal situation came to a head , as the government announced it would seek to restructure its debt . although the economic crisis in venezuela has been building for years , in many ways it is still in the early stages , with no clear or quick resolution on the horizon , particularly given the concurrent political crisis . underpinning the political crisis is an acute and increasingly unstable economic crisis . venezuela's economy is built on oil , which accounts for more than 90% of the country's exports . the 2014 collapse in oil prices hit venezuela's economy hard . the government's policy responses , including price and import controls , vague restructuring plans , and deficit spending financed by expanding the money supply ( printing money ) , have been widely criticized as inadequate and as exacerbating the economic situation facing the country . over the past several decades , the international community has developed processes for helping countries respond to serious economic crises . these processes usually entail an international financial assistance package , paired with debt restructuring and an imf reform program . in the case of venezuela , the maduro government has no such plan in place , nor has it shown any signs of pursuing such a program . given the political situation there , it is unlikely that the international community is inclined to do so either . there are serious questions about how long the maduro regime can persist amid such a severe economic crisis , but in recent months maduro appears to have increasingly consolidated political power over the opposition . in terms of u.s. policy , the trump administration likely increased the fiscal challenges facing venezuela's government through sanctions restricting venezuela's access to the u.s. financial system . however , the sanctions are a double - edged sword . the sanctions are opposed by a majority of venezuelan people , and may have boosted support for the maduro regime . they also restrict the ability of u.s. investors to participate in any restructuring , and u.s. investors could face substantial losses if the maduro regime suspends payments . some analysts have called for stronger sanctions on venezuela to force a change in government , but others have cautioned against potential harm to both the venezuelan people and u.s. economic interests . the country is facing a complex set of economic challenges embedded in a volatile political context: collapsed output , inflation , and unsustainable budget deficits and debt all plague the country . congress has long - standing interests in both u.s. - venezuela relations and foreign economic crises that affect u.s. economic interests . venezuela continues to be in the throes of a deep political crisis under the authoritarian rule of president nicolás maduro . in addition , the crisis is marked by inflation , shortages of consumer goods , default on the government's debt obligations , and deteriorating living conditions with significant humanitarian consequences . for decades , venezuela was one of south america's most prosperous countries , but now lags behind other key economies in the region ( figure 1 ) .