s ubstitutability . this metric determines whether other banks or financial institutions could perform the critical functions currently performed by the bank in question should it fail . substitutability is measured in method 1 by a bank's assets under custody , payments activity , and underwriting . c omplexity . banks differ substantially across their business models , and certain activities could make them more or less risky and , in the event they experienced distress or failure , more or less likely to destabilize the financial system . many large bank organizations are engaged in numerous lines of business , including securities trading , insurance , swap dealing , custodial services , credit card issuance , merchant banking , and clearing and settlement services , among others . these activities may not necessarily be systemically risky ( diversifying business lines could arguably make an individual institution less risky ) , but they may warrant additional regulatory scrutiny because they are outside the traditional prudential regulatory model for commercial banking and increase the number of markets and activities through which an institution could trigger a systemic event or spread systemic risk . complexity is measured in method 1 by over the counter ( otc ) derivatives , level 3 ( i.e. , illiquid ) assets , and trading and available for sale ( afs ) securities . c ross - j urisdiction a ctivity . measured by cross - jurisdictional claims and liabilities , this metric captures the degree to which the bank operates internationally . the score is a weighted average of each institution's share of a global aggregate of each of the 12 indicators , expressed in basis points . any institution with a score of more than 130 is determined to be systemically important to the global financial system . one drawback to using this indicator is that it is intended to measure global systemic importance , whereas the enhanced prudential regime is intended to apply to domestic systemically important banks . for example , cross - jurisdictional metrics may be more pertinent to global importance than domestic importance . nevertheless , banks with low scores arguably may not be domestically systemically important . examining the u.s. banks with more than $50 billion in assets reveals a wide range of scores , as seen in table 2 . eight banks exceed the 130 threshold . the rest are not close to this number , and half have a score of less than 15 , including all of the banks with less than $100 billion in assets . some relatively large banks have low scores . for example , capital one had $334 billion in assets at the end of 2015 , but a score of 20 . conversely , state street , the smallest bank by asset size to be designated a g - sib , had assets of $224 billion and a score of 148 . such scoring may suggest that size alone is not well correlated with systemic importance , and may also support assertions that the $50 billion threshold is set too low .