some assessments are required , and some are voluntary . some assessment results are reported on an individual level , and some are reported at a group level . if these issues are not carefully considered , inappropriate inferences can lead to a variety of unintended consequences . the sections that follow provide some guidance in the form of sample questions that can be used to consider the appropriateness of inferences about test scores . these guidelines are not intended to be an exhaustive list of considerations but rather a starting point for examining the appropriateness of conclusions drawn from assessments . students in elementary and secondary education participate in a wide range of educational assessments . assessments are an important tool at many levels — from making instructional decisions in the classroom to making policy decisions for a nation . when used correctly , educational assessments contribute to the iterative process of teaching and learning and guide education policy decisions . currently , a primary focus of educational assessment is tracking student academic achievement and growth in schools . assessment is a critical component of accountability systems such as those required under title i - a of the esea . all states currently accept title i - a funds . for fy2017 , the program was funded at $15.5 billion . more specifically , to receive title i - a funds , states must agree to assess all students annually in grades 3 through 8 and once in high school in the areas of reading and mathematics . students are also required to be assessed in science at least once within each of three specified grade spans ( grades 3-5 , 6-9 , and 10-12 ) . , conclusions drawn from the result of a test ) . inferences may be either appropriate or inappropriate based on a number of technical and contextual factors . following a discussion of the concepts of validity , reliability , and fairness , this report will conclude with a discussion of how to avoid making inappropriate inferences from educational assessments . it will also highlight some of the issues to consider when making inferences from high - stakes assessments versus low - stakes assessments . test users have a responsibility to examine the validity , reliability , and fairness of an assessment to make appropriate inferences about student achievement . states are required by the federal government to provide special services to students with disabilities and english learners ( els ) . to receive special services , a student must be found eligible for services based on a variety of assessments . states are required to designate the specific assessments that determine eligibility . in addition , states are required to assess els in english language proficiency , which includes the domains of listening , speaking , reading , and writing . on the surface , it may be difficult to understand why students participate in so many assessments . each assessment has a specific purpose and reports a specific kind of score . teaching and learning can benefit from educational assessment , but there is a balance between the time spent on educational assessment and the time spent on teaching and learning .