this resulted in widespread flooding across the island . puerto rico's office of emergency management reported that the storm had incapacitated the central electric power system , leaving the entire island without power . puerto rico's grid infrastructure was essentially destroyed by hurricane maria . recovery efforts from hurricane maria focused on restoring electricity to hospitals , water treatment plants , and some industries . however , the commonwealth of puerto rico ( the commonwealth ) was already in recovery mode following the glancing blow struck by hurricane irma on september 6 , 2017 , which left 70% of electricity customers without power . after maria , officials were estimating that many of puerto rico's 3.5 million people could be without electricity for up to six months . even before the 2017 hurricane season , puerto rico's electric power infrastructure was known to be in poor condition , due largely to underinvestment and poor maintenance . questions are now being raised as to possible options for rebuilding the electricity grid on the island , given the financial debt of the puerto rico electric power authority ( prepa ) before the damage from the storms . prepa's current debts at the end of 2016 totaled about $9 billion . prepa is overseen by a board appointed by the puerto rican governor . some have blamed much of prepa's woes on governance issues . hurricanes irma and maria brought the electricity system's problems to a head , as power outages before the first storm were eclipsed in magnitude by the island - wide power outages brought on by the destruction of the second storm . power outages in puerto rico have been common , as an apparent lack of maintenance and vegetation management practices have contributed to power outages . some have questioned prepa's dispensing with long - established practices ( eg , a request for proposals ) following its posthurricane decision to give a major repair and reconstruction contract to a small firm . this decision seemed to eschew normal industry practices which rely on mutual aid as a primary route to system restoration . with the poor state of the electricity system ( physically , organizationally , and financially ) , and a perceived lack of transparency with regard to decisions ( both before and since hurricane maria ) , some have called for a new electricity system regime to lead the reconstruction and resiliency planning efforts ahead . should congress decide that alternatives to prepa be considered , the question of what entities and structures could replace prepa will arise . this report presents a history of prepa , describes issues related to the debt crisis in puerto rico , and offers some options if congress wants to consider restructuring the electricity system in puerto rico . modernizing puerto rico's grid , and taking the next steps to incorporate resiliency , will be expensive . congress may want to consider whether investment incentives to form public - private partnerships could provide alternatives for modernizing puerto rico's grid .