the house passed a reauthorization bill ( h.r . 2874 ) in november 2017 , and three bills have been introduced in the senate , but so far the nfip has received a series of short - term reauthorizations . the debate over a longer reauthorization of the nfip is taking place during the 2018 hurricane season , and in the aftermath of the 2017 hurricane season , which produced widespread flooding and renewed concern about the structure of the nfip and its solvency in the face of catastrophic flood losses . the nfip is authorized by the national flood insurance act of 1968 and was reauthorized until september 30 , 2017 , by the biggert - waters flood insurance reform act of 2012 ( bw - 12 ) . in a recent report , gao examined actions which congress and fema could take to reduce federal fiscal exposure and improve national resilience to floods , and recommended that congress should consider comprehensive reform covering six areas: ( 1 ) outstanding debt ; ( 2 ) premium rates ; ( 3 ) affordability ; ( 4 ) consumer participation ; ( 5 ) barriers to private sector involvement ; and ( 6 ) nfip flood resilience efforts . this report will discuss the areas identified by gao as well as additional issues which congress may wish to consider . as a public insurance program , the goals of the nfip were originally designed differently from the goals of private - sector companies . as currently authorized , the nfip also encompasses social goals to provide flood insurance in flood - prone areas to property owners who otherwise would not be able to obtain it , and reduce government's cost after floods . the nfip also engages in many "non - insurance" activities in the public interest: it disseminates flood risk information through flood maps , requires communities to adopt land use and building code standards in order to participate in the program , potentially reduces the need for other post - flood disaster aid , contributes to community resilience by providing a mechanism to fund rebuilding after a flood , and may protect lending institutions against mortgage defaults due to uninsured losses . the benefits of such tasks are not directly measured in the nfip's financial results from underwriting flood insurance . from the inception of the nfip , the program has been expected to achieve multiple objectives , some of which may conflict with one another to ensure reasonable insurance premiums for all ; to have risk - based premiums that would make people aware of and bear the cost of their floodplain location choices ; to secure widespread community participation in the nfip and substantial numbers of insurance policy purchases by property owners ; and to earn premium and fee income that , over time , covers claims paid and program expenses . gao concluded that the sequence of actions taken by congress is important ; for example , requiring full - risk rates for all policyholders and expanding the mandatory purchase requirement would create affordability concerns which would warrant having an affordability assistance program already in place .