the house has not acted on h.r . 1154 since it was introduced in february 2017 . the companion bill in the senate , s. 168 , was reported out of the committee on commerce , science , and transportation in march . in addition , in june 2017 , the committee reported s. 1129 , the coast guard authorization act of 2017 . as reported , s. 1129 includes the text of s. 168 as title viii . these bills are similar to those introduced in previous sessions of congress , but do differ in some respects . several bills address only the moratorium on cwa permitting for certain incidental discharges ( excluding ballast water ) from commercial fishing vessels of all sizes and nonrecreational vessels less than 79 feet in length . 115-100 ) , signed by president trump on january 3 , 2018 , extended the moratorium that expired on december 18 , 2017 , through january 19 , 2018 . 4656 would extend the moratorium through december 18 , 2020 . s. 2331 , introduced on january 23 , 2018 , would extend the moratorium through march 23 , 2018 . for more than a decade , some members of congress have introduced legislation intended to modify and clarify regulation and management of ballast water discharges that can be a source of ans in u.s. waters . in recent years , these bills have focused on establishing uniform , national standards for ballast water and other incidental discharges and providing the authority to regulate these discharges primarily with the coast guard ( in consultation with epa ) . many in the maritime industry strongly support the legislation discussed in this report , arguing that without it , the confusion and inefficiencies they associate with the current regulatory scheme will continue to grow . others , including some states and environmental advocacy groups , continue to oppose aspects of the proposals — especially the preemption of state authority and the cwa in regulating the discharges . considering the complex policy issues associated with the regulation of ballast water and other incidental discharges will likely continue to be of interest to congress . zebra mussels compete with native species and cause significant ecological damage . they also attach to hard surfaces such as water intake pipes used for cooling water and municipal water supply , sometimes causing a significant reduction in pumping capacity . currently , many u.s. areas have ans , although some areas — the great lakes , hawaii , the west coast , and florida — have larger numbers of ans . ballast water discharged from ships is one significant pathway for the introduction of ans . ships use large amounts of ballast water to stabilize the vessel during transport . ballast water is often taken on in the coastal waters in one region after ships discharge wastewater or unload cargo . it is then discharged at the next port of call , where ships load more cargo . the practice of taking on and discharging ballast water is essential to the proper functioning of ships because the water that is taken in or discharged compensates for changes in the vessel's weight as cargo is loaded or unloaded , and as fuel and supplies are consumed .