a related policy consideration is necessity . as discussed , fda's interpretation of the prescription requirement has been met with some opposition , and certain stakeholders have argued that compounding for office - use by 503a pharmacies should be allowed because health care providers need to keep certain compounded drugs in stock for immediate administration . however , fda and outsourcing facility groups have generally disagreed that 503a pharmacies need to compound for office - use . outsourcing facilities created by the cqa are able to produce in bulk while also providing additional patient protections since they are subject to more stringent regulatory requirements ; as such , allowing 503a compounding pharmacies to produce for office - use may not be necessary . if a hospital , clinic , or health care practitioner wants to keep compounded drugs in stock for office - use , they can generally obtain non - patient - specific compounded drugs from outsourcing facilities that are registered under section 503b . fda also has stated that allowing pharmacies to compound without a patient - specific prescription may provide less incentive for such entities to register as outsourcing facilities . to help health care providers determine which outsourcing facilities compound the drugs they need for purposes of office - use , fda has issued a list of the drugs that registered outsourcing facilities have produced . several other stakeholders , including the pharmaceutical industry , have generally supported fda's prescription requirement guidance . congress provided statutory authority for portions of the guidance in ffdca section 503a . in response to the 2012 fungal meningitis outbreak and a series of adverse event reports and quality problems linked to compounding facilities , congress held a series of hearings , which led to the enactment of the cqa in november 2013 . the law established ffdca section 503b and created a new category of drug compounders called outsourcing facilities . entities that compound drugs in ways that exceed the circumstances described in section 503a ( i.e. , facilities that compound drugs in bulk for use in hospitals or other facilities ) may register with fda as such . an outsourcing facility is defined as a facility at one geographic location or address that is engaged in the compounding of sterile drugs , has elected to register as an outsourcing facility , and complies with all the requirements of section 503b . since the enactment of the cqa , fda has issued numerous draft and final guidance documents to explain its policy on certain requirements and facilitate implementation of the compounding provisions under ffdca sections 503a and 503b . the agency also has issued a draft mou addressing the interstate distribution of certain compounded drug products . additionally , since enactment of the cqa , fda has conducted over 400 inspections of drug compounders , issued more than 150 warning letters advising compounders of violations of federal law , and overseen more than 125 recall events . fda also has communicated with stakeholders and state regulators via annual listening sessions , a notice - and - comment guidance development process , intergovernmental meetings , and information posted to the fda website , among other things . as of december 2017 , fda's website lists 73 entities that have registered as outsourcing facilities .