this is ridiculous — and irresponsible . today there are 24 million americans without access to broadband . there are 19 million americans in rural areas who lack the ability to access high - speed services at home . there are 12 million school - aged children who are falling into the homework gap because they do not have the broadband at home they need for nightly schoolwork . ask any one of them if they think the deployment of the most essential digital age infrastructure is reasonable and timely and you will get a resounding "no. to call these numbers a testament to our national success is insulting and not credible . on august 8 , 2017 , the fcc adopted and released its t hirteenth section 706 notice of inquiry ( noi ) . such a change in setting the broadband benchmark could , they asserted , lead to an unwarranted fcc determination that advanced telecommunications services are being deployed to all americans in a timely and reasonable fashion . for example , an august 2017 letter from a group of democratic senators to the fcc noted that "the commission appears ready to decide that mobile broadband could be a substitute , rather than a complement , to fixed broadband service , and that slower - speed mobile service substitutes as effectively. the letter argued that mobile broadband is not yet equivalent to fixed broadband services and that "such a striking change in policy would significantly and disproportionately disadvantage americans in rural , tribal , and low income communities across the nation , whose livelihoods depend on a reliable and affordable broadband connection. similarly , a group of democratic senators and representatives , in an october 2017 letter to the fcc , expressed concern "with any effort to weaken the fcc's current policy finding that every american should have access to broadband services with speeds of at least 25 mbps download / 3 mbps upload," and that "[f]inding instead that only mobile service of 10 mbps download / 1 mbps upload is sufficient would result in significantly slower and less reliable internet access for millions of americans. much of the debate over the fcc's broadband benchmark played out in comments and letters filed in response to the fcc's thirteenth section 706 noi . in general , those parties who support an fcc determination that broadband is not being deployed to all americans in a timely and reasonable fashion were opposed to altering the current broadband benchmark by considering the presence of fixed or mobile broadband as an area that is "served. they asserted that mobile broadband is not a satisfactory substitute or replacement for fixed broadband service .