sbrefa addressed both recommendations . the office of the national ombudsman and the small business regulatory fairness boards were created to address the recommendation concerning federal regulatory reform . during senate floor debate , the bill's proponents argued that the office of the national ombudsman was part of the bill's overall effort to create a "more cooperative and less punitive regulatory environment between agencies and small business that is less threatening and more solution - oriented than we have achieved in the past. they argued that it would "help small businesses get fair and legal treatment from the government if they have been treated unfairly" and "also assist small businesses in recovering legal fees as a result of unfair government actions. during floor debate , senator john glenn indicated that he supported the legislation but was concerned that the office of the national ombudsman and the small business regulatory fairness boards could "end up creating a one - sided record of complaints that will distort the broad public mission of our agencies. he also indicated that federal agencies are not "the enemy when they carry out the laws passed by the people's representatives in congress" and was "happy , at least , that in the final version of the bill before us , the ombudsman will focus on general agency enforcement activity and not attempt to evaluate or rate the performance of individual agency personnel. senator carl levin also supported the legislation but argued that "the committee [on small business] should have taken more time to look at the pros and cons of placing an ombudsman in each regulatory agency , rather than relying on a lone ombudsman in the small business administration to cover all agencies. initially , the office of the national ombudsman was located in chicago and had a three - person staff . the first national ombudsman ( peter barca ) was appointed in november 1996 , and 50 small business owners were appointed to the 10 small business regulatory fairness boards in that same month . the small business regulatory fairness boards were all chartered by february 1997 , and became operational in june 1997 . during its first year , the office of the national ombudsman also created its first small business appraisal form to receive small business comments , developed a structure to evaluate federal agency regulatory compliance and enforcement activities , instructed small business fairness board members about sbrefa , published a brochure , established its toll - free 1-888-regfair telephone number , created a website , and held 10 public hearings across the nation "to enable small businesses to publicly bring forth their concerns of the regulatory enforcement structure. the office of the national ombudsman also received 735 telephone calls , had more than 56,000 hits on its website , and had 110 small businesses initiate an appraisal form . fifty filed a completed appraisal form , and 33 of these forms were forwarded to federal agencies for responses .