most states continue to express their support for nafta . the national association of state departments of agriculture and the american farm bureau federation , among other industry coalition groups , also continue to emphasize the importance of nafta to the u.s. agricultural sectors and the need to maintain a preferential trade relationship with canada and mexico . the trump administration has generally downplayed these types of concerns . however , usda is reportedly developing a contingency plan to protect against potential agricultural losses if the united states withdraws from nafta . again , in august 2017 , president trump and other administration officials suggested the united states would likely withdraw from the agreement . many in congress representing states with agricultural interests continue to express opposition to nafta withdrawal . in november 2017 , the leadership of the house agriculture committee , chairman k. michael conaway and ranking member collin c. peterson , joined several u.s. agriculture groups in opposing withdrawal and supporting a quick end to the ongoing nafta renegotiations . in october , 2017 chairman pat roberts of the senate agriculture committee expressed support for nafta and emphasized the need for industry leaders to present their support to the administration . senator debbie stabenow , ranking member of the senate agriculture committee , has also expressed support for nafta . reportedly , some agricultural groups believe that congress has the ability to intervene , if president trump withdraws the united states from nafta . congress maintains oversight authority on industry and trade activities and has continued to monitor and conduct hearings on the ongoing nafta renegotiations . for additional information on the role of congress in the ongoing negotiation , see crs report r44981 , nafta renegotiation and modernization . the text box below describes the different types of tariffs . when president trump announced in april 2017 that he was considering withdrawing the united states from nafta , many u.s. agricultural groups expressed strong opposition to withdrawal . many in congress also voiced opposition to outright withdrawal from nafta . the national pork producers council stated that nafta withdrawal could be "cataclysmic" and "financially devastating" to u.s. pork producers . the national corn growers association said that "withdrawing from nafta would be disastrous for american agriculture" and would disrupt trade with the sector's top trading partners . the american soybean association said withdrawing from nafta is a "terrible idea" and would hamper ongoing recovery in the sector . the u.s. grains council highlighted that withdrawal would have an "immediate effect on sales to mexico. the national association of wheat growers ( nawg ) noted that mexico is the largest u.s. wheat buyer and claimed that nafta withdrawal would be a "terrible blow to the u.s. wheat industry and its mexican customers. cargill , inc. , a major privately held u.s. grain distributor and global agricultural supplier , claims that sales to canada and mexico account for an estimated 10% of the company's annual revenues . most fruit and vegetable growers did not support nafta withdrawal , citing the benefit of exports to mexico . the administration did not withdraw from nafta at that time , deciding instead to formally renegotiate and "modernize" nafta .