in the version of h.r . the provision was included in the final bill , with some modification ( §848 ) . 2810 originally passed by the house: section 1651 would have required the secretary of defense to "promptly submit in writing [to congress] notice of any sensitive military cyber operation and notice of the results of the review of any cyber capability that is intended for use as a weapon. in the final version of the bill , section 1631 modifies the house provision to require that the legal reviews of cyber capabilities intended for a weapon be submitted on a quarterly basis in aggregate form . section 1654 would have required the secretary of defense to develop plans to increase regional cyber planning and enhance information operations to counter information operations and propaganda by china and north korea . a slightly modified version of that requirement is included in section 1641 of the final version of the ndaa . both chambers also supported the president's budget request for research , development , test and evaluation funding for an air force one replacement ( formally known as the presidential aircraft recapitalization program ) and the vh - 92 presidential helicopter . however , the house bill included a provision ( §211 ) that would impose cost controls and require quarterly briefings to the hasc on efforts to control costs related to the program . the final version funded the requested amounts . the president's budget also requested investment in several patrol and surveillance aircraft ( see table 12 ) . both chambers generally supported the request but also recommended additional funding for procurement of p - 8 poseidon aircraft for the navy and an additional $39.4 million for rq - 4 global hawk modifications . the house bill would have further increased funding for the rq - 4 program by $18.3 million to support continued modifications of existing rq - 4 aircraft . the house bill also included a provision ( §1034 ) that would repeal section 133 of the fy2012 ndaa ( p.l . 112-81 ) , which limited the secretary of the air force in taking actions to retire u - 2 aircraft . the final version of h.r . 2810 included $1.8 billion for p - 8s , authorizing three more than requested . global hawk modifications are funded at $101.8 million , $39.4 million above the request . section 136 of the conference report places modified limits on retirement of u - 2s . both chambers generally supported the request and recommended additional funding for the procurement of various types of helicopters and tilt - rotor aircraft — ah - 64 apaches , ch - 47 chinooks , and v - 22 ospreys — and for upgrades to apaches , chinooks , h - 1 "hueys," and ah - 1 cobras ( see table 13 ) . the house bill would have authorized additional funding for ah - 64 modifications and uh - 60 blackhawk procurement ( 8 additional aircraft ) . the senate bill would have authorized an additional $279.2 million to procure 2 additional ch - 53ks over the marine corps request . the final version of h.r .