insurance . section 211 creates an "insurance policy advisory committee on international capital standards and other insurance issues" at the federal reserve made up of 21 members with expertise on various aspects of insurance . it requires an annual report and testimony from the federal reserve and the department of the treasury on the ongoing discussions at the international association of insurance supervisors through 2022 , and a report prior to supporting any specific international insurance standards . n ational c redit u nion a dministration budget . section 212 requires the national credit union administration to publish a draft of its annual budget in the federal register and hold public hearings on the draft . federal reserve surplus . the fed's capital comprises paid - in capital issued to member banks and retained earnings deposited in its surplus account . section 217 reduces the statutory cap on the fed's surplus account from $7.5 billion to $6.825 billion and requires funds in excess of that amount to be remitted to treasury as general revenues . cbo estimated that this provision would increase revenues by $478 million on net over 10 years . cbo assumed that the fed would finance the transfer by selling treasury securities , which otherwise would have earned $177 million in income that would have been remitted to the treasury in the next 10 years . thus , the provision can be thought of as shifting fed remittances from the future to the present , as opposed to representing new economic resources available to the federal government . remediating lead and asbestos hazards . section 305 directs the secretary of the treasury to use loan guarantees and credit enhancements to remediate lead and asbestos hazards in residential properties backing mortgages acquired by the treasury . family self sufficiency program . section 306 makes alterations to the family self sufficiency program ( fss ) , an asset - building program for residents of public and assisted housing . the changes are designed to harmonize separate fss programs into one , unified program ; expand the range of services that can be provided to participating residents ; and make other technical changes to the program . overpayments to the sec . section 505 permits national securities exchanges that have made overpayments to the sec in excess of their required fees to offset those payments against future fees owed within 10 years of the overpayment . studies and best practices . section 216 requires a treasury report on cyber threats to financial institutions and capital markets . section 308 requires a government accountability office ( gao ) report on consumer reporting . section 311 requires a gao report on foreclosures in puerto rico . section 312 requires a department of housing and urban development report on lead - based paint hazard prevention . section 502 requires an sec report on algorithmic trading in capital markets . section 503 amends the small business investment incentive act of 1980 ( sbiia ; p.l .