daca was initiated not by congressional legislation but by the obama administration . it has fluctuated between 11.0 and 11.5 million since that time . scholars attribute the general decline and changing country - of - origin composition in illegal migration flows in recent years to increased border security , relatively large numbers of alien removals , high u.s. unemployment , crime in central america , and other factors . options proposed for addressing the unauthorized alien population often emphasize reducing its size . some approaches would require or encourage unauthorized aliens to depart the united states . other strategies would grant qualifying unauthorized residents various immigration benefits , including an opportunity to obtain legal immigration status . federal law places various restrictions on unauthorized aliens . in general , they have no legal right to live or work in the united states and are subject to removal from the country . at the same time , the ina provides limited forms of immigration relief for some unauthorized aliens to be legally admitted to the country , including crime victims or those seeking asylum . unauthorized aliens who were present illegally in the united states for between 6 and 12 months are barred from readmission to the united states for 3 years , and those present for more than 1 year are barred for 10 years ( the "3- and 10-year bars" ) . for unauthorized aliens who cannot obtain lpr status , existing mechanisms enable some to remain in the united states . one such mechanism , deferred action , is defined by dhs as "a discretionary determination to defer removal action of an individual as an act of prosecutorial discretion. deferred action is not an immigration status and does not have a statutory authority ; it is a form of administrative discretion . examples of deferred action may include dhs terminating removal proceedings , declining to initiate removal proceedings , or declining to execute a final order of removal . approval of deferred action means that no action will be taken against a removable alien for a specified time or in some cases indefinitely . under the deferred action for childhood arrivals ( daca ) initiative begun by dhs in june 2012 , certain individuals without a lawful immigration status who were brought to the united states as children and who meet other criteria may be granted deferred action for two years , subject to renewal . daca recipients can apply for employment authorization but are not afforded a pathway to a legal immigration status . the trump administration announced the planned rescission of the daca initiative on september 5 , 2017 , but due to federal court orders enjoining the rescission , daca remains in effect pending the outcome of further litigation . implementation of ina policies is carried out by multiple executive branch agencies . the department of homeland security ( dhs ) has primary responsibility for immigration functions through several agencies: u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , customs and border protection ( cbp ) , and immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) .