90-247 , as amended ) . the campus - based programs are among the oldest of the federal financial aid programs . as federal aid has largely transitioned to a system that allows for "portability" in receipt of student aid , meaning that most forms of aid are made available to students at whichever participating institution a student chooses to attend , the campus - based programs have come to play a relatively smaller role in the federal student aid effort . the other federal student financial aid programs and benefits generally make available "portable aid," which allows students to shop among institutions that participate in the federal student aid programs . these programs are characterized by having statutorily specified methods for determining the levels of assistance available to students . in contrast , under the campus - based programs , federal funds are first allocated to ihes , which are afforded some discretion with regard to the awarding of aid among eligible students . possibly because of this difference in approach , debate sometimes surfaces about whether it is optimal to sustain a smaller set of federal student aid programs through which aid may be awarded in a different manner than most other federal student aid programs . given the complexities of the federal student aid system , some have proposed eliminating one or more of the campus - based programs that could be considered to be duplicative of or overlapping with other aid programs . these proposals sometimes identify the fseog program and the perkins loan program as candidates for elimination . in considering whether overlap may exist , it can be noted that when making fseog awards , ihes are required to give priority to pell grant recipients . more - recent research on the effects of the fws program on student academic performance has generated mixed results . in addition , the research has a number of methodological limitations and does not provide a national view of student participants . ongoing evaluation of the fws program could provide federal policymakers with a better sense of the extent to which fws employment supports students' career interests . it could also help to identify the extent to which populations of students may experience any adverse effects on their academic performance . the authorization for ihes to make new perkins loans expired on september 30 , 2017 . a few institutional and student issues related to the wind - down of the perkins loan program may be considered prior to or during hea reauthorization . a few issues pertaining to the fws program could be considered during reauthorization . one is whether community service should continue to be an explicit purpose of the program . currently , institutions are required to use 7% of their fws allocation to compensate students employed in community service . the federal share is equal to the amount of the loan fund balance that is proportional to ed's overall fcc as of september 30 , 2017 . ihes may retain any remaining amounts ( eg , their iccs ) . under current regulations , when an ihe discontinues its participation in the perkins loan program , it is required to assign all loans with outstanding balances to ed .