it does not include toys or imitations . nevertheless , the government need not produce the gun itself at trial . the courts have said that it need do no more than "present sufficient testimony , including the testimony of lay witnesses , in order to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that a defendant used , possessed or carried a 'firearm' as that term is defined for purposes of §924 ( c ) . yet conviction must rest on some evidence of the presence of a firearm . predicate offenses : section 924 ( c ) is triggered when a firearm is used or possessed in furtherance of a predicate offense . the predicate offenses are crimes of violence and certain drug trafficking crimes . the drug trafficking predicates include any felony violation of the controlled substances act , the controlled substances import and export act , or the maritime drug law enforcement act . a defendant may be convicted under section 924 ( c ) , however , even though not convicted or even prosecuted for the predicate offense . possession in furtherance : section 924 ( c ) has two alternative firearm - nexus elements: ( a ) possession in furtherance and ( b ) carrying or use . the possession - in - furtherance version of the offense requires that the defendant " ( 1 ) committed a drug trafficking crime ; ( 2 ) knowingly possessed a firearm ; and ( 3 ) possessed the firearm in furtherance of the drug trafficking crime [or other predicate offense]. the "possession" component may take the form of either actual or constructive possession . "constructive possession exists when a person does not have possession but instead knowingly has the power and the intention at a given time to exercise dominion and control over an object , either directly or through others. the in - furtherance component compels the government to show some nexus between possession of a firearm and a predicate offense – that is , to show that the firearm furthered , advanced , moved forward , promoted , or in some way facilitated the predicate offense . this requires more than proof of the presence of a firearm in the same location as the predicate offense . most circuits have identified specific factors that commonly allow a court to distinguish guilty possession from innocent "possession at the scene," particularly in a drug case , they include " ( 1 ) type of criminal activity that is being conducted ; ( 2 ) accessibility of the firearm ; ( 3 ) the type of firearm ; ( 4 ) whether the firearm is stolen ; ( 5 ) the status of the possession ( legitimate or illegal ) ; ( 6 ) whether the firearm is loaded ; ( 7 ) the time and circumstances under which the firearm is found ; and ( 8 ) the proximity to the drugs or drug profits. although the supreme court has determined that acquiring a firearm in an illegal drug transaction does not constitute "use" in violation of section 924 ( c ) , several of the circuits have found that such acquisition may constitute "possession in furtherance.