note that h.j.res . 12 were joint resolutions . unlike simple and concurrent resolutions , final approval of joint resolutions requires passage by both houses of congress , and then the president must sign them or allow them to become law without his signature . these specific joint resolutions also mandated that the president , by his signature , agree to the following conditions: acknowledge censure and condemnation , donate $500,000 to the treasury , not deliver in person any state of the union address , not involve himself in democratic party or campaign activities , and not serve in public office after his term as president concluded . the joint resolutions' procedural and policy requirements made them the most controversial of the clinton censure resolutions . however , like the other censure resolutions , h.res . 44 , the joint resolutions were referred to committee without further consideration . the george w. bush resolutions addressed the administration's response to the september 11 , 2001 , attack on the united states and its prosecution of the global war on terrorism . 398 charged the "unlawful authorization of wiretaps of americans. 626 targeted president bush and attorney general alberto r. gonzales ; both measures resolved to censure and condemn them for "disregarding statutes , treaties , and the constitution. the remaining four resolutions , h.res . 625 sought to censure either president bush alone , or in addition to vice president richard cheney , for actions related to the war in iraq . 302 was referred to the senate foreign relations committee . the other resolutions were referred to either the house or senate judiciary committees . while no resolutions were reported out of committee , the senate judiciary committee , on march 31 , 2006 , held hearings on s.res . the five obama censure resolutions contained a variety of charges . 425 ( november 20 , 2013 ) charged a failure to execute laws , as well as the "usurpation of the legislative power of congress. 652 ( june 26 , 2014 ) charged "actions beyond the laws of the united states. 582 ( january 7 , 2016 ) cited usurpation of congress , while h.res . 588 ( january 13 , 2016 ) stated that the president failed to fulfill the duties of commander in chief . the final resolution , h.res . 607 ( february 4 , 2016 ) , again charged actions beyond the laws and usurpation of congress . all measures were simple house resolutions , which were referred to the judiciary committee , and subsequently by the committee to its subcommittee on the constitution and civil justice . the resolutions received no action . notes: * entries marked with an asterisk called for the president's resignation . if the resolution did not include additional language reprimanding the president or his conduct , it is arguably not a resolution of censure . 531 ( 105 th congress ) is both a resolution of "no confidence" and a resolution of censure because it included the phrase , "abused the office. the measures are also listed in table 1 . the four adopted censure - related resolutions were all simple resolutions .