medical needs are not included in the spm poverty thresholds . nevertheless , regional patterns emerge . these cash benefits are included in both the official poverty measure and the spm . the official poverty measure captures only those government benefits that are paid in cash . this treatment of medical expenses also means that some of the largest noncash benefits programs — medicare , medicaid , and premium assistance under the patient protection and affordable care act — are not explicitly taken into account in determining spm poverty status . there has been some research into methods and measures that would incorporate medical risk , and how it is affected by health insurance , into measures of economic well - being to complement the current spm . tax credits , when they are provided to filers , are given as a lump sum based on income in the previous year . the spm imputes taxes in the year they are earned , but in reality the credit will not appear in the family's income until the following year . furthermore , tax credits are given as a lump sum , but poverty is a spell phenomenon . both the spm and the official poverty measure examine resources in a full calendar year compared with a threshold based on the calendar year . the economic status of families , however , can change throughout the year . a family may experience poverty because one or more workers in the family lost a job and months passed before the worker was able to find another one , putting the family in a poverty spell for that duration . the tax credit , therefore , may or may not provide relief during the poverty spell , depending on the spell's timing in the year and the severity of expenses faced by the family throughout the year . longitudinal datasets like the survey of income and program participation can unmask the length of time people and families spend in poverty . however , they typically have smaller sample sizes than the cps asec , which limits their ability to provide detailed geographic analyses . there has been some debate about whether the spm is closer to a relative or an absolute poverty measure . a relative poverty measure is one in which poverty is defined with respect to some percentile of the income distribution ( eg , half of median income ) , while an absolute measure uses a fixed dollar cutoff updated for inflation over time . relative poverty measures keep pace with changes in the income distribution over time and identify the economically worst - off portion of the population , but they may not necessarily be tied to a particular level of well - being . because relative poverty measures are based on the income distribution , it is possible for poverty to increase even when incomes throughout the distribution rise if the distribution of income becomes wider . this potential disconnection between the poverty rate and levels of well - being is considered to be a weakness of relative measures . absolute poverty measures are set to a fixed income amount representing a level of economic well - being at a point in time , adjusted periodically for inflation .