here , the statute was found wanting . the court concluded in gonzales v. raich that: given the enforcement difficulties that attend distinguishing between marijuana cultivated locally and marijuana grown elsewhere and concerns about diversion into illicit channels , we have no difficulty concluding that congress had a rational basis for believing that failure to regulate the intrastate manufacture and possession of marijuana would leave a gaping hole in the csa [controlled substances act] . thus ... when it enacted comprehensive legislation to regulate the interstate market in a fungible commodity , congress was acting well within its authority to 'make all laws which shall be necessary and proper' to 'regulate commerce ... among the several states. that the regulation ensnares some purely intrastate activity is of no moment. as such , the pennsylvania statutory scheme neither offended due process nor triggered any right to a separate jury finding . there followed a number of state and federal statutes under which facts that might earlier have been treated as elements of a new crime were simply classified as sentencing factors . in some instances , the new sentencing factor permitted imposition of a penalty far in excess of that otherwise available for the underlying offense . for instance , the supreme court found no constitutional defect in a statute which punished a deported alien for returning to the united states by imprisonment for not more than 2 years , but which permitted the alien to be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 20 years upon a post - trial , judicial determination that the alien had been convicted of a serious crime following deportation . perhaps uneasy with the implications , the court soon made it clear in app r endi that , "under the due process clause of the fifth amendment and the notice and jury trial guarantees of the sixth amendment , any fact ( other than prior conviction ) that increases the maximum penalty for a crime must be charged in an indictment , submitted to a jury , and proven beyond a reasonable doubt. side opinions questioned the continued vitality of mcmillan 's mandatory minimum determination in light of the apprendi . initially unwilling to extend apprendi to mandatory minimums in harris v. united states , the court did so in alleyne v. united states . alleyne was convicted under the statute that imposes a series of mandatory minimum penalties upon defendants who carry a firearm during and in furtherance of a crime of violence ( 5 years for carrying ; 7 years for brandishing ; 10 years for discharging ) . the jury found him guilty of carrying ; the trial court judge concluded the gun had been brandished . the sixth amendment requires that the question of brandishing had to be found by the jury , the court declared: harris drew a distinction between facts that increase the statutory maximum and facts that increase only the mandatory minimum . we conclude that this distinction is inconsistent with our decision in apprendi and with the original meaning of the sixth amendment . any fact that , by law , increases the penalty for a crime is an element that must be submitted to the jury and found beyond a reasonable doubt .