no further legislative action was taken . the purpose of this report is to provide an overview of the federal tax system , including the individual income tax , corporate income tax , payroll taxes , estate and gift taxes , and federal excise taxes , as in effect through 2017 . the federal income tax system has several components . the largest component , in terms of revenue generated , is the individual income tax . in fiscal year ( fy ) 2016 , $1.5 trillion , or 47% of the federal government's revenue , came from the individual income tax . the corporate income tax generated another $300 billion in revenue in fy2016 , or 9% of total revenue . social insurance or payroll taxes generated $1.1 trillion , or 34% of revenue in fy2016 . the remainder of federal revenue was collected through excise taxes ( 3% ) or other sources ( 6% ) . 1 includes broad changes to the federal tax system after the 2017 tax year . on the individual side , the act structurally changes the individual income tax system by repealing personal exemptions and increasing the standard deduction . rates and brackets are modified , as are many individual income tax expenditures . the act also changes how businesses are taxed , with most pass - through business income being effectively taxed at rates that differ from the statutory tax rates under the individual income tax system . corporations will face a reduced statutory tax rate , with many corporate and business tax expenditures otherwise modified . the act also moves towards a territorial tax system for multinational corporations . this report provides an overview of the federal tax system , as in effect in 2017 . changes to the federal tax system enacted in the 115 th congress will be addressed in subsequent crs products . the largest individual income tax expenditures are listed in table a - 1 . in 2016 , the sum of individual income tax expenditures was $1.2 trillion . of this total , $844.2 billion ( or 69% ) is attributable to the top 10 provisions . the largest corporate income tax expenditures are listed in table a - 2 . in 2016 , the sum of corporate tax expenditures was $267.2 billion . of this total , $222.8 billion ( or 83% ) is attributable to the top 10 provisions . president barack obama created the national commission on fiscal responsibility and reform in 2010 to address the deficit and national debt . in december 2010 , the fiscal commission released its final report , "a moment of truth," which included base - broadening , rate - reducing , revenue - raising tax reform as part of a broader fiscal reform package . during the 112 th and 113 th congress , then - chairman of the ways and means committee , dave camp , released a series of tax reform discussion drafts , which ultimately became the tax reform act of 2014 . this proposal , which was intended to "fix america's broken tax code by lowering tax rates and making the code simpler and fairer for families and job creators" in a revenue - neutral manner was later introduced as h.r .