although e.o . 12928 did not directly reference e.o . 11625 , it reiterated support for expanding access to federal procurement contracts for businesses owned by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals , black colleges and universities , and other minority institutions . the clinton administration supported substantial increases in the agency's budget . in seeking to expand the reach and capacity of the mbda , the clinton administration sought increases to fund the establishment of rural business development centers , and the activities of the mbdcs and minority business opportunity committees ( mboc ) . in 1996 , the agency announced the initiation of a pilot program , the community based enhancement services ( cbes ) . according to the federal register notice on march 6 , 1996 , the goal of the cbes was "to enable mbda to enter into strategic alliances , coordinating the delivery of its services with those of other entities capable of assisting in minority and / or small and disadvantaged business development in a particular market. an audit of the pilot program found significant deficiencies in mbda's administration of the pilot project , noting that mbda failed to monitor and assess the grantees' performance in accord with its own handbook . the report recommended that mbda develop project - specific performance measures to reflect the nature of the project , assign staff with adequate technical and business expertise to monitor project activities , and undertake timely and thorough evaluation to determine program effectiveness . the house bill , introduced by representatives parren mitchell and joseph addabbo , would have granted the agency the authority to engage in a number of activities in support of the agency's mission , including equity financing of minority business ; financial and technical assistance in penetrating domestic and foreign markets ; and minority business management education . a senate bill , s. 2565 , introduced by senator abraham ribicoff and backed by the carter administration , would have authorized the creation of a minority business development agency focused on the provision of technical assistance to minority firms . the senate bill included much of the language of e.o . during the 99 th congress , representative parren mitchell introduced h.r . 4632 , a bill that would have denied any appropriations to the mbda to avoid potential duplication of services with the sba's associate administrator for minority small business and capital ownership development . the activities of the mbda , as well as any unexpended balances , would have been transferred to the sba associate administrator for minority small business and capital ownership development . during the 101 st through the 104 th congress , representative kweisi mfume introduced legislation ( h.r . 114 , respectively ) that would have re - designated mbda as the minority business development administration .