sponsor fee . an annual fee for each sponsor of an approved or pending nada , supplemental application , or inad submission ( 27% of estimated revenue ) . the statutory fee revenue amounts for fy2014-fy2018 , as established by adufa iii , are listed in table 1 . the law requires the secretary to set and publish in the federal register annual fees , based on the statutory revenue amounts and adjustments , 60 days before the start of each fiscal year . the secretary may waive or reduce fees if he or she determines ( 1 ) assessment of the fee would present a significant barrier to innovation ; ( 2 ) the fees to be paid will exceed expected review costs ; ( 3 ) the animal drug is intended to be used in a medicated feed ; ( 4 ) the animal drug is intended solely for a mums indication ; or ( 5 ) the sponsor is a small business ( defined as having fewer than 500 employees ) submitting its first animal drug application . information about the numbers and value of waivers and reductions granted and used is provided in fda's annual adufa financial reports . according to the draft agreement , the planned total five - year revenue for agdufa iii is $95 million , compared to $38.1 million for agdufa ii and $27.1 million for agdufa i . table 7 shows the proposed agdufa iii performance goals compared to agdufa ii . the total five - year revenue planned for adufa iii was $114 million . to ensure that user fees supplement , rather than replace , appropriated funds , the law includes three funding "triggers" that prohibit fda from collecting user fees for animal drug review unless certain conditions are met each year . fda may collect and use fees only if the nonuser fee appropriations , both for the activities involved in the review of animal drug applications and for fda activities overall , remain at a level at least equal ( adjusted for inflation ) to fy2003 . the third trigger prohibits fda from collecting user fees in excess of the amount specified in annual appropriations or otherwise made available for obligation that fiscal year . adufa requires the secretary to submit to congress , not later than 120 days before the end of each fiscal year for which fees are collected , a performance report concerning fda's progress in achieving the performance goals identified in the adufa agreement letter , and a financial report on the implementation of the user fee authority and the use of fees collected during that fiscal year . in fy2011 fda released an electronic tool for animal drug review submissions ( called esubmitter ) , in order to improve review efficiency . in fy2015 and fy2016 , about 70% of all submissions were made electronically . according to fda's most recent performance report ( for fy2016 ) , the agency exceeded its adufa iii performance goals for fy2015 ( as shown in table 2 ) , and for the first three quarters of fy2016 .