table 1 . selected federal programs that support flood resilience and risk reduction improvement . the nfip is the primary source of flood insurance coverage for residential properties in the united states . the nfip has two main policy goals: ( 1 ) to provide access to primary flood insurance , thereby allowing for the transfer of some of the financial risk of property owners to the federal government ; and ( 2 ) to mitigate and reduce the nation's comprehensive flood risk through the development and implementation of floodplain management standards . a longer - term objective of the nfip is to reduce federal expenditure on disaster assistance after floods . do federal programs provide incentives or disincentives for state and local entities to prepare for floods and manage their flood risks ? although this report covers a broad range of federal programs that may be able to assist with reducing community flood risk and improving flood resilience , it is not comprehensive . multiple aspects of flood policy and specialized federal programs are not addressed herein . this report is largely an overview of existing federal programs with a brief description of some policy considerations as context for these programs and the nation's flood challenge . congress has created various federal programs that may be able to assist state , local , territorial , and tribal entities with flood risk reduction and flood resilience improvements for communities . table 1 summarizes some of these federal programs . each program shown in table 1 was created for a specific purpose and has statutory limitations . for example , some programs are triggered only after certain declarations or actions ; others are part of regular agency operations . discussions later in this report provide more information on each of the programs listed in table 1 . although the subsequent discussions examine geographic eligibility generally , some programs may not be eligible in certain areas designated under the coastal barrier resources act . table 1 provides information on regular funding for fy2018 ( i.e. , annual discretionary appropriations for some programs ) and supplemental appropriations provided in fy2017 and fy2018 . additional information is provided in the more detailed discussions about each program , including for most programs in the trump administration's budget request for fy2019 . the first set of assistance programs shown in table 1 are those that provide assistance targeted specifically at flood - related improvements . the second set addresses not only flood but also other hazard mitigation and resilience activities . the third set includes broader programs that include flood - risk reduction , resilience , or stormwater activities among multiple eligible activities . in some instances , a state may carry out some activities supported by the programs shown in table 1 in a coordinated manner . each state has a state hazard mitigation officer who helps to compile a state mitigation plan , administers certain mitigation funding , and generally has knowledge of the state's existing mitigation resources and its history of programs and funding awards in this area .