, the universe ) . both prior to and following the enactment of the essa , the esea has required states to administer 17 annual assessments across three subject areas ( reading , mathematics , and science ) . second , test - based accountability may lead to increases in test preparation in the classroom , which also takes away from instructional time . there is some evidence to suggest that teachers feel pressure to "teach to the test" and engage in test preparation activities at the expense of broader , higher - level instruction . test - preparation activities take several forms , including emphasizing specific content believed to be on the assessments , changing classroom assignments to look like the format of the assessments , or presenting test taking strategies . third , in test - based accountability systems , teachers report reallocating instructional time toward tested subjects and away from nontested subjects . surveys of teachers have consistently reported that their instruction emphasizes reading and mathematics over other subjects like history , foreign language , and the arts . test preparation can take many forms , and it is difficult to distinguish appropriate test preparation from inappropriate test preparation . many schools provide test preparation to young students who have little experience with standardized testing , and this form of it can actually increase the validity of a test score because it is less likely that students will do poorly due to unfamiliarity with the testing process . test preparation begins to affect validity in a negative way , however , when there are excessive amounts of alignment between test items and curricula , excessive coaching on a particular type of item that will appear on the test , or even outright cheating . although these efforts are often undertaken with good intentions , overuse of test preparation strategies can lead to score inflation . score inflation is a phenomenon in which scores on high - stakes assessments tend to increase at a faster rate than scores on low - stakes assessments . the validity of the assessment results is reduced when score inflation is present . studying its prevalence is difficult because leas may be reluctant to give researchers access to test scores for the purpose of investigating possible inflation . several studies , however , have been able to document the problem of score inflation by comparing gains on state assessments ( historically , high - stakes ) to those made on naep ( low - stakes ) . studies have consistently reported discrepancies in the overall level of student achievement , the size of student achievement gains , and the size of the achievement gap . these discrepancies indicate that student scores on state assessments may be inflated and that these inflated scores may not represent true achievement gains as measured by another test of a similar construct . in this case , the validity of the conclusions based on state assessments may be questioned . they also have better statistical properties for research and analysis . scale scores exist along a common scale so that they can be compared across students , subgroups , schools , and so forth .