proposed u.s. foreign military sale . legislation originates with the prime minister or presidency . national legislative elections for iraq's council of representatives ( cor ) were held in december 2005 , march 2010 , and april 2014 . the 328-seat legislature is directly elected by proportional representation in multi - seat districts , with eight seats reserved for minority communities . legislators vote to confirm nominees for the prime ministership , cabinet , and presidency . elections for the next council of representatives are planned for may 2018 . iraq's constitution provides for a sharing of some powers between the national government and recognized subnational entities known as regions . the kurdistan region of iraq ( kri ) is the sole constitutionally recognized region at present , and is home to most of iraq's ethnic kurdish minority . laws adopted since 2008 also have nominally provided for the decentralization of many administrative and judicial authorities to governorates that are not part of recognized regions . iraq's economy benefits from the country's considerable energy resources , its location at the center of the middle east region , and its young , resilient population . since the downfall of the baathist regime and removal of international sanctions on iraq , the country's gdp per capita has increased between six - and seven - fold . nevertheless , during this period , conflict , instability , and corruption have taken a significant toll on iraqis , and these factors continue to hinder otherwise promising development and investment trends . because iraq's government depends on oil proceeds for nearly 90% of its revenue , lower global oil prices and the fiscal demands of war with the islamic state have greatly strained public finances since 2014 . iraq has sought and obtained international aid and lending to meet its fiscal needs , while also accumulating arrears . since august 2014 , the united nations has designated the situation in iraq as a level three emergency , its designation for "the most severe , large - scale humanitarian crises. conflict and terrorist violence in iraq have created long - running displacement crises , with the international organization for migration ( iom ) estimating that 11 million iraqis were in need of some form of humanitarian assistance as of october 2017 . more than 5.4 million iraqis have been displaced since 2014 , and 2.1 million have returned to their home districts . displacement in iraq was concentrated in northern areas for most of 2017 , amid iraqi and coalition military operations against the islamic state in and around the city of mosul and elsewhere in ninewa , salah al - din , and kirkuk governorates . of the more than 1 million people estimated to have been displaced after the start of operations in mosul in october 2016 , approximately 72% remained displaced in mid - october 2017 . during his march 2017 visit to washington , dc , iraqi prime minister haider al abadi reviewed progress in iraq's campaign against the islamic state and appealed for u.s. and international aid to help meet iraq's short term humanitarian needs and longer term stabilization and reconstruction costs .