the three forums share some common features . for example , they each utilize the same definition of "interested party" to govern who may file a valid protest . however , as discussed in more detail below , the applicable legal procedures and available remedies vary considerably under each forum . parties generally consider these distinctions when choosing the forum or forums in which to file a protest , and as a result , often begin a protest in one of the nonjudicial forums . in addition , contractors may request , and for certain procurements procuring agencies must provide , pre - award and post - award "debriefings" through which the contractor may acquire certain information about how the agency decided to make an award or to eliminate the contractor from competition for a contract prior to the award decision . debriefings can help inform an interested party's decision on whether to initiate a protest and through which forum or forums to raise claims . although there are scant reliable data on the number of protests filed with procuring agencies , public data demonstrate that substantially more protests are filed with gao on average each year than with the cofc . parties that disagree with the outcome of a bid protest before a procuring agency or gao often can still bring claims before the cofc , but the reverse route ( filing a protest with a procuring agency or gao after an adverse cofc decision ) is generally not permitted . for example , gao generally dismisses protests that are currently pending before or have been previously resolved by the cofc . provisions of the far , which were implemented pursuant to a 1995 executive order and several broad procurement - related statutory authorities , require executive branch procuring agencies to "provide for inexpensive , informal , procedurally simple , and expeditious resolution of protests. there are no comprehensive publicly available data on protests before procuring agencies ; agency protest decisions are not published ; and the relevant far provisions , which stress speed and simplicity , provide limited guidance for how agencies are expected to implement these "informal" protest procedures . given the dearth of publicly available data , it is difficult to draw firm conclusions regarding the consistencies and differences of procuring agency protest processes across the government . the relevant far provisions provide some standard procedures applicable to agencies hearing a bid protest . for example , only an "interested party" may file a valid protest with a procuring agency . the term "interested party" is defined as an "actual or prospective bidder or offeror whose direct economic interest would be affected by the award of the contract or by failure to award the contract. interested parties that file a protest with a procuring agency generally do not have a legal right to compel discovery from the procuring agency , although agencies could voluntarily share certain information . in addition , agencies are expected to resolve a protest within 35 days of its receipt . when a procuring agency receives a protest from an interested party , the agency must halt ( i.e.