the nfip is more than just an insurance program . the nfip also engages in many "noninsurance" activities that may be in the public interest: it disseminates flood - risk information through the creation of flood maps , requires communities to adopt land use and building code standards in order to participate in the program , potentially reduces the need for other post - flood disaster aid , may contribute to community resilience by providing a mechanism to fund rebuilding after a flood , and may help protect lending institutions against mortgage defaults due to uninsured losses . the benefits of such tasks are not directly measured in the nfip's financial results from underwriting flood insurance . according to fema , the program saves the nation an estimated $1.87 billion annually in flood losses avoided because of the nfip's building and floodplain management regulations . flood insurance can sometimes be seen as if it is the solution to flooding , but , of course , insurance does not prevent flooding , it merely makes it possible to recover financially more rapidly after a flood . flood mitigation creates safer communities and can save money for individuals and taxpayers . the importance of fema's mitigation programs ( which include , but are not limited to , fma programs ) is illustrated by research findings that for every dollar invested by fema in flood mitigation between 1993 and 2003 , society as a whole saved $5 due to reduced future flood losses . the nfip encourages communities to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations such as zoning codes , subdivision ordinances , building codes , and rebuilding restrictions . internal fema studies have found that structures built to fema standards experience 73% less damage than structures not built to those standards . mitigation activities , however , form only part of the nfip activities and are funded entirely by premiums and fees paid by nfip policyholders . the nfip manages three programs that help communities reduce flood risk: the community rating system , the fma grant program , and increased cost of compliance coverage ( icc ) . the nfip requires most policyholders to purchase icc coverage , which is in effect a separate insurance policy to offset the expense of complying with more rigorous building code standards when local ordinances require them to do so . this icc is authorized in law , with rates for the coverage as well as how much can be paid out for claims , set by fema . congress has capped the amount that can be paid for icc coverage at $75 . there is currently no statutory cap on premiums . this cap could affect 800 properties , or 0.02% of nifp policies , though that figure is subject to considerable change ( likely increasing ) as premium rates change going forward . section 301 would require the administrator , not later than three years from enactment , to calculate premium rates based on both the risk identified by the applicable firms and by other risk assessment data and tools , including risk assessment models and scores from appropriate sources .