most u.s. imports of natural gas come from canada . small quantities of liquefied natural gas arrive in the united states from trinidad . the united states exports natural gas by pipeline to mexico and canada , and exports liquefied natural gas to about a dozen nations , with south korea , jordan , and mexico among the largest customers . the lower inventory levels are due to high global demand and the disruptive effects of hurricane harvey . prices for home heating oil in the northeast could rise rapidly if colder - than - expected weather occurs . any change in the level of economic activity , or changes in the prices of fuels , coupled with the natural variability in the actual weather experienced during the winter heating season , could change the expenditure projections as shown in table 7 . because the distribution process usually requires delivery by truck , of relatively small quantities , it tends to be high cost . electricity prices are related to natural gas and coal prices as well as the availability of nuclear , hydro , and alternative fuel generating capacity . in addition to natural gas being an input in electricity generation , it is also a direct competitor to electricity as a home heating source . approximately 40% of u.s. households use electricity as their primary heating source . in the northeast , electricity use is lowest , at about 15% , while in the south it is highest , at about 63% . domestic consumers of natural gas include households and commercial customers that largely use natural gas for space heating . simultaneous cold weather in europe could cause additional upward pressure on price and perhaps compound pressure on low inventories . propane provides primary home heating for approximately 5.7 million households in the united states , about 5% of the total households . propane consumers are projected to experience an increased expenditure of about $211 , or 10.6% in the northeast , while consumers in the midwest are projected to experience an increase of $276 , or 23.5% . these cost increases make propane the second most expensive fuel among those covered in the stewfo . the number of households heating with propane has remained roughly constant over the past three years . the eia expects a decline of 1.3% in the number of households using propane in 2017-2018 . for the northeast in 2016-2017 , propane prices were $3.06 per gallon , while they were $1.73 in the midwest , a differential of over 55% . while the consumption levels in the two areas are expected to be , on average , within 90 gallons of each other , the difference in propane prices leads to heating season expenditures of $1,451 in the midwest compared to $2,203 in the northeast . propane is unique compared to other fuels covered in this report in the sense that it is a by - product , and not directly produced itself . the production of gasoline and natural gas both contribute to the supply of propane . as a result , when the supply of those fuels is high , so is the supply of propane .