appendix a . title viii provisions in the fy2006-fy2018 ndaas appendix b . title viii provisions in the fy2016-fy2018 ndaas , by subtitle topi . previously , only the secretary of defense could do so . section 802 goes on to amend 10 u.s.c . yet the service chief is not in the acquisition chain of command . we get in trouble in the defense department when authority and accountability are fractured . many other analysts took the opposite view , and the obama administration strongly objected to such changes , arguing that if enacted , they would reduce the secretary of defense's ability to guard against unwarranted cost optimism and prevent excessive risk - taking . giving the service chiefs responsibility for requirements and budgets but not acquisition makes no sense . this section does not include the future usd ( a&s ) in the chain of command in establishing such policies . the fy2017 ndaa does not directly shift more acquisition authority to the military services . however , some of the sections in the bill could have the effect of adjusting acquisition authority in favor of the services . section 901 , while not directly affecting the balance of authority between osd and the services , significantly affects osd's role in defense acquisition . most notably , the section breaks up at&l into the usd ( research and engineering ) and usd ( acquisition and sustainment , a&s ) . according to the conference report [t]hree broad priorities framed the conference discussions: ( 1 ) elevate the mission of advancing technology and innovation within the department ; ( 2 ) foster distinct technology and acquisition cultures to better deliver superior capabilities for the armed forces ; and ( 3 ) provide greater oversight and management of the department's fourth estate . section 807 of the fy2017 ndaa requires that before funds are obligated for technology development , systems development , or production of an mdap , the secretary of defense must establish goals for the milestone decision authority , including for cost , schedule , and technology maturation . the customer is defined as the military service with primary responsibility for fielding the system or systems acquired , represented by "the secretary of the military department concerned and the chief of the armed force concerned" with regard to major defense acquisition programs . 2547 ( a ) by assigning the chiefs the responsibility to assist the secretary of the military department in making decisions regarding balancing resources and priorities , and associated trade - offs among cost , schedule , technical feasibility , and performance on major defense acquisition ; and the management of career paths in acquisition for military personnel . section 802 also required the joint requirements oversight council to "seek , and strongly consider , the views of the chiefs of staff of the armed forces" and for major defense acquisition programs , the chiefs to advise the decision authority for milestones a and b on cost , schedule , technical feasibility , and performance trade - offs . section 825 requires that , generally , the service acquisition executive be the milestone decision authority for major defense acquisition programs .