how should international assistance be coordinated ? repatriation / resettlement issues : what are the prospects for safe and voluntary repatriation of the displaced rohingya ? what arrangements should be made for the resettlement of those who do not wish to return to burma , and what role should the united states play in such a resettlement program ? issues of discrimination in burma : how important is rectifying burma's discriminatory laws and policies for the voluntary repatriation of the rohingya and reconciliation between the rakhine and rohingya ? what measures should the united states take to encourage or pressure the burmese government to repeal or amend discriminatory laws and policies ? human rights abuse issues : what efforts should be made to investigate and document the alleged human rights abuses , and what role should the united states play in supporting or conducting such efforts ? what are the options for securing accountability for those people or organizations determined to be responsible for human rights abuses ? issues regarding the risk of radicalization : how serious is the risk of radicalization of rakhine or rohingya , or their recruitment by existing eaos or islamist militant groups ? what measures , if any , should the united states take to assist the bangladesh government and the burmese government to counteract efforts to radicalize members of either ethnic community ? does the treatment of the rohingya minority pose a radicalization risk for communities elsewhere in the region ? issues r elated to p otential d estabilization of the r egion : will the displaced rohingya in bangladesh raise domestic political tensions related to islamist agendas for bangladesh ? will this have an impact on bangladesh domestic politics and bangladesh - burma relations ? issues for u.s. p olicy t oward burma : do the events in rakhine state warrant a rethink or adjustment in current u.s. policy toward burma ? should some of the previously waived u.s. sanctions on burma be reinstated to encourage or promote changes in the policies and behavior of the burmese government or the burmese military ? what forms of assistance should the united states provide to the bangladesh government and the burmese government to respond to the various crises coming out of the events in rakhine state ? how will the issue affect u.s. geopolitical interests , given china's substantial influence in burma ? on november 2 , 2017 , companion bills were introduced in the house of representatives and the senate that offer an approach to addressing the rohingya crises , as well as a reformulation of u.s. policy toward burma . the burma unified through rigorous military accountability act of 2017 ( burma act ; h.r . 4223 ) and the burma human rights and freedom act of 2017 ( s. 2060 ) would impose sanctions on selected burmese military leaders , limit security and military assistance , and place conditions on multilateral assistance until the burmese government and military meet certain criteria to address the various crises in rakhine state . the burma human rights and freedom act of 2017 would also appropriate $104 million for humanitarian assistance to "the victims of the burmese military's ethnic cleansing campaign targeting rohingya in rakhine state.