reporting requirements . 2811 / s. 625 would expand the categories of information that doj must submit in its semiannual reports to congress . fara currently requires doj's reports to identify fara registrations and the nature , sources , and content of materials distributed by agents of foreign principals . 2811 / s. 625 , doj would also report the number of investigations of potential violations involving officers and directors of any entity serving as an agent of a foreign principal and the number of those investigations that were referred to the attorney general for prosecution . oversight of fara enforcement and administration . 4170 / s. 2039 would require the attorney general to "develop and implement a comprehensive strategy to improve the enforcement and administration of [fara]," which would be subject to review by the inspector general of doj and congress . additionally , it would require the comptroller general to analyze the effectiveness of enforcement and administration of fara within three years of enactment of the legislation . availability of civil fines . breadth of the disclosure requirement . s. 1679 would expand the applicability of fara's disclosure requirement by requiring agents to file copies of materials transmitted to "any other person. furthermore , s. 1679 would require agents to provide additional information when filing any distributed materials with doj , including the name of each original recipient and the original date of distribution . separately , h.r . 2811 / s. 625 generally would apply the disclosure requirement to electronic transmittals ( eg , email and social media ) and align the filing deadlines of the disclosure requirement with those of the registration requirement . repeal of the exemption for agents registering under the lda . 4170 / s. 2039 would repeal the exemption that currently allows agents of foreign principals in the private sector to register under the lda instead of under fara . repeal of the exemption for agents representing foreign principals in the private sector would require all activities covered under fara to be subject to the standards of that act , regardless of whether the foreign principal is a government , political party , or individual or entity in the private sector . for agents of foreign principals whose activities may require registration under fara and the lda , h.r . 4170 / s. 2039 would also align all filing deadlines after the initial registration for fara to coincide with the deadlines of the lda . provision of civil investigative demand authority . both the foreign agents registration modernization and enforcement act ( farmea ; h.r . 2811 / s. 625 ) and the disclosing foreign influence act ( dfia ; h.r . 4170 / s. 2039 ) would authorize the attorney general to compel individuals or entities to produce documents relevant to a fara investigation before initiating civil or criminal enforcement proceedings . such authority would augment doj's authority to investigate potential violations of agents of foreign principals who may be required to register under fara . s. 1679 would authorize the attorney general to enforce fara violations by means of civil fines based on the number of offenses , as well as providing the attorney general discretion to consider the severity and frequency of the violations .