113-83 ) was enacted . on the same afternoon another measure ( p.l . 113-82 ) was enacted to reverse certain reductions in cost - of - living adjustments to working - age military retiree pensions that had been included in the bipartisan budget act of 2013 ( bba2013 ; p.l . although nothing formally linked the two measures , their passage in quick succession may have reflected a fiscal compromise . debt limit measures have been informally or formally linked with other issues for many decades . in 1939 , when congress was considering creating what became the modern debt limit , senator george norris offered an amendment to allow the tennessee valley authority ( tva ) to use bonds to consummate purchases of some power plants . once a separate tva measure was agreed to , the amendment to the debt limit measure ( h.r . 5748 ) was withdrawn . in 1957 , congress declined to raise the limit until the following february , in part to "compel more economy of efficiency , better management of money and manpower in the defense program. in the 1960s , debt limit debates provided a forum for those concerned about the expansion of federal spending due to federal credit guarantees , new social insurance programs , and the escalation of the vietnam war . in the early 1970s , debt limit measures were embroiled in debates over campaign finance reform and in congressional conflicts with the nixon and ford administrations . in the mid - 1980s , a debt limit provision was packaged with the gramm - rudman - hollings budget constraints . the debt limit episode of 1995-1996 was described by the u.s. general accounting office ( gao ; now government accountability office ) as a "crisis. some commentators have pointed to a statutory provision that allows minting of platinum coins as a purported solution to the prospect of a binding debt limit . unlike other provisions governing coinage , the face values of platinum coins are not limited . that provision , according to its author , was introduced to give the u.s. treasury flexibility in minting relatively low - denomination platinum coins for collectors . instead , proponents of the platinum coin strategy have encouraged the u.s. treasury to consider minting a high - denomination coin , which — according to proponents — could be deposited at the federal reserve and exchanged for cash for the u.s. treasury's general fund . officials of both the u.s. treasury and the federal reserve system therefore would have to approve the strategy . both the u.s. treasury and the federal reserve , however , rejected such options in 2013 . a treasury spokesman stated that "neither the treasury department nor the federal reserve believes that the law can or should be used to facilitate the production of platinum coins for the purpose of avoiding an increase in the debt limit. the u.s. treasury again rejected such stratagems in 2015 . apart from various legal , accounting , and practical uncertainties , the platinum coin strategy would present several major policy issues . first , such actions by executive branch officials could be seen as undermining congress's fiscal powers .