according to the d.c . circuit , this privilege is broad and "absolute," and applies with equal "vigor" as the other aspects of the clause . the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit ( ninth circuit ) and the third circuit have rejected this documentary nondisclosure privilege , considering it an undue expansion of the clause . instead , these courts have held , at least in criminal cases , that the clause prohibits only the evidentiary use of privileged documents , not their mere disclosure to the government for review as part of an investigation . the disagreement has not been addressed by the supreme court . circuit position is perhaps best exemplified by two cases: brown & williamson tobacco corporation v . williams and united states v. rayburn house office building . brown & williamson arose when a former employee of a law firm disclosed to a congressional committee stolen documents that were obtained while the firm was representing brown & williamson . the law firm brought an action against the former employee in state court , and during that proceeding , the court issued subpoenas to two members of the committee requiring the return of the stolen documents . u.s. const . art i , § 6 cl . the constitution's speech or debate clause ( clause ) represents a key pillar in the american separation of powers . the clause , which derives its form from the language of the english bill of rights and has deep roots in the historic struggles between king and parliament , serves chiefly to protect the independenc e , integrity , and effectiveness of the legislative branch by barring executive or judicial intrusions into the protected sphere of the legislative process . these prohibited intrusions may take various forms , and , judicial interpretation of the clause's relatively ambiguous language has developed along several related lines of cases . first and foremost , the clause has been interpreted as providing members of congress ( members ) with general immunity from liability for all "legislative acts" taken in the course of their official responsibilities . this "cloak of protection" shields members from "intimidation by the executive" or a "hostile judiciary" by protecting against either the executive or judicial powers from being used to improperly influence or harass legislators through retaliatory litigation . this overarching immunity principle has traditionally been viewed as advancing the primary purpose of the clause: that of preserving the independence of the legislative branch . the clause has also been said to serve a good governance role , barring judicial or executive processes that may constitute a "distraction" or "disruption" to a member's representative or legislative role . the court has cited this "distraction" principle , and the clause's broad proscription that members not be "questioned in any other place," as justification for extending the clause's immunity protection beyond criminal actions initiated by the executive branch — which clearly implicate the separation of powers — to private civil suits initiated by members of the public — which generally implicate the separation of powers only to a lesser degree .