( see figure 6 . ) u.s. lng exports could add to the pressure for other countries to delink their natural gas exports — either as lng or by pipeline — from oil - indexed prices . japanese companies , for example , have been vocal about their interest in a natural gas - based pricing mechanism to reduce costs and exposure to oil prices . however , recent declines in global oil prices have reduced the oil - indexed versus gas - indexed price differential . many of the projected projects in figure 5 are targeting the asian lng demand centers . although the locations of most of the proposed u.s. export terminals are on the u.s. gulf coast and the east coast , asia may be the target market for u.s. lng , as it tends to pay higher prices for its natural gas imports . the widening of the panama canal has contributed to u.s. competitiveness in asia . europe has significant lng import capacity , but needs to continue to improve its infrastructure connections to transport gas to markets . russia , the main supplier of natural gas to europe by pipeline , may be put under increasing pressure by u.s. export projects to further delink its natural gas prices from oil . venezuela has used subsidized exports of fuel oil to gain influence in the region . environmentally , the united states has supported greater natural gas use in the region to curb carbon dioxide emissions , as well . under doe's proposed rule , a small - scale natural gas export facility may qualify for the expedited approval process if it meets two criteria: ( 1 ) it would export no more than 0.14 bcfd or 51.10 bcf per year , and ( 2 ) it qualifies for a categorical exclusion under doe's national environmental policy act ( nepa ) regulations . if these two criteria are met , then the project , under the proposed rule , would be assumed to be in the public interest per the natural gas act ( nga ) . in the beginning of the 21 st century , u.s. natural gas prices were generally on the rise ( see figure 2 ) , and the united states was viewed as a growing natural gas importer . the prospect of the united states limiting or restricting lng exports has raised questions by industry analysts , particularly as a member of the world trade organization ( wto ) . in previous congresses , legislation was introduced that would have given certain countries , like nato members , priority in receiving u.s. lng exports . the general agreement on tariffs and trade's ( gatt's ) article xi , general prohibition against quantitative restraints , states the following: no prohibition or restrictions other than duties , taxes or other charges made effective through quotas , import or export licenses or other measures , shall be instituted or maintained by any contracting party on the importation of any product of the territory of any other contracting party or on the exportation or sale for export of any product destined for the territory of any other contracting party .