vietnam is one such country . the agriculture and nutrition act of 2018 ( h.r . 2 , so called "2018 farm bill" ) was introduced in the house on april 12 , 2018 , and includes no provisions with regards to the catfish inspection program . on march 19 , 2018 , senator john mccain and senator jeanne shaheen , in a letter to u.s. trade representative robert lighthizer , asked the trump administration to terminate the catfish inspection program before the wto consultation ended . in the letter , the two senators assert , "since its implementation , the usda catfish inspection program has done nothing more than erect a damaging trade barrier against asian catfish imports to protect a handful of domestic catfish farmers in southern states. it remains uncertain if a senate version of the 2018 farm bill will address this issue . the table below provides the official merchandise trade data for the united states and vietnam . piracy and sales of counterfeit goods online remain common . the potential sale of arms to vietnam had been a source of some controversy for congress . counterfeit goods , including counterfeits of high - quality , remain widely available in physical markets , and , while still limited , domestic manufacturing of counterfeit goods is emerging as a concern . during their june 2008 meeting , president bush and prime minister dung announced the launch of talks to establish a bilateral investment treaty ( bit ) . bits are designed to improve the climate for foreign investors by establishing dispute settlement procedures and protecting foreign investors from performance requirements , restrictions on transferring funds , and arbitrary expropriation . the united states currently is a party to 40 bits ; vietnam has signed over 50 . the first round of bit negotiations was held in washington , dc , on december 15-18 , 2008 . since then , two more rounds of talks have been held — one on june 1-2 , 2009 , in hanoi , and another on november 17-19 , 2009 , in washington , dc . a proposed fourth round of talks that was to be held in early 2010 did not happen . according to the state department , no bit talks were held after the two nations joined the tpp negotiations , presumably because the tpp agreement would have encompassed those issues that would be addressed in the bit . the existing 2001 bilateral trade agreement ( bta ) between the united states and vietnam included provisions in chapter 4 governing investment and the future negotiation of a bit . specifically , article 2 commits both nations to providing national and mfn ( ntr ) treatment to investments . article 4 provides for a dispute settlement system for bilateral investments . article 5 requires both nations to ensure that the laws , regulations , and administrative procedures governing investments are promptly published and publicly available . article 11 pertains to compliance with the provisions of the wto agreement on trade - related investment measures ( trims ) . article 13 states that both nations "will endeavor to negotiate a bilateral investment treaty in good faith within a reasonable period of time.