the proposed h.r . 4508 amendments would extend the authorization of most hea programs through fy2024 . in general , for programs with discretionary funding h.r . table a - 1 lists , by title and part as they would appear in the hea if h.r . 4508 were enacted , programs for which funds would be authorized or for which mandatory budget authority would be provided under h.r . 4508 would authorize the appropriation of funds in specific , as opposed to indefinite , amounts for each year in which funding would be authorized to be provided . 4508 but that would not appear in the hea . for each program , the table identifies the section of the hea ( as amended should h.r . 4508 be enacted ) under which the authorization of appropriations or budget authority would be provided ; whether the program is a continuing program ( c ) that is currently specified in the hea , or would be newly established ( n ) by h.r . 4508 ; and whether appropriations or budget authority for the program are discretionary ( d ) or mandatory ( m ) . for continuing programs , the table also shows the amount of funding that was provided in fy2017 ; notations of a dash ( — ) for new programs mean that fy2017 appropriations are not applicable . for all programs , the table shows the amount of authorization of appropriations or budget authority for fy2019 through fy2024 , as applicable . appropriations figures are shown in thousands of dollars ; the phrase "such sums" indicates that the amount authorized to be appropriated for a particular fiscal year is such sums as may be necessary ( i.e. , an indefinite amount ) . in general , in the absence of legislation to extend or repeal a program , the authorization of appropriations for a program for which ed has responsibility to administer would be extended for an additional fiscal year under section 422 of the general education provisions act ( gepa ; p.l . the appendix contains two tables that present information on the proposed authorization of appropriations or budget authority for new programs and for programs currently specified in the hea and related laws ( eg , the education of the deaf act ) . the report focuses on the larger changes proposed in h.r . 4508 ; it does not aim to provide a comprehensive summary of the bill or of technical changes that would be made by the bill . 4508 , as reported with amendments on february 8 , 2018 , would provide for the comprehensive reauthorization of the hea , amending numerous programs and activities that make up a large portion of the federal effort to support postsecondary education . taken collectively , the changes that would be made by h.r .