these are verified upon receipt data matches . they are conducted and considered moderately or extremely useful by 51 of the 51 state agencies surveyed ( 50 states plus d.c. ) in october 2016 . ssa beneficiary earnings exchange record ( beer ) — state agencies can match with ssa - beer to verify income based on internal revenue service ( irs ) earnings and tax data . this section reviews qc and these developments . over time , usda - fns , snap state agencies , usda - oig , gao , and other stakeholders have identified issues that may complicate or impede the detection and correction of errors and fraud in snap . these kinds of issues can stem from shortcomings or gaps in existing regulation and law , as well as complexities in the fundamental design of the program itself . in addition , stakeholders have proposed strategies to address these kinds of issues and further curb errors and fraud in snap . these include , for example , proposed rulemaking actions , proposed statutory changes , and state pilots . changes that strengthen payment accuracy and punishments against fraud can be in tension with other policy objectives , such as preserving recipient access to the program , and may have unintended consequences such as incurring costs greater than their savings . balancing program objectives such as these is always a consideration for policymakers in this area . according to snap rules , if a store is permanently disqualified from participating in snap and later that store's owner applies to participate in snap at a new store , then usda - fns will deny the new store's application . due to a longstanding usda - fns policy , however , store owners who own multiple stores that participate in snap have been able to remain in the program with some of their stores despite a permanent disqualification at another of their stores . this usda - fns policy , identified and examined in the july 2013 usda - oig report , was intended to prevent the elimination of whole chains of stores from the program as a result of violations at one store . however , the policy has been applied beyond chain stores , and usda - oig identified it as a weakness in efforts to combat trafficking . in the july 2013 report , usda - oig identified 586 store owners who remained in snap due to this policy despite their association with a permanently disqualified store ; 66 of these owners were found to have obtained snap authorization at new stores . in the july 2013 report , usda - oig proposed that usda - fns make a change to snap regulations and usda - fns policy to allow for the permanent disqualification or denial of all current or future stores , respectively , associated with an owner of a store that is permanently disqualified for retailer trafficking unless the retailer can meet certain criteria . usda - fns responded to usda - oig with an alternative policy that would impose collateral requirements for these owners .