employees . the statutory language in dodd - frank states that the median worker - ceo pay ratio is to be calculated using the annual total compensation of " all employees of the registrant. the rule therefore takes an inclusive approach , requiring registrants to include part - time , temporary or seasonal employees , as well as employees situated in the u.s. or abroad , employed by the company or any of its consolidated subsidiaries in its calculations . annualizing the pay of part - time or temporary / seasonal employees — that is , to reflect full - time or full - year equivalents — is not permitted , although the pay of a permanent employee who only worked part of the year ( eg , a new hire ) may be annualized . the "employee" definition does not include contractors that are employed by and whose compensation is determined by an unaffiliated third party . as to foreign employees , in recognition of certain difficulties that may arise in including such workers' compensation in the pay ratio calculation , the rule provides for two potential exemptions: data p rivacy e xemption : a registrant may exclude employees located in countries whose data privacy laws make it impossible to obtain , process or disclose workers' compensation information without violating the data privacy laws of that country . to rely on this exemption , the registrant needs to have first made reasonable efforts to obtain the information , including under applicable exemptions to the privacy laws , and must file a legal opinion supporting their non - disclosure . de minimis e xemption : a registrant may also exclude up to 5% of its non - u.s. employees . if certain employees in a particular non - u.s. jurisdiction are excluded , all employees from that jurisdiction need to be excluded without violating the 5% maximum . any exclusion of non - u.s. employees under this exemption must be disclosed , including the jurisdiction ( s ) and approximate number of employees at issue . overall , the rule's definition of "employee" is quite broad . in his dissenting statement , one of the commissioners , daniel gallagher , stated that he would have limited the definition to full - time u.s. employees , arguing that the sec had the authority to interpret the statutory language in such a manner . one difficulty voiced by registrants has been that the "employee" definition under the rule does not match up in all respects with the definition of "employee" for other purposes under the law , making it difficult to use existing records and classification systems as a basis for pay ratio calculations . in particular , commenters and registrants were concerned that the rule appeared to define "contractor" more narrowly than that term is traditionally defined under employment and tax law . however , more recent sec guidance has clarified that registrants may use their existing payroll and tax records as a basis for determining their employee pool , at least for purposes of excluding independent contractors . method of i dentifying the " m edian employee .