liberia continues to face substantial economic challenges . joblessness is reportedly high , although hard data are lacking , and technical skills and training are limited , as are cross - sectoral integration and value - added processing of commodities like timber , rubber , and ores . economic growth has been uneven nationally and artificially boosted by aid inflows . according to the world bank , the robustness of liberia's economic recovery from a drop in the prices of key commodity exports and the residual effects of the ebola crisis "will depend on the effective diversification of the economy , development of strong institutions , and a smooth political transition. liberia faces many profound development and economic challenges , however , and a failure to successfully address them — in particular by increasing job growth , diversifying the economy , and addressing the needs of liberia's large , often disenfranchised youth population — could generate political grievances . there are also many localized sources of potential unrest , including mob violence attributable to lack of trust in the police and justice systems , competition over land and other resources , and anger over corruption . weah appears to be enjoying a political honeymoon , but its duration may be limited , given the pressing nature of the challenges the country faces . his success is likely to depend on his ability to prove — both to liberia's citizens and to the international community — that he can govern competently , transparently , and accountably . still , while he inherits many problems from the sirleaf administration , he is also the beneficiary of extensive and ongoing donor - backed development and capacity - building assistance , including from the united states , initiated under sirleaf . the prior government also proposed a range of reform legislation and policies that were not enacted or implemented that the new government may be able to adapt and pursue . for the time being , the united states appears set to continue to support liberia's current development trajectory , albeit with assistance allocations lower than those provided during recent past years . according to the international monetary fund ( imf ) , real gdp growth then dropped sharply , due largely to the ebola outbreak , from 8.8% in 2013 , the year before the outbreak , to 0.7% in 2014 and 0.01% in 2015 . it then contracted by 1.6% in 2016 before recovering somewhat in 2017 , to 2.5% . gdp per capita , at $729 in 2017 , remains low , even though it has grown from $224 , where it stood when sirleaf took office . liberia's pre - epidemic growth rested , in part , on large inflows of development aid premised on donor confidence in sirleaf ; on her government's negotiation of multiple natural resource - focused foreign direct investment ( fdi ) deals ; and , to a lesser extent , on public investment in the agricultural sector . the sirleaf administration reported having negotiated multi - year deals worth an aggregate potential $16 billion over a period of up to 25 years , although current fdi stocks total less than half of this amount .