appendix a . and receives mandatory funding . as such , it would continue to operate in the event that congress does not enact a new farm bill , although farm bills have been vehicles for modifying the program in the past . as the expiration of the 2014 farm bill draws nearer , congress may debate proposals to modify the federal crop insurance program in considering the next farm bill . since the agricultural act of 2014 ( "2014 farm bill," p.l . 113-79 ) , the federal crop insurance program has become a central agricultural support program , with comparable or larger outlays than either commodity price and income support programs ( eg , agricultural risk coverage , price loss coverage , and marketing assistance loans ) or conservation programs ( eg , environmental quality incentives program , conservation stewardship program , and conservation reserve program ) . the federal crop insurance program is operated through public and private entities and is funded by both taxpayers and producers . the federal crop insurance program is a central part of federal support for agriculture . given the program's significant cost and share of usda program outlays , it is a frequent target for budgetary savings . with a few exceptions , rma requires a minimum of four years of records and will accept records for up to 10 years . acceptable records include sale receipts and storage records . for most crops , the aph is a simple average of the historical yields . if producers do not have four years of records , rma substitutes a transition or "t yield" for the missing years . t yields are based on the 10-year average county yield . growers with no records are assigned 65% of the t yield as their aph yield . if producers provide acceptable records for less than four years , they can receive between 80% and 100% of the t yield for the missing years depending on how many years they provide . for aph policies , rma determines the projected price using a variety of tools depending on the crop . for yp policies , rma determines the projected price from commodity exchanges using the methodology published in the applicable commodity exchange price provisions ( cepps ) . for corn and soybeans , the projected price is the average chicago mercantile exchange ( cme , formerly chicago board of trade ) daily price in february for the december - futures contract of the same year for corn and the november - futures contract for soybeans ( figure b - 1 ) . for both aph and yp policies , producers select coverage levels between 50% and 75% ( up to 85% in some areas ) of their aph yields and between 55% and 100% of the projected prices . indemnities are triggered only if actual yields fall below the yield guarantee . the higher the coverage level , the lower the premium subsidy rate . rma offers cat coverage to individual producers at 50% of the aph yield and 55% of the projected price for an administrative fee of $300 per crop per county . yield and price guarantees equal the selected coverage levels times the aph yield and projected price , respectively .