, customer demand ) . 115-72 , two supplemental appropriations enacted in response to 2017 hurricanes . in the senate , s. 2165 — puerto rico and virgin islands equitable rebuild act of 2017 — would provide disaster recovery assistance specifically for the territories impacted by hurricanes irma and maria . congress may consider other legislative action in addition to federal disaster assistance . the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-58 ) amended 48 u.s.c 1492 to authorize doe and doi to provide technical and financial assistance to insular area governments . viwapa has experienced cash flow challenges . the government of the u.s. virgin islands — viwapa's largest customer — has been slow in providing payment for services . chronic slow payment in addition to incidents of nonpayment for electricity services has hindered the utility's ability to recover costs and maintain equipment . furthermore , cash flow concerns are exacerbated because revenues from recovered rates do not adequately cover expenses , resulting in delays in major equipment maintenance and repair , decreases in inventory levels of spare parts , and deferrals in preventative maintenance . these actions have increased the frequency of equipment outages and failures , which not only decreases power generation efficiency but also increases the cost of supplying energy to the customers . the usvi were hit by both hurricanes , and damage on two of the three main islands ( st. thomas and st. john ) was extensive . as noted , the usvi government estimates that 80-90% of the power transmission and distribution systems across the usvi were damaged . as of january 29 , 2018 , power had been restored to nearly 93% of total customers across the usvi . viwapa reported that approximately 3,900 customers ( 7% ) remained without power within the territory . st. thomas had approximately 2,900 total customers ( 11% ) without power , which includes data from water island ( 100% power restored ) and hassel island ( 0% power restored ) . st. john had approximately 160 total customers ( 4% ) without power . st. croix had approximately 800 total customers ( 3% ) without power . as of january 31 , 2018 , nearly 800 "supplemental utility personnel" were assisting in restoration efforts across the territory . u.s. coast guard had reopened all ports that receive marine delivery of petroleum products . on st. john , work to restore infrastructure and reopen the virgin islands national park has started . st. croix is accepting hotel guests and received its first posthurricanes cruise ship on november 11 , 2017 . the usvi and viwapa engaged in several energy planning efforts prior to the 2017 hurricane season . efforts focused on evaluating future power needs and cost - effective options as well as comprehensive energy planning . this planning process is consensus - based , involving various stakeholders , and includes assessing future energy needs within the context of existing policies . electric system reliability is a key measure of a utility's performance , and is often mentioned by electric utilities simply as their ability to "keep the lights on.