what are their legal authorities for doing so ? which military terms describe activities that might seem similar but are distinct from covert action ? prior to 1974 , no statute existed that enabled congress to conduct oversight of the intelligence community . congress exercised what some have described as "benign neglect" of intelligence . what agencies are authorized to conduct covert action and clandestine activities ? in earlier instances , when it could have exercised greater oversight — such as over the cia's orchestration of the 1953 coup in iran — congress trusted that the executive branch and intelligence community were acting in accordance with the law . congress also did not question whether particular covert actions or other sensitive intelligence activities were viable as a means of supporting u.s. national security . in the 1970s , controversy over public disclosure of cia's covert action programs in southeast asia and the agency's domestic surveillance of the antiwar movement spurred congress to become more involved in intelligence oversight . in 1974 , the hughes - ryan amendment of the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( §32 of p.l . 93-559 ) provided the first statutory basis for congressional oversight and notification to congress of covert action operations . investigations by two congressional committees — in the senate , chaired by idaho senator frank church , and in the house , chaired by representative otis pike — provided the first formal effort to understand the scope of intelligence activities . these committees became the model for a permanent oversight framework that could hold the intelligence community accountable for spending appropriated funds legally and supporting identifiable national security objectives . in 1975 , congress established the senate select committee on intelligence ( ssci ) and the house permanent select committee on intelligence ( hpsci ) . congress later refined its oversight of the intelligence community when the executive branch directed covert action operations without notifying congress in advance . in august 1980 , out of concern for maintaining operational security , president carter chose not to inform congress prior to the attempt to rescue american hostages held by the iranian regime . in the mid - 1980s , the reagan administration did not inform congress about a covert initiative to divert funds raised from the sale of arms to iran to support the contras in nicaragua . through the intelligence authorization acts ( iaa ) of 1981 ( p.l . 102-88 ) , congress revised procedures to try to ensure that the executive branch would , in the future , provide timely , comprehensive notification of all covert action and other "significant anticipated intelligence activity. in the field , the military and intelligence communities increasingly integrated their activities for greater effect in the post - 9 / 11 environment . a reportable intelligence activity , therefore , was often of interest to the congressional defense as well as intelligence committees . yet , in congress , the intelligence and defense committees have different notification standards and processes .