what are the risks and opportunities ? for european allies , increases in defense spending could be expected to support european firms and strengthen european autonomy . this could mean fewer opportunities for u.s. firms , but it could also mean more european capabilities . what posture should congress take toward these possibilities ? also , what can congress do to help allies invest more effectively , especially in terms of r&d and procurement ? global commercial investments in r&d are growing , and commercial innovation is increasingly important for defense and security . russia's resurgence continues . in march 2018 , nato accused russia of a "clear pattern of reckless and unlawful behavior" to destabilize the west , including its support for separatists in ukraine , its military presence in moldova and georgia , its meddling in elections , and its involvement in the war in syria . in the last few years russia has expanded its anti - western rhetoric and shown willingness to use force in pursuit of its political objectives . it has modernized its military and increased investments in unmanned systems and other emerging technologies . russia reportedly now has sophisticated sensors , space capabilities , and cyber capabilities , as well as long - range precision missiles , which can be used to deliver nuclear weapons or for anti - access / area denial ( a2ad ) in local conflicts . what role can congress play in expanding nato's access to commercial technology and innovation ? the latter undermines nato dominance in operating domains and increases the risks associated with nato deployments into those areas . some analysts believe that russia is reducing the once "gaping qualitative and technological gap" between russian and nato military forces . on nato's southern flank , technologies are also reshaping the threat environment , including through the proliferation of conventional weapons , small arms , and munitions ; the evolution of cybersecurity and social media ; and the rapid development of technologies that can be used by terrorists or harnessed in nato's counterterrorism or crisis - management operations . congress may wish to reconcile u.s. narratives in its messaging to nato and to the eu . syria is in its eighth year of war , libya remains unstable , and poor governance , demographic pressures , and natural resource constraints threaten security . the mediterranean has become a transit hub for refugees from war - torn countries , economic migrants , foreign fighters , and organized crime networks . the growing influence of china and russia is challenging the prominence of western actors in the mediterranean , and nonstate groups are more empowered to shape security outcomes . transnational threats , including terrorism , have become priorities for several european allies , including france and others that are more exposed to the security challenges emanating from the south . u.s. policymakers have had concerns about the development and proliferation of disruptive technologies and their implications for defense for more than a decade . in the 2006 quadrennial defense review report , u.s. strategymakers officially identified china as having the "greatest potential to compete militarily with the united states and to field disruptive military technologies that could over time offset traditional u.s. military advantages absent u.s. counter strategies.