it is not variable . such cuts may also result in lasting damage to important segments of the u.s. r&d infrastructure — researchers , professors , academic programs , student interest , equipment , infrastructure , etc. — in defense - critical fields , even if funding were to be later restored . such effects could not only diminish u.s. innovative capacity , but result in the transfer of knowledge and loss of people , capabilities , and leadership to other nations . according to a 2012 defense science board report on dod basic research the dod basic research program has supported a large fraction of revolutionary research in the physical sciences . among the many other factors that may affect the effectiveness of the performance of defense s&t are organizational structures and relationships ; management ; workforce recruitment , training , and retention ; and policies related to cooperative research and technology transfer . defense s&t stakeholders have also asserted the importance of stability in funding streams . as congress undertakes defense annual authorization and appropriations , it may wish to consider the issues raised in this report related to the magnitude and composition of funding for defense s&t in the overall context of dod rdt&e , as well as the other issues such as those identified above . without dod support , these u.s. - based research communities would find it more difficult to expand knowledge , collaborate , publish , and meet . without adequate u.s. support , these centers of knowledge will drift to other countries . while there is little direct opposition to defense s&t spending in its own right , there is intense competition for available dollars in the appropriations process . this competition has been made more acute under congressionally enacted budget control provisions . congressional acts establish and provide enforcement mechanisms for separate spending caps for defense and nondefense spending . these independent budget caps essentially fence off certain funds from being used for defense purposes by those who would prioritize such defense spending over certain nondefense activities . increases in the defense and nondefense budget caps for fy2018 and fy2019 included in the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( p.l . 115-123 ) may ease the resource competition in these fiscal years , but not eliminate it . with the spending caps has come greater competition for available dollars within the defense portion of the budget ( for example , between rdt&e and procurement ) , and among the various rdt&e budget activities and program elements ( for example , between defense s&t and the rest of the defense rdt&e budget activities ) . with members of the u.s. armed forces currently engaged in combat and others facing potentially imminent threats in other locations around the world , some may believe it is appropriate to prioritize defense spending to support immediate operational needs and contingency preparations of the military over activities whose payoff is likely to be realized only in the longer term . in addition , some have questioned the effectiveness of defense investments in r&d .