13757 ) amending e.o . 13694 to allow for the imposition of sanctions on individuals and entities determined to be responsible for tampering , altering , or causing the misappropriation of information with the purpose or effect of interfering with or undermining election processes or institutions . the below tables summarize recent legislative actions . the white house has taken actions independent of congress to address a variety of cybersecurity issues . recent executive actions are described below in reverse chronological order , starting with the most recent action . in may 2017 , the trump administration issued an executive order ( e.o . 13800 ) designed to improve the cybersecurity of both federal networks and critical infrastructure . it requires federal agencies to manage cybersecurity risks holistically across the government . it also directs federal agencies to take specific steps to assist the private sector in managing cyber risks . previously , the obama administration issued an executive order ( e.o . five entities and four individuals were identified in the annex of the amended executive order and added to the u.s. department of the treasury's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) list of specially designated nationals and blocked persons ( sdn list ) . on april 1 , 2015 , the obama administration issued an executive order ( e.o . 13694 ) placing sanctions on certain persons engaging in significant malicious cyber - enabled activities . the executive order established the first sanctions program to allow the administration to impose penalties on individuals overseas who engage in destructive attacks or commercial espionage in cyberspace . the order declares "significant malicious cyber - enabled activities" a "national emergency" and enables the treasury secretary to target foreign individuals and entities that take part in the illicit cyber activity for sanctions that could include freezing their financial assets and barring commercial transactions with them . in february 2015 , the obama administration issued executive order 13691 , which , along with a legislative proposal , is aimed at enhancing information sharing in cybersecurity among private sector entities . it promotes the use of information sharing and analysis organizations ( isaos ) , which were defined in the homeland security act ( 6 u.s.c . ยง131 ( 5 ) ) as entities that gather , analyze , and share information on the security of critical infrastructure to assist in defense against and recovery from incidents . these initiatives broadened the reach of isaos beyond ci to any affinity group ( eg , geography , business sector , etc. ) in that sense , they differ from the more familiar information sharing and analysis centers ( isacs ) , created in response to presidential decision directive ( pdd ) 63 in 1998 specifically to address information - sharing needs in ci sectors . also in february 2015 , the obama administration created the cyber threat intelligence integration center ( ctiic ) , established by the dni . its purposes are to provide integrated analysis on foreign cybersecurity threats and incidents affecting national interests and to support relevant government entities , including the national cybersecurity and communications integration center ( nccic ) at dhs , as well as other entities at dod and doj .