with class counsel. further , this section would forbid a federal court from granting class certification to any proposed class action in which the class representative is a "relative or employee of class counsel. second , proposed 28 u.s.c . ยง 1718 ( 2 ) - ( 3 ) would forbid class counsel from collecting fees until "the distribution of any monetary recovery to class members has been completed" and would limit the fees that class counsel could obtain in cases involving monetary recovery to "a reasonable percentage of any payments directly distributed to and received by class members . or has any contractual relationship . [not to] exceed the total amount of money directly distributed to and received by class members. proposed section 1717 would effectuate , at least relative to other provisions in ficala , a minor change in the law . it would require additional disclosure of conflicts to the court and would codify the requirement , already accepted by many courts , that class counsel should not have certain conflicts of interest . it would also largely codify the words of the seventh circuit in levitt v. southwest airlines co. : "our message to the class action bar is short and simple: when in doubt , disclose [potential conflicts]. proposed section 1718 , on the other hand , proposes significant limitations on the fees that class counsel would be able to obtain . this provision would work a major change . currently , rule 23 ( h ) provides that a court may award "reasonable" attorney's fees following a motion under federal rule of civil procedure 54 ( d ) ( 2 ) , which provides that the motion for fees must be made within 14 days after judgment . class counsel is ordinarily entitled to fees only in cases involving either a common - fund created by the attorney's effort or in cases where substantive law provides for fee shifting . case law states that a "reasonable" fee is determined by a number of factors , which include the benefits obtained by the class . where the fee is based on a common fund created by the litigation , generally , a reasonable fee extends to a percentage of the fund that is created , including any unclaimed portion . proposed section 1718 would change that rule , insofar as percentage recoveries would have to be based on only the recovered portion of the funds actually received , rather than the total fund including any unclaimed portion . further , this section apparently ensures that class counsel cannot collect fees until monetary recovery has been completed . this provision , if enacted , could raise issues in cases where fee awards would potentially be difficult to administer or in class actions where funds are created but the potential beneficiaries are unknown or their injuries are uncertain . an example of such a case is the national football league's ( nfl's ) concussion settlement . in that case , the court approved a settlement covering 20,000 retired nfl players , even though the injuries sustained by some of the claimants are not likely to become apparent for some time ( if ever ) , meaning the payment owed to those claimants is unknown .