he demeaned the bundestag . he made them , its members , appear to be like a group of urchins who had no sense . but time and time again what has been our experience ? you sit there as the manager of the bill , and someone comes down on the floor with an extraneous speech , which he has a perfect right to deliver , because he must meet a press deadline . all i am saying here is that a period of 4 hours from the time we conclude the morning hour , for those 4 hours we devote ourselves to the business at hand . senator pastore argued that his proposed rule would increase attendance and allow the senate to proceed in a more orderly fashion first of all , [the proposed rule] would accomplish this: the members of the senate , knowing that the business at hand will be discussed , will be more readily available on a quorum call . it will not have to take 20 minutes or a half hour , and then probably get into live quorums . members would know that for 4 hours , if they arrange their program , they would sit on the floor , that they could discuss the business at hand and conclude it , without interruption . i think it would help immensely . ultimately , s.res . 89 was agreed to , as amended , in the senate by a 57-25 vote on january 23 , 1964 . the resolution , as passed , inserted the new germaneness requirement into senate rule viii , relating to the order of business . the language would later be recodified without change as paragraph 1 ( b ) of rule xix with the adoption of s.res . 274 on november 14 , 1979 , in the 96 th congress ( 1979-1980 ) . as noted above , the pastore rule has seen sporadic enforcement since its adoption . in the decade or so after the rule's adoption , senator robert byrd of west virginia , who served as majority whip and later as both majority and minority leader , was a frequent observer of the rule , often seeking clarification on whether the senate was operating within the three hours of required germaneness or seeking unanimous consent to waive the rule to allow him or others to speak without restriction . on occasion , senators have taken to the floor to proclaim an expectation of adherence to the pastore rule for the duration of the consideration of a particular bill . despite , or perhaps because of , the sporadic observance of the pastore rule , a report issued in 1983 by the study group on senate practices and procedures — an entity established to examine senate procedures and recommend improvements to them — recommended that the senate "require debate to be relevant at all times during the discussion of legislation and executive business. on may 9 , 1983 , the senate committee on rules and administration held a hearing on the study group report . the senate took no further action on the proposal .