it does not address any other provisions in these measures . neither bill saw further action . since then , legislative proposals on unauthorized childhood arrivals have been introduced as both stand - alone bills and parts of larger immigration reform bills . while some of these measures have seen legislative action , none have been enacted . in the 109 th congress , the senate passed a comprehensive immigration reform bill with a dream act title ( s. 2611 ) ; the house did not consider that bill . in the 110 th congress , there were unsuccessful efforts in the senate to invoke cloture on a comprehensive immigration reform proposal that included a dream act title ( s. 1639 ) and to invoke cloture on a motion to proceed to a stand - alone dream act bill ( s. 2205 ) . more recently , the house approved dream act language as part of an unrelated bill in the 111 th congress ( h.r . 5281 ) ; the senate rejected a motion to invoke cloture on a motion to agree to the house - passed dream act amendment . in the 113 th congress , the senate passed a comprehensive immigration reform bill with dream act provisions ( s. 744 ) ; the house did not consider that bill . a number of bills have been introduced in the 115 th congress to provide immigration relief to unauthorized childhood arrivals . some of these measures would provide a pathway to lpr status , like the bills considered in past congresses , while others would provide daca - like temporary protection from removal and employment authorization . according to data published by dhs's u.s . citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) in february 2018 , the agency had approved a cumulative total of 807,447 initial daca requests through january 31 , 2018 . as of that same date , there were approximately 682,750 active daca recipients . in january 2018 , the white house produced a "legislative framework" for immigration reform . as part of that framework , the trump administration called on congress to "provide legal status for daca recipients and other daca - eligible illegal immigrants. against this backdrop , the senate considered several immigration proposals containing provisions on unauthorized childhood arrivals in february 2018 . the house has not considered legislation on unauthorized childhood arrivals in the 115 th congress as of the date of this report . legislative proposals on unauthorized childhood arrivals in the 115 th congress build on related legislation introduced and considered in earlier congresses . measures receiving legislative action prior to the 115 th congress would have enabled eligible unauthorized childhood arrivals to become u.s. lawful permanent residents ( lprs ) . under most of these proposals , individuals meeting an initial set of criteria would have been granted some type of conditional or transitional legal status and then , after meeting additional criteria , would have been granted full - fledged lpr status . in the past , legislation proposing such a pathway to lpr status for unauthorized childhood arrivals was often referred to as the dream act , whether or not a particular measure carried the bill title associated with that acronym ( i.e.