section 130k of title 10 of the u . s. code provides notification requirements for cyber capabilities "intended for use as a weapon" that specifically do not constitute covert action . section 130k specifies that covert actions are exceptions to these notification requirements . they may be conducted covertly and clandestinely ( i.e. , the activity as well as u.s. sponsorship are secret ) . they include recruitment , training or other assistance to non - u.s. individuals , organizations or populations to conduct activities — wittingly or not — that support u.s. military objectives . gang of four and gang of eight notifications differ in several ways . a principal difference is that the gang of four notifications procedure is not based in statute , and is a more informal process that generally has been accepted by the leadership of the intelligence committees over time . by contrast , the gang of eight procedure is provided in statute , and imposes certain statutory obligations on the executive branch . for example , when employing this particular notification procedure , the president must make a determination that vital u.s. interests are at stake if a notification is to be restricted to the gang of eight and provide a written statement setting forth the reasons for limiting notification to the gang of eight , rather than notifying the full membership of the intelligence committees . another distinction between the two notification procedures , at least since 1980 when the gang of eight procedure was first adopted in statute , is that gang of four notifications generally are limited to non - covert action intelligence activities , including principally but not exclusively intelligence collection programs viewed by the intelligence community as being particularly sensitive . in contrast , gang of eight notifications are statutorily limited to particularly sensitive covert action programs . notwithstanding these distinctions , there is no provision in statute that restricts whether and how the chairs and ranking members of the intelligence committees share with committee members information pertaining to the intelligence activities that the executive branch has provided only to the committee leadership , either through gang of four or gang of eight notifications . nor , apparently , is there any statutory provision that sets forth any procedures that would govern the access of appropriately cleared committee staff to such classified information . some critics of restricted intelligence notification of congress , such as the gang of eight procedures , maintain that they do not allow for effective oversight because participating members "cannot take notes , seek the advice of their counsel , or even discuss the issues raised with their committee colleagues. other critics contend that restricted notifications such as gang of eight and gang of four briefings have been "overused. still others believe gang of four notifications are unlawful because they are not statutorily based . supporters of gang of eight notifications assert that such restricted notifications continue to serve their original purpose , which is to protect operational security of particularly sensitive intelligence activities while they are ongoing .