more recently , the aforementioned p.l . dua and ddwg are contingent on disasters being declared as such . dua benefits are available only to those individuals who have become unemployed as a direct result of a declared major disaster as determined under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( p.l . 100-707 , the stafford act ) and if the disaster declaration includes the notice of availability of dua benefits . ddwg assistance can be awarded in response to a disaster or emergency declared under the stafford act or "an emergency or disaster situation of national significance that could result in a potentially large loss of employment , as declared or otherwise recognized ... by a federal agency. the 12-month maximum duration of disaster relief employment , however , may offer a longer benefit window than uc and / or dua . workers who exhausted their uc benefits but had received less than a total of 39 weeks of benefits would receive dua benefits for as many weeks as necessary to reach a total of 39 weeks of uc and dua benefits combined . this extension did not apply to any subsequent major disasters . the wioa - dw program's general strategy of preparing dislocated workers for locally in - demand jobs may offer limited short - term value , especially if large numbers of local worksites are disrupted due to the disaster . wioa - dw activities could , however , be viewed as a longer - term investment in preparing dislocated workers for an area's post - disaster labor market . disaster relief employment under ddwg is designed to respond to labor market disruptions by providing dislocated workers with federally subsidized employment while local labor markets recover . uc and dua benefits usually offer the advantage of getting assistance to affected workers quickly , but benefits are of limited duration . conversely , wioa - dw and ddwg may offer less immediate relief , but may function as a longer - term investment in disaster - affected communities . both uc and dua benefits are structured to rapidly respond to economic conditions ( caused by a disaster in the case of dua ) and provide immediate income support to the unemployed . in particular , each state agency responsible for administration of the uc program is assessed in part on the state's "methods of administration" to ensure that eligible claimants are paid uc benefits promptly when determined to be eligible . while these benefits can typically be provided quickly , it should be noted that the prompt payment of both uc and dua benefits is dependent on a functioning state uc program . if the administrative abilities of the state offices are impacted by the disaster — as occurred in louisiana after hurricane katrina and has also been experienced after the series of 2017 hurricanes in puerto rico and the u.s. virgin islands — the processing of claims and subsequent payment of benefits may be delayed . uc and dua are available for a limited duration . uc is limited by state policy and is typically limited to 26 weeks .