it gives you dignity or not. in addition , experts highlight that the balance of international ai development will affect the magnitude of ai's influence . as one analyst states , "[t]he most cherished attribute of military technology is asymmetry. in other words , military organizations seek to develop technological applications or warfighting concepts that confer an advantage for which their opponent possesses no immediate countermeasure . indeed , that is the u.s. military's intent with the current wave of technological development as it seeks "an enduring competitive edge that lasts a generation or more. for this reason , dod is concerned that if the united states does not increase the pace of ai development and adoption , it will end up with either a symmetrical capability or a capability that bestows only a fleeting advantage , as u.s. competitors like china and russia accelerate their own respective military ai programs . the democratization of ai technology will further complicate the u.s. military's pursuit of an ai advantage . as the 2018 national defense strategy warns , "the fact that many technological developments will come from the commercial sector means that state competitors and nonstate actors will also have access to them , a fact that risks eroding the conventional overmatch to which our nation has grown accustomed. in these circumstances , ai could still influence warfighting methods , but the technology's overall impact may be limited if adversaries possess comparable capabilities . a sizeable contingent of experts believe that ai will have a revolutionary impact on warfare . one analysis asserts that ai will induce a "seismic shift on the field of battle" and "fundamentally transform the way war is waged. the 2018 national defense strategy counts ai among a group of emerging technologies that will change the character of war , and frank hoffman , a professor at the national defense university , takes this a step further , arguing that ai may "alter the immutable nature of war. statements like this imply that ai's transformative potential is so great that it will challenge long - standing , foundational warfighting principles . in addition , members of the chinese military establishment assert that ai "will lead to a profound military revolution. proponents of this position point to several common factors when making their case . they argue that the world has passed from the industrial era of warfare into the information era , in which gathering , exploiting , and disseminating information will be the most consequential aspect of combat operations . in light of this transition , ai's potential ability to facilitate information superiority and "purge combat of uncertainty" will be a decisive wartime advantage , enabling faster and higher - quality decisions . what unique advantages and vulnerabilities come with employing ai for defense ? how will ai change warfare , and what influence will it have on the military balance with u.s. competitors ? congress has a number of oversight , budgetary , and legislative tools available that it may use to influence the answers to these questions and shape the future development of ai technology . a range of potential consequences flow from the assumptions surrounding ai's impact on warfighting .