this assumption is reflected in the figures below. ) relevant appropriations bill: lhhs fy2019 request: ba: $33.888 billion outlays: $35.082 billio . the samhsa mission is focused on reducing the "impact of substance abuse and mental illness on america's communities. samhsa coordinates behavioral health surveillance to improve understanding of the impact of substance abuse and mental illness on children , individuals , and families , and the costs associated with treatment . relevant appropriations bill: lhhs fy2019 request: ba: $3.426 billion outlays: $3.616 billio . these totals are inclusive of both mandatory and discretionary funding . the fy2017 actual , fy2018 estimate ( based on the annualized cr and current services mandatory spending ) , and fy2019 request figures are taken from the hhs bib for fy2019 ; the fy2016 actual figures are taken from the fy2018 bib . the remainder of this section provides a brief summary of the mission of each operating division , the fy2019 budget request , and links to additional resources related to that request . a table of relevant crs key policy staff is included at the end of the report . the figures in this section are provided in terms of budget authority ( ba ) and outlays . ba is the authority provided by federal law to enter into contracts or other financial obligations that will result in immediate or future expenditures involving federal government funds . outlays occur when funds are actually expended from the treasury ; they could be the result of either new budget authority enacted in the current fiscal year or unexpended budget authority that was enacted in previous fiscal years . as a consequence , the ba and outlays in this table represent two different ways of accounting for the funding that is provided to each hhs agency through the federal budget process . the fda mission is focused on regulating the safety of human foods , dietary supplements , cosmetics , and animal foods ; and the safety and effectiveness of human drugs , biological products ( eg , vaccines ) , medical devices , radiation - emitting products , and animal drugs . it also regulates the manufacture , marketing , and sale of tobacco products . relevant appropriations bill: ag fy2019 request: ba: $3.257 billion outlays: $3.092 billio . the hrsa mission is focused on "improving access to health care for those who are uninsured , isolated , or medically vulnerable. among its many programs and activities , hrsa supports health care workforce training , the national health service corps , and the federal health centers program , which provides grants to nonprofit entities that provide primary care services to people who experience financial , geographic , cultural , or other barriers to health care . relevant appropriations bill: lhhs fy2019 request: ba: $9.891 billion outlays: $10.634 billio . the ihs mission is focused on providing "comprehensive health services for american indians and alaska natives ... to improve their health status and overall quality of life. ihs provides health care for approximately 2.2 million eligible american indians / alaska natives through a system of programs and facilities located on or near indian reservations , and through contractors in certain urban areas . relevant appropriations bill: int fy2019 r equest: ba: $5.433 billion outlays: $5.410 billio .