additionally , "certain sections of the bankruptcy code . the stay is "automatic" because "it operates without the necessity for judicial intervention" ; it "is triggered upon the filing of a bankruptcy petition regardless of whether the other parties to the stayed proceeding are aware that a petition has been filed. the automatic stay generally remains in effect until the bankruptcy court closes the case , dismisses the case , or grants the debtor a discharge , whichever comes first . "the policy underlying the automatic stay is to protect the debtor's estate from 'the chaos and wasteful depletion resulting from multifold , uncoordinated and possibly conflicting litigation'" that could occur in the absence of the stay . "the automatic stay provides debtors a breathing spell from creditors by preventing 'all collection efforts , all harassment , and all foreclosure actions.' "the stay protects creditors , too , by precluding certain 'creditors from acting unilaterally in self - interest to obtain payment from a debtor to the detriment of other creditors.' a creditor who knowingly violates the automatic stay — such as by attempting to collect a debt the debtor owes to him — does so at his peril . "an individual injured by any willful violation of" the automatic stay may potentially "recover actual damages" against the violator , "including costs and attorneys' fees , and , in appropriate circumstances , may recover punitive damages. thus , if a creditor or other entity subject to the automatic stay wishes to take action against the debtor or his estate , it must usually ask the bankruptcy court to "grant relief from the stay , . such as by terminating , annulling , modifying , or conditioning the stay" to allow the creditor to take the requested action . the court may grant relief from the automatic stay "for cause," as may exist when "the hardship to the movant" resulting from the enforcement of the automatic stay would outweigh "the hardship to the debtor" if the automatic stay were lifted , or when the debtor has filed bankruptcy in bad faith solely to prevent an impending foreclosure . alternatively , the court may also grant relief "with respect to a stay of an act against property" if "the debtor does not have an equity in such property" and "such property is not necessary to an effective reorganization" of the debtor . as a result , a creditor may , for example , be able to successfully obtain relief from the automatic stay when the debtor has failed to make timely mortgage payments . the likelihood that a bankruptcy court will grant a party relief from the automatic stay varies depending on the context . a debtor may declare bankruptcy by filing a document known as a bankruptcy "petition" with the clerk of the bankruptcy court . in addition to the petition , most debtors must also file a schedule of the debtor's assets and liabilities ; a schedule of the debtor's current income and expenditures ; a statement of the debtor's financial affairs ; and other required documents .