panic. a bankruptcy proceeding , bernanke explained , could seriously damage the money market funds that lent to bear stearns and other corporations , and "lock up the cash of many other creditors , potentially for years. likewise , according to bernanke , unwinding bear stearns's derivatives portfolio would have "prove[n] chaotic" because of its size and complexity . moreover , a decision by jp morgan , the "clearing bank" for bear stearns's repurchase agreements ( repos ) , to liquidate collateral on behalf of bear stearns's creditors could drive securities prices down even further , "leading to a new wave of losses and write - downs" and possible "runs" on other investment banks . accordingly , on march 14 , the federal reserve bank of new york ( new york fed ) extended a bridge loan of $12.9 billion to bear stearns as it worked to orchestrate a deal to save the investment bank . on march 17 , the federal reserve shepherded an acquisition of bear stearns by jp morgan . in order to facilitate the acquisition , the federal reserve again exercised its section 13 ( 3 ) authority , creating an entity called maiden lane llc and lending it roughly $29 billion to purchase certain mortgage assets from bear stearns . although the bear stearns rescue temporarily calmed markets , similar troubles surfaced later in 2008 at lehman brothers ( lehman ) , the nation's fourth largest investment bank at the time . over the weekend of september 12 , the new york fed attempted to coordinate a private - sector solution that would avert a lehman bankruptcy . during these negotiations , regulators took the position that no government money would be committed to rescuing lehman , unlike the case of bear stearns six months earlier . the government's attempts to broker an acquisition of lehman ultimately failed . bank of america , one of the potential acquirers , purchased the also - troubled investment bank merrill lynch instead . british regulators of barclays , another potential purchaser , refused to approve a proposed deal without a shareholder vote . unable to secure government support or find a private buyer , lehman declared bankruptcy on september 15 , 2008 . lehman's bankruptcy reverberated throughout financial markets . on september 15 , the dow jones industrial average dropped more than 500 points , its worst single - day decline in seven years . shares of goldman sachs and morgan stanley , two of the largest remaining investment banks , lost an eighth of their value . lehman's bankruptcy also precipitated a "run" on money market funds . the reserve primary fund , a large fund that had invested in lehman's commercial paper , "broke the buck," meaning that its asset value per share fell below $1 . because money market investors had come to expect that fund shares would always be worth $1 , the troubles at the reserve primary fund precipitated a $300 billion "run" on other funds , threatening a key source of short - term financing for large and medium - sized companies . also in september 2008 , american international group ( aig ) — the nation's largest insurance company at the time — came under heavy financial pressure .