the united states code ( u.s. code or u.s.c. ) is the official government codification of all general and permanent laws of the united states . the u.s. code has its roots in an 1866 law that initiated a project to "revise , simplify , arrange , and consolidate all statutes of the united states , general and permanent in their nature...." this endeavor was not fully realized until 1874 , when the revised statutes of 1874 became the first official codification of u.s. laws . this system began in 1957 with the 85 th congress . laws enacted prior to 1957 are cited by the date of enactment and the chapter number assigned to them in the statutes at large , discussed further below . when researchers want to obtain a copy of a newly enacted law , they will most likely be looking for the "slip law. a slip law is the first official publication of a public or private law , prepared by the office of the federal register ( ofr ) , and published by the government publishing office ( gpo ) . every two years at the end of a congressional session , slip laws ( both public and private laws ) are accumulated and published chronologically in a series of volumes entitled the united states statutes at large ( statutes at large ) . the statutes at large also contain concurrent resolutions , reorganization plans , proposed and ratified amendments to the constitution , and proclamations by the president . until 1948 , treaties and international agreements approved by the senate were also published in the statutes at large . laws are cited by the statutes at large volume and page number ( eg , 125 stat . 753 refers to page 753 of volume 125 of the statutes at large ) . the printed edition of the statutes at large is "legal evidence of the laws...in all the courts of the united states" and thus researchers may likely refer to this publication when citing a law before a court . a second edition making corrections and updates followed in 1878 . however , despite numerous efforts to supplement and revise inaccuracies in the revised statutes , the publication contained errors . the revised statutes were also not updated regularly , making it difficult to know if a particular law had been amended . in 1919 , work on a new codification project began , but it was not until 1926 that what is today known as the united states code came to exist . the u.s. code has been published by the gpo every six years since its initial publication in 1926 . the current edition of the u.s. code was printed in 2012 and is updated annually with cumulative print supplements . in the u.s. c ode , statutes are grouped by subject matter into 54 titles and five appendices . each title is organized into chapters and then sections , which is how a particular provision is cited ( eg , 27 u.s.c . ยง124 refers to section 124 of title 27 ) .