the cpsa has been amended a number of times . as is discussed below , congress made a number of notable changes to the commission's rulemaking process via legislation enacted in 1981 . the last major legislative amendment to the cpsa occurred in 2008 , with the enactment of the consumer product safety improvement act of 2008 ( cpsia ) . one of the cpsc commissioners is selected by the president , subject to the advice and consent of the senate , to be the commission's chairman . the chairman is empowered with the executive and administrative responsibilities of the cpsc , which includes hiring personnel , expending appropriations , and delegating duties among the other commissioners and cpsc staff . the commission has six main offices: communications ; legislative affairs ; inspector general ; executive director ; equal employment opportunity and minority enterprise ; and general counsel . it also has a number of sub - offices , including offices of hazard identification and reduction , import surveillance , international programs , and compliance and field operations . in fy2017 , the commission employed approximately 560 employees and received $126 million in appropriations . as noted above , the commission's jurisdiction under the cpsa is largely governed by the definition of "consumer product. the term is multifaceted and broad in scope , although a number of products that generally are regulated by other federal agencies are explicitly carved out of the definition . a "consumer product" is defined , in relevant part , as 1 . [a]ny article , or component part thereof , 2. produced or distributed a. for sale to a consumer for use in or around a permanent or temporary household or residence , a school , in recreation , or otherwise , or b. for the personal use , consumption or enjoyment of a consumer in or around a permanent or temporary household or residence , a school , in recreation , or otherwise . the cpsa further provides that , to meet the definition , a product must be "customarily produced or distributed for sale to , or use or consumption by , or enjoyment of , a consumer. courts have stated that the definition of "consumer product" should be "liberally construed in accordance with the stated purposes of [the cpsa] , i.e. , the protection of consumers from injury due to unsafe products. the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia ( d.c . circuit ) interpreted the phrase "any article or component thereof" of the consumer product definition to mean either "a distinct article of commerce" or "a component part of such a distinct article. the language "for sale to the consumer" applies to products that are purchased directly by a consumer , while the phrase "for the personal use , consumption or enjoyment of a consumer" encompasses products that a consumer obtains through other means , such as "through lease , promotional gift , or purchase by an institution for consumer use.