they are discussed in the following sections . given the relatively recent promulgation of nerc's new physical security standards , bulk power physical security has not been a major legislative focus in the 115 th congress . nonetheless , several bills include provisions intended to enhance bulk power physical security — primarily by establishing new doe grid security programs rather than by imposing new requirements on ferc or on bulk power asset owners directly . the relevant provisions of these bills , and a related resolution , are summarized below . the enhancing grid security t hrough public - private partnerships act ( h.r . 5240 ) would require doe to establish a program to facilitate public - private partnerships for electric utility physical security and cybersecurity , among other provisions . program activities would support voluntary implementation of maturity models , self - assessment , and security auditing ; sharing of best practices and data collection in the electric sector ; and training and technical assistance to utilities ( §2 ( a ) ) . the energy emergency leadership act ( h.r . 5174 ) would amend the department of energy organization act to include "energy emergency and energy security" to the functions assigned to assistant secretaries . these functions would include responsibilities with respect to emerging threats , supply , and emergency planning , among others . they would also include "provision of technical assistance , support , and response capabilities with respect to energy security threats , risks , and incidents" ( §2 ) . the energy and natural resources act of 2017 ( s. 1460 ) would require doe to develop an advanced energy security program to secure energy networks , including electric transmission and delivery . eligible activities would include developing "capabilities to identify vulnerabilities and critical components that pose major risks to grid security if destroyed or impaired," modeling national level impacts from human - made events , developing a physical security maturity model , conducting grid security exercises , conducting research on critical asset hardening , and other related measures ( §2002 ( e ) ) . the leading infrastructure for tomorrow 's america act ( h.r . 2479 ) would establish a grant program administered by doe "to enhance energy security through measures for electricity delivery infrastructure hardening and enhanced resilience and reliability" ( §31101 ( a ) ) . the advancing grid storage act of 2017 ( s. 1851 ) would establish a competitive grant program for pilot energy storage systems administered by doe with one objective being to "improve the security of critical infrastructure and emergency response systems" in the electric grid ( §5 ( a ) ( 4 ) ( a ) ) . the grid cybersecurity research and development act ( h.r . 4120 ) would require doe , together with bulk power asset owners , and in collaboration with the national laboratories , to "utilize a range of methods , including voluntary vulnerability testing and red team - blue team exercises , to identify vulnerabilities in physical and cyber systems" ( §6 ( a ) ) .