for example , h.r . 115-31 , which prohibited the use of funds to regulate tackle based on lead content in fy2017 , the issue of regulating lead tackle has been raised in several other bills . for example , h.r . 3354 ( the house version of the fy2018 interior and environment appropriations bill ) would extend the prohibition on using federal funds to regulate tackle , as has been mandated in recent years . similarly , s. 1460 would prohibit the environmental protection agency from regulating tackle based on lead content until 2028 , and h.r . 3668 would prohibit any doi or usda bureaus or agencies from regulating ammunition or tackle based on lead content . the following table presents issues addressed within selected hunting and fishing legislation introduced in the 115 th congress . these four bills were selected from the many that have been introduced because they each address multiple sportsperson - related issues . table a - 1 includes selected sportsperson and general federal land issues included within these bills and , as such , includes certain issues that are outside the scope of this report . postal service ) . many federal laws are relevant to hunting and fishing on federal lands and waters . furthermore , federal land management agencies manage lands and waters they administer pursuant to federal laws , even when they may conflict with state law . federal laws can be specific to a particular land management agency , such as the agency - specific statutes cited above ; to a particular species ; or to a particular parcel of federal land , such as a wildlife refuge . these laws outline the purpose and mission of specific agencies and determine whether lands and waters managed by these agencies are open unless closed or closed unless open . ( see " hunting and fishing on federal lands " for more information on agency - specific laws. ) in contrast , other laws pertain to hunting and fishing at the national scale or are related to hunting - or fishing - related programs or taxation . some also argue that nawca supports hunting and fishing activities by supporting projects to improve bird populations and wetland habitat . some have also argued that language to limit acquisition authority under nawca ( such as that proposed in h.r . 3668 ) is contrary to its purpose . several bills — h.r . 3668 ( title ii ) , h.r . 4489 ( title xi ) , s. 593 , s. 733 ( §401 ) , and s. 1460 ( §8401 ) — would amend the pittman - robertson wildlife restoration act to allow more funding allocated to the states to be used for target ranges . 2591 and s. 1613 would amend pittman - robertson to allow for the provision of financial and technical assistance to the states for the promotion of hunting and recreational shooting . supporters of these bills note that they would allow pittman - robertson funds to be used in a way that is more in line with states' needs . others may view them as diverting money from existing priority wildlife restoration activities . regulation of ammunition and tackle based on lead content is a contentious issue .