at least some p rograms were very competitive . not all programs in the study described the number of applicants relative to the number of apprentices , but the programs that did were selective , with sponsors selecting approximately 10% to 15% of applicants for an apprenticeship . in addition to the activities at the department of labor's office of apprenticeship , there are other federal funding streams that can directly support apprenticeship or individual apprentices . these funding streams most frequently support other means of human capital development , but they can also support apprenticeship in some circumstances . this section highlights federal funding streams in which the administering departments have issued guidance on how to utilize funds for apprenticeship . it is likely that there are other federal funding streams that could support apprenticeship in certain circumstances . workforce funding through the workforce innovation and opportunity act the workforce innovation and opportunity act ( wioa ) authorizes formula grants to state workforce agencies to support job training and career services . wioa funding is administered at the state and local levels by workforce development boards ( wdbs ) , which are partnerships of local employers , training providers , and other workforce stakeholders . state and local wdbs have autonomy to support workforce development through a variety of activities . statute and guidance have specified a number of ways in which wdbs can use wioa funds to support apprenticeship . for example , the on - the - job training provisions of wioa allow wdbs to reimburse apprenticeship sponsors for a portion of wages paid to apprentices . the training provisions of wioa allow funds to be used for expenses related to an apprenticeship program's related instruction . in addition to potentially providing direct financial support for apprenticeship programs , wioa contains several administrative provisions that institutionally integrate local registered apprenticeship programs into state workforce systems . wioa specifies that there must be a representative from a registered apprenticeship program on each state and local wdb . these boards are responsible for recognizing local workforce programs that meet local needs and approving those programs for wioa funding . registered apprenticeship programs are automatically eligible for wioa funding ; they do not need to be approved by a wdb . gi bill and veterans education benefits individuals eligible for a gi bill , including former members of the armed forces , can typically use their benefits while pursuing an approved apprenticeship . for example , veterans who use the post - 9 / 11 gi bill ( the most common education benefit for recent veterans ) while pursuing a registered apprenticeship program qualify for a housing allowance while participating in the apprenticeship . the amount of the housing allowance varies by geographic location and other factors . post - 9 / 11 gi bill participants in a registered apprenticeship program receive up to 100% of the housing allowance for the first six months of the program . the allowance then declines 20 percentage points every six months until reaching 20% . the declines in the housing allowance are intended to align approximately with scheduled wage increases in the apprenticeship program .