appendix a . estimated title i - a grants table a - 1 shows the estimated fy2016 title i - a grants to states and state grants per child included in the determination of title i - a grants ( formula children ) under four funding scenarios: ( 1 ) current law , ( 2 ) assuming no state minimum grant provisions are applied , ( 3 ) assuming no lea hold harmless provisions are applied , and ( 4 ) assuming no state minimum grant or lea hold harmless provisions are applied . the formula child population used to determine title i - a grants for the 50 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico consists of children ages 5 to 17 ( 1 ) living in poor families , ( 2 ) in institutions for neglected or delinquent children or in foster homes , and ( 3 ) in families receiving temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) payments above the poverty income level for a family of four . children in poor families account for about 98% of the total formula child count . for the purposes of this analysis , all formula children in the state were included regardless of whether they were in an lea that received a title i - a grant or not ( some leas that have formula children do not receive title i - a grants ) . table a - 2 and table a - 3 show the 10 leas estimated to see the largest losses and gains , respectively , assuming no hold harmless provisions are applied . table a - 4 and table a - 5 show the 10 leas estimated to see the largest losses and gains , respectively , assuming no minimum grant provisions are applied . table a - 6 shows the estimated fy2016 title i - a grants to states assuming the expenditure factor was calculated ( 1 ) as 50% of state average per pupil expenditures ( appe ) ; ( 2 ) as 50% of the larger of state or national appe ; and ( 3 ) as 40% of state appe , subject to a minimum and maximum . these expenditure factors correspond to ( 1 ) the expenditure factor that was originally included in the title i - a formulas , ( 2 ) the expenditure factor used to determine fy1968 through fy1974 title i - a grants , and ( 3 ) the expenditure factor under current law . table a - 7 shows the estimated fy2016 title i - a grants to states and state grants per formula child under current law , assuming all title i - a funds are allocated only via the basic grant formula ( as was generally the case prior to fy1989 ) , and assuming all title i - a funds are allocated only via the basic grant and concentration grant formulas ( as was the case between fy1989 and fy2002 ) . fy2016 title i - a grants under current law were calculated by ed . all other estimates were calculated by crs .