support . coordination and collaboration between law enforcement and the community to reduce drug use and its consequences and prevent drug related crime . treatment . since 2006 , there has been a prohibition on the use of hidta funds to establish or expand drug treatment programs . however , the washington / baltimore hidta has continued its prior funding support to drug courts in its region . management and coordination . notably , there are likely differences in what may be captured in these local - level data . nonetheless , in conducting oversight of the hidta program , policymakers may explore changes in drug trafficking at the county level before the county's inclusion in the program as well as after it becomes eligible for hidta support for law enforcement initiatives in its area . as outlined , there are four principal criteria against which counties are evaluated when they are considered for hidta inclusion . in conducting oversight , policymakers may reevaluate these criteria to ensure that the counties most at - risk for drug trafficking activities are included in a hidta . to evaluate whether these criteria are reliably identifying at - risk counties , policymakers may question how each criterion is measured . ensuring that the evaluation standards are used consistently for each county will help ensure that the most critical areas are designated in an impartial manner . for example , the first criterion against which counties are evaluated is "the extent to which the area is a significant center of illegal drug production , manufacturing , importation , or distribution. one question that may arise when evaluating this criterion is what constitutes a "‛significant' center" of illegal drug activity . petitions to designate a county as part of a hidta are evaluated independently , not in relation to other petitions or to the conditions in counties already designated hidta counties . further , there do not appear to be standardized numerical metrics ( for levels of drug production or quantities of drugs distributed , for instance ) against which counties are evaluated in determining whether they should be included in a hidta . as such , what might be considered a significant drug threat in one county might not be considered a significant threat in another county . policymakers may examine what metrics ondcp uses to determine when the level of drug trafficking in an area reaches a level of significance . a related question policymakers may ask is whether ondcp has altered or needs to alter the metrics or criteria for evaluating whether a county should be designated as part of a hidta as trends in drug production , manufacturing , importation , and distribution change . annually , the hidta executive boards examine — against the four criteria for hidta designation — the counties included in their regions . if a board determines that a county "no longer meets the statutory requirements for hidta designation," it petitions ondcp to remove the county's hidta designation . for example , if a board deems that a county within its hidta region is no longer a significant center of drug trafficking , it can petition for the county's removal from the hidta .