do not occur. given that each debtor's personal and financial circumstances may be unique , some have expressed concern that cabining the term "undue hardship" to "an 'inflexible dictionary definition' would defeat the discretionary interpretation of the facts in each case. to that end , at least one member of the congress that enacted section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) in 1978 appeared to agree that bankruptcy judges should be granted sufficient freedom "to determine in each case what is truly hardship , rather than define it" in a potentially restrictive manner . legislation may not be the only means of altering the meaning of "undue hardship" under section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) . on february 21 , 2018 , the u.s. department of education ( ed ) requested public comment on factors to be considered in evaluating undue hardship claims asserted by student loan borrowers in . bankruptcy cases , the weight to be given to such factors , whether the existence of two tests for evaluation of undue hardship claims [ ( namely , the brunner test and the totality - of - the - circumstances test ) ] results in inequities among borrowers seeking undue hardship discharge . ed will then consider "how all of these , and potentially additional , considerations should weigh into whether an undue hardship claim should be conceded by the loan holder. congress could also consider making the undue hardship standard easier for debtors to satisfy . on one hand , some commentators maintain that debtors who truly need an undue hardship discharge are generally able to receive one under the existing legal standards . others , by contrast , believe it is currently too difficult for debtors experiencing severe financial stress to discharge their student loans in bankruptcy , and that congress should therefore amend section 523 ( a ) ( 8 ) to make the standard for discharging a student loan less demanding . if congress decides to make the undue hardship standard more lenient , it could do so in several ways . for instance , some have advocated eliminating the second prong of the brunner test , so that a debtor seeking an undue hardship discharge would not need to prove that his inability to repay his loans will likely persist into the future . alternatively , congress could eliminate the requirement imposed by most courts that the debtor demonstrate a "certainty of hopelessness" and "exceptional circumstances" in order to discharge a student loan . congress may also consider whether the brunner test — which first originated in 1987 — is now outdated or obsolete in light of legislative , economic , and regulatory developments that have occurred in the past thirty years .