114-145 had added to the csa . establishing a n opioid prescription limit . current federal law does not restrict the particular quantity of opioids that may be prescribed by a practitioner . the opioid addiction prevention act of 2017 ( s. 892 ) would , among other things , amend the csa to prohibit the dea administrator from registering , or renewing the registration of , a practitioner who is licensed under state law to prescribe controlled substances in schedule ii , iii , or iv , unless the practitioner certifies to the dea that he will not prescribe any schedule ii , iii , or iv opioid for the initial treatment of "acute pain" ( except opioids approved by the fda for treating drug addiction ) in an amount greater than a seven - day supply of the drug ( with no refills allowed ) , or exceeding an opioid prescription limit established under state law , whichever is lesser . the bill would define "acute pain" to mean "pain with abrupt onset and caused by an injury or other process that is not ongoing" and excludes chronic pain , pain associated with cancer , hospice or other end - of - life care , or pain being treated as part of palliative care . the cara 2.0 act of 2018 ( s. 2456 ) would also impose a supply limitation on opioid prescriptions , requiring practitioners to certify , as a precondition for dea registration or renewal of registration , that they will not prescribe any opioid ( other than an addiction - treatment opioid ) for the initial treatment of acute pain in an amount exceeding a three - day supply . medical education and prescriber education initiatives . 358 the safer prescribing of controlled substances act ( s. 1554 ) would , among other things , amend the csa to require physicians , dentists , and scientific investigators who wish to dispense or conduct research with controlled substances to complete training that provides them with information concerning best practices for pain management ( including alternatives to prescribing controlled substances ) , responsible prescribing of opioids , methods for diagnosing and treating substance use disorders , and tools to manage diversion of controlled substances such as prescription drug monitoring programs and the use of drugs to treat opioid overdoses . the bill would also make such required training a precondition to the dea's granting or renewing the registration of these types of practitioners . the opioid preventing abuse through continuing education ( pace ) act of 2017 ( h.r . 2063 ) would impose similar practitioner education requirements as a condition for registration to prescribe or dispense opioids , though the specifics of the training differ from s. 1554 . increasing penalties for fentanyl trafficking . several bills , including the stop trafficking in fentanyl act of 2017 ( h.r . 1354 ) , the comprehensive fentanyl control act ( h.r . 1781 ) , the stop trafficking in fentanyl act of 2018 ( s. 2481 ) , and the ending the fentanyl crisis act of 2018 ( h.r .