both treatments have led to some criticism . by completely excluding cost of goods sold , it is possible to effectively avoid including royalties in the base by embedding them in inventory . that is , when a u.s. firm is paying a foreign related firm from tangible property to sell and also paying a royalty for distribution rights or rights to use a logo , the royalty could be eliminated and the price of the goods increased . thus , royalties will be taxed only if separated , or for firms that do not keep inventory . other planning possibilities may be associated with the exclusion of costs of goods sold , including supply chain restructuring . an issue of extensive debate is whether the cost component of services with a markup can be excluded . the statute states that services using the service cost method with no mark - up can be excluded as a base erosion payment . some see that and other relevant information from the legislative history as indicating that any service with a markup , whether eligible for the cost method or not , would be included in beat in its entirety . others argue that only the markup would be included . issues have been raised about whether individual payments will be aggregated , an issue important to financial institutions ( i.e. one uncertainty is whether gilti will be included in the earnings base , which includes items attributable to the taxpayer's business , since gilti is not associated with the domestic business . a major option that may be considered is to restore the worldwide interest allocation measure , probably in the form of a allocation based on income . a number of comments have been made concerning the deemed repatriation , which imposes a tax of 15.5% on cash equivalents held abroad and 8% on other unrepatriated earnings . one concern is that the proposed definition of cash equivalent is overly broad . under treasury notice 2018-07 , the irs stated that it intends to treat as cash a number of financial instruments — such as options contracts , futures contracts , and non - bona fide hedging transactions — held overseas and tax them at 15.5% . commentators have questioned whether this treatment is overly harsh , as some of these financial instruments may not be liquid or may serve a nonspeculative business purpose . a second concern is that the downward attribution rules may unintentionally result in the inclusion of income in the deemed repatriation tax . a reading of the 2017 tax revision legislative language along with the changes in the downward attribution could increase the number of taxpayers being defined as a u.s. shareholder of a cfc ( and subject to the deemed repatriation tax ) above the level intended by congress , according to the american institute of certified public accountants ( aicpa ) . another concern that has been raised is the dates used to calculate the base for the deemed repatriation tax .