appendix a . related issues in the act 9-1-1 improvements the act authorized $115 million for a grant program to upgrade public safety answering points ( psaps ) to ng911 capabilities . the ng911 grant program is to provide financial assistance to psaps to help fund the establishment of ip - based backbone networks , the application layer software infrastructure needed to interconnect a multitude of response organizations , trainers , call - takers and first responders . ntia and nhtsa finalized a management plan to jointly administer the grant and submitted that plan to congress in january 2017 . in september 2017 , the ntia and nhtsa released draft program requirements in the federal register , seeking comment on the grant . this $115 million grant is to enable some psaps to upgrade their networks , but not all psaps are to receive funding . congress can monitor the grant terms and formulas , to ensure that funding is used wisely , and that underserved psaps are encouraged to apply . congress may seek to ensure that firstnet and the 911 community engage early , before the deployment of the band 14 network , to ensure that 911 needs are considered in the earliest stages of network planning and deployment . congress can encourage firstnet / at&t to work in tandem with the 911 community to ensure that upgrades planned for both systems are coordinated , and to ensure that psaps can be integrated into the firstnet network , as encouraged in the act . spectrum relocation: t - band in the same act that created firstnet , congress directed the fcc to reallocate the spectrum in the 470-512 mhz band ( also known as the t - band spectrum ) from public safety to commercial use . this spectrum is currently used by 925 public safety licensees in eleven metropolitan areas , for land mobile radio ( voice ) communications . the act requires that , within nine years of enactment ( i.e. , by february 22 , 2021 ) , the fcc must reallocate the t - band public safety spectrum and begin the auction process . two years after the bidding is complete ( ~2023 ) , relocation of t - band public safety entities is required to be completed . ntia is required to use the proceeds from the bidding process to make grants to cover relocation costs of those public safety entities from the t - band spectrum . public safety advocates believe that congress saw two options for t - band operators: relocate those agencies to other frequencies in the area ; or , migrate those agencies to the firstnet network , once it is operational . public safety agencies operating on the t - band argue that there are no frequencies available in the area , which is why they were operating on the t - band originally . in 2013 , npstc conducted a study of spectrum and options available to t - band licensees . the study confirmed probable shortages in several regions , and significant shortages in the five largest urban areas .