the current 2014 farm bill ( p.l . 113-79 ) contains 12 titles that address commodity program payments , farm credit , trade , agricultural conservation , research , rural development , energy , and foreign and domestic food programs , among others . it is typically reauthorized about every five years . the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) implements the majority of the farm bill programs . this report focuses on commodity program payments authorized by title i of the 2014 farm bill . the authority for usda to operate farm commodity support programs comes from three permanent laws , as amended: the agricultural adjustment act of 1938 ( p.l . following the introduction of new commodity support programs in the 2014 farm bill , a number of issues have emerged around these programs that could factor into congressional consideration of the next farm bill . moreover , congress may consider how these programs perform during a period of lower crop prices and reduced farm income . other issues around commodity support programs that have come up in the past — such as payment limits and income eligibility limits — may continue to be of interest for some members and to various stakeholders . several of these issues are summarized below , along with selected legislative proposals that address commodity support programs . farm commodity programs have evolved over time via successive farm bills that update and supersede prior policies . however , a set of non - expiring provisions remain in statute and are known as "permanent law. these provisions were enacted primarily in the agriculture adjustment act of 1938 and the agricultural act of 1949 , as amended by subsequent farm bills . many of the programs authorized by the 2014 farm bill will expire in 2018 unless congress provides for an extension or reauthorizes them . without congressional action , farm commodity program payments would revert to permanently authorized legislation from the 1930s and 1940s . the commodity support provisions of the 1938 and 1949 permanent laws are commonly viewed as being radically different from current policy — and inconsistent with today's farming practices , marketing system , and international trade agreements — while also being potentially costly to the federal government . having these permanent laws as the legislative default has in the past tended to bring focus to efforts to reauthorize the farm bill . the upcoming farm bill discussions may address arc , plc , and mal payments . 75-430 ) , the agricultural act of 1949 ( p.l . 81-439 ) , and the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) charter act of 1948 ( p.l . congress typically amends these laws through multi - year omnibus farm bills to address current market conditions , budget constraints , and related issues and concerns . the most recent omnibus farm bill is the agricultural act of 2014 , referred to as the "2014 farm bill," which president barack obama signed into law on february 7 , 2014 . many current farm bill provisions expire on september 30 , 2018 . when the 2014 farm bill expires , farm programs would revert to the permanent laws mentioned above for the majority of crops eligible for commodity support programs — "program" or "covered" crops .