it depends . from 1990 to 2017 , global trade in goods and services , as measured by exports , grew more than five times , from about $4 trillion a year to $23 trillion . during the same period , gross capital flows , as measured in the balance of payments accounts ( direct , portfolio , and other official investments ) , expanded from around $1 trillion a year to about $4 trillion — but with a pre - crisis peak of more than $12 trillion in 2007 , which showed significant growth since the 1990s . during this time period , there was also an explosion in growth in other types of capital flows , known as foreign exchange and over - the - counter derivatives markets . these markets facilitate trade in foreign exchange and other types of assets . while the capital flows associated with these markets do not directly relate to transactions in the balance of payments , they do affect the international exchange value of the dollar , which in turn affects prices of goods and services and the cost of securities . the latest survey of the world's leading central banks indicated that the total daily trading of foreign currencies was more than $5.1 trillion in 2016 . broadly , firms invest abroad to increase their profits . however , a range of factors can influence a firm's decision to invest . multinational corporations ( mncs ) generally invest abroad because they possess some special process or product knowledge or special managerial abilities , which give them an advantage over foreign firms . major determinants of fdi include the presence of competitive advantages , resources such as low - cost labor in a host country , and greater commercial benefits through an intra - firm relationship as opposed to an arm's - length relationship between the investor and host country . mncs are motivated by more than a single factor and likely invest abroad not only to gain access to low - cost resources , but to improve efficiency or market share . fdi has supported the development of global value chains by multinational corporations ( mncs ) , which source production globally . in addition , many firms find it advantageous to operate close to their customers in foreign countries , where tastes and preferences may differ from the home market . foreign markets also enable mncs to access various resources , such as a well - educated work force , which might contribute to a firm's r&d activities . last , some fdi transactions involve mergers and acquisitions , which can help make a firm become more globally competitive . according to the united nations conference on trade and development ( unctad ) , the total stock of global outward fdi in 2017 was $31 trillion . the united states remains the largest source of fdi worldwide , followed by hong kong , germany , the netherlands , the united kingdom , and japan , all with individual outward investment positions about one - fourth or less than that of the united states . the united states is also the largest recipient of fdi , followed by hong kong , china , the united kingdom , and singapore .