these plans had 10.8 million participants . plans report two values of liabilities: the actuarial value and the rpa '94 liability . the main difference is the value of the discount rate that is used to value plan liabilities . the actuarial valuation of liabilities typically discounts them using the expected return on assets . the guarantee is not adjusted for changes in the cost of living . using 2013 data , pbgc estimated that 79% of participants in multiemployer plans that were receiving financial assistance receive their full benefit ( eg , their benefits were below the pbgc maximum guarantee ) . among participants in plans that were terminated and likely to need financial assistance in the future , 49% of participants have a benefit below the pbgc maximum guarantee , and 51% have a benefit larger than the pbgc maximum guarantee . among ongoing plans ( neither receiving pbgc financial assistance nor terminated and expected to receive financial assistance ) , the average benefit is almost twice as large as the average benefit in terminated plans . this suggests that a larger percentage of participants in plans that receive pbgc financial assistance in the future are likely to see benefit reductions as a result of the pbgc maximum guarantee level . pbgc estimates that in the future it will not have sufficient resources from which to provide financial assistance for insolvent plans to pay benefits at the pbgc guarantee level . most participants would receive less than $2,000 per year because pbgc would be able to provide annual financial assistance equal only to its annual premium revenue , which was $291 million in fy2017 . there is no obligation on the part of the federal government to provide financial assistance to pbgc , although some policymakers have stated that some form of federal assistance to pbgc might be necessary to ensure that participants' benefits are not reduced to a fraction of their promised benefits . crs analyzed public - use form 5500 data from the department of labor ( dol ) for the 2015 plan year , the most recent year for which complete data are available . most private - sector pension plans are required to annually report to the internal revenue service ( irs ) , dol , and pbgc information about the plan , such as the number of participants , financial information , and the companies that provide services to the plan . in addition to form 5500 , pension plans are generally required to file additional information in specific schedules . for example , most multiemployer db plans are required to file schedule mb , which contains information specific to multiemployer db plans , such as the zone status of the plan ( described below ) . each pension plan's form 5500 and required schedules are available by search on dol's website . the public - use form 5500 data included 1,363 plans that indicated they were multiemployer db pension plans for the 2015 plan year . the analyzed data in this report consider only multiemployer db pension plans that filed schedule mb for the 2015 plan year . not all multiemployer db pension plans file schedule mb .