energy policy . what implications , if any , does sino - indian rivalry in the ior have for u.s. energy policy ? for example , what impact might it have on the role that persian gulf oil supplies have in the formulation of u.s. foreign and defense policy ? congressional organization and staffing . if not , when does the trump administration anticipate completing its development of such a strategy ? should congress require the trump administration to submit a report or reports to congress on the development and implementation of its strategy for responding to sino - indian rivalry in the ior ? economic architec ture . is the evolving strategy towards the indo - pacific overly reliant on military tools following the united states' withdrawal from the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) ? should the trump administration seek to further develop or engage with an economic architecture for the indo - pacific that could promote peace and stability and enhance u.s. interests through enhanced economic interdependencies between regional states including china ? state department staffing . u.s. foreign assistance . what implications does sino - indian rivalry in the ior have for the scale or allocation of u.s. foreign assistance funding to the region ? is the ior receiving too large a share , too little a share , or about the right share of total u.s. foreign assistance funding ? is the allocation of u.s. foreign assistance funding to individual countries in the region appropriate , or should it be changed in some way ? trade policy . what implications , if any , does sino - indian rivalry in the ior have for u.s. trade policy ? there are other conceptual frameworks , such as the security dilemma , which could also be applied . geopolitics geopolitical competition on the indian subcontinent was captured by the concept of the "great game," popularly articulated by rudyard kipling in his novel kim . this great game was a competition for influence between the british east india company in colonial india and czarist russia . some analysts view today's conditions as an evolving new great game in the indo - pacific , focused primarily on trade , investment and infrastructure development , between china , on the one hand , and india , the united states , japan , and australia on the other . while the competition is primarily economic at present , this new great game is increasingly developing strategic and military aspects . current american geopolitical thinking is to a large extent built on a tradition formed through a debate between united states navy captain alfred thayer mahan , who wrote the seminal 1890 work the influence of sea power on history , which argued that control of the seas and littorals determines strategic decisions on land , and britain's halford j. mackinder who , in his 1904 work the geographical pivot of history , argued instead that the eurasian heartland was central to strategic control . in mahan's view , the control of sea lanes of communication and maritime choke points with the selective projection of power inland was key to a winning strategy . mackinder's focus lay in the eurasian interior rather than with maritime theaters of operation .