some of these forms of relief and adjustment are discussed below . in general , lprs may naturalize as u.s. citizens after residing continuously in the united states for five years and satisfying other qualifications . but to be eligible to naturalize , an lpr ( among other things ) must have been a person of good moral character for at least five years preceding his application for naturalization . as discussed above , the ina provides a nonexhaustive list of criminal activity that — if committed during the relevant period — would preclude a finding of good moral character and thus bar an lpr from naturalizing . however , some types of criminal activity permanently bar an alien from showing good moral character if they were committed at any time , including a conviction for an aggravated felony . although immigration proceedings are civil matters , criminal proceedings are often linked to immigration proceedings because of the many immigration consequences of criminal activity . this section examines select legal issues related to criminal proceedings as they relate to immigration law , including the constitutional obligations of criminal attorneys representing alien defendants , what constitutes a "conviction" under the ina , and how adjudicatory bodies determine when a criminal conviction will trigger immigration consequences . congress has repeatedly amended the ina to expand , curtail , or otherwise modify the immigration consequences of criminal conduct , and legislative proposals to alter the current framework are regularly introduced . for instance , congress may legislate to expand or constrict criminal grounds for inadmissibility and deportability . congress also could add or subtract crimes from those listed as aggravated felonies and clarify what crimes involve moral turpitude . additionally , congress could modify the number of crimes that would render an alien statutorily ineligible for relief from removal or those that preclude a finding of good moral character . further , congress could clarify certain terminology in the ina that some courts have deemed ambiguous , like crime of moral turpitude and crime of violence . in short , given the immigration consequences that may follow from criminal activity , congress may consider various legislative options that would modify the standards employed by the courts and relevant immigration authorities to determine whether an alien may be excluded or deported from the united states due to criminal conduct . ( the attorney general is vested with discretion to review those appeals as well. ) additionally , as was the case before enactment of the homeland security act , attorney general rulings "with respect to all questions of law shall be controlling. federal circuit courts of appeals have exclusive jurisdiction to adjudicate petitions for review of final removal orders issued in proceedings before eoir . however , the ina limits what issues the appellate courts may review . for instance , the ina limits federal courts' jurisdiction over cases involving an alien ordered removed based on certain criminal activity , unless the alien raises a constitutional claim or question of law ( eg , whether particular conduct an alien allegedly committed is of the type of conduct covered by a particular removal ground in the ina ) .