there are instances when the committee is not unanimous in its rating of a nominee . of the four presidents included in the table , president trump's first - year nominees had the second longest average and median number of days from nomination to confirmation ( president obama's nominees had the longest average and median — 137 and 130 days , respectively ) . the average and median number of days from nomination to confirmation for president trump's first - year nominees represent a departure from the upward trend in the length of time first - year nominees waited to be confirmed during the previous three presidencies . specifically , it is the first instance over the past several presidencies in which the average and median wait times from nomination to confirmation of a president's first - year nominees were both shorter than the average and median wait times of his immediate predecessor's first - year nominees . it is solely in a president's discretion as to how much weight to place on a judicial candidate's aba rating . consequently , a "not qualified" aba rating of a judicial candidate in some instances may dissuade a president from nominating an individual , while in other instances the president may nominate regardless of the rating . the evaluations submitted by the aba are similarly advisory when it comes to final senate action on judicial nominations . table 3 reports the average and median number of days that elapsed from nomination to confirmation for all u.s. circuit and district court nominees who were confirmed during a president's first year in office . as shown by the table , the average number of days from nomination to confirmation for u.s. circuit and district court nominees confirmed during president trump's first year in office was 115 days . the median number of days from nomination to confirmation was 109 days . the decline in the average and median wait times for president trump's first - year nominees ( relative to president obama's first - year nominees ) occurred , in part , as a result of the shorter time nominees waited on the executive calendar to be confirmed once reported by the senate judiciary committee . for example , president trump's first - year nominees waited , on average , 34 days from committee report to confirmation ( with a median wait of 19 days ) . in contrast , president obama's first - year nominees waited , on average , 60 days from committee report to confirmation ( with a median wait of 43 days ) . table 4 reports , for nominees confirmed during a president's first year in office , the number of u.s. circuit and district court nominees who waited a specified period of time from nomination to confirmation . for example , of the 12 u.s. circuit court nominees confirmed during president trump's first year in office , 6 were confirmed less than 100 days after being nominated ; 4 were confirmed between 100 and 149 days after being nominated ; 2 were confirmed between 150 and 200 days after being nominated ; and none waited more than 200 days to be confirmed .