the cig program has not been without controversy . fta contends the program "is needed because it allows transit agencies to undertake major capital projects that would otherwise be infeasible for local governments and transit agencies to finance alone. supporters insist that growing demand for cig funds is evidence of its success . critics , however , have contended that cig funding encourages communities to build expensive fixed - guideway infrastructure rather than invest lesser sums in improving bus service . no comprehensive benefit - cost studies of completed cig projects have been conducted to evaluate the cig program as federal policy . research has shown that some rail transit lines built at great cost with federal support have low ridership , but there are significant differences in benefit / cost ratios among systems . according to one study , two of the systems with the largest net benefits include the subway systems in san francisco and new york city , while the rail system in buffalo and those operated by new jersey transit in newark , jersey city , and trenton have some of the largest net costs . if the full promise of autonomous vehicles is realized , the benefits of rail in all but the largest and most dense cities are likely to decline dramatically . in this situation , one policy option would be to eliminate the cig program and redirect the funding through the formula programs , possibly using formulas that have been changed to encourage ridership . another option would be to redirect cig funding from building rail and perhaps even bus rapid transit in relatively small and dispersed urban areas to the large and dense cities where rail transit currently carries very large numbers of riders , such as new york , chicago , and washington , dc . with new funds to refurbish old infrastructure and to add new capacity in congested areas , it might be possible to substantially increase national transit ridership in the short to medium term . preliminary figures show a further decline in 2017 . an alternative approach might tie federal funding to changes in ridership , such as the number of revenue passengers , or to productivity , such as the average number of passengers per bus - mile . such an approach would provide transit agencies an incentive to improve their performance while allowing them to innovate by redesigning their bus networks , introducing technology to speed up boarding , or adjusting service levels . a possible downside is that encouraging transit agencies to focus exclusively on ridership may discourage them from serving isolated areas with transit - dependent populations . although small transit agencies frequently receive federal operating assistance , most transit operators in urbanized areas with populations above 200,000 or with more than 100 buses can use federal funds only for capital expenses or maintenance . greater federal support for transit operations could increase the quantity of transit service offered by local transit agencies , potentially expanding ridership . there are three main issues with federal operating support: its effects on service , productivity , and asset condition .