the fund is administered by the u.s . fish and wildlife service ( fws ) in the department of the interior . in the p - r act , congress provided a permanent appropriation for the fund , to be apportioned and distributed to states and territories ; p - r tax revenues are available for obligation in the fiscal year following their collection . any interest that may accrue on moneys in the fund before they are expended is allocated to the north american wetlands conservation fund rather than being retained in the p - r trust fund . apportionment of the fund ( and fundable activities ) is based on relevant sections of the p - r act: administration ( 16 u.s.c . funds may be used "only for expenses for administration that directly support the implementation of this chapter. enhanced hunter education and safety grants ( 16 u.s.c . funds may be used for the enhancement of hunter education , safety , and development programs as well as the construction or development of firearm and archery ranges . multistate conservation grants ( 16 u.s.c . funds may be used for wildlife restoration projects that will benefit at least 26 states ; a majority of states in an fws region ; or a regional association of state fish and game departments . payments to states , for the following purposes: b asic h unter e ducation ( 16 u.s.c . §669c ( c ) ) . funds may be used for the costs related to hunter safety programs and the public target ranges as outlined in 16 u.s.c . §669g ( b ) . w ildlife r estoration p rograms ( 16 u.s.c . §669c ( b ) ) . funds may be used to carry out wildlife restoration projects and related maintenance of completed projects . in most cases , any projects or activities funded through the p - r act programs are subject to a 75% federal cost - share cap . two major federal statutory frameworks regulate the commerce in and possession of firearms: the 1934 national firearms act ( nfa ) and the gun control act of 1968 ( gca ; codified as amended at 18 u.s.c . chapter 44 , §§921 et seq. ) as part of the internal revenue code , the nfa regulates — largely through taxation — all aspects of the manufacture and distribution of certain firearms that congress deemed especially "dangerous and unusual" or to be the chosen weapons of "gangsters," most notably machine guns , short - barreled shotguns , and silencers . the gca , by comparison , contains the principal federal restrictions on domestic commerce in firearms and ammunition not regulated under the nfa . the atf administers both the gca and the nfa . all atf - collected taxes and fees are deposited into the general fund of the treasury . these tax receipts totaled $68.6 million in fy2016 . the gca requires all persons manufacturing , importing , or selling firearms as a business to be federally licensed . the third set of proposals , including some proposals introduced in response to the shootings at sandy hook elementary school in newtown , ct , in december 2012 , would increase firearm excise taxes .