115-97 and previously . these could include issues related to limits on the footprint of development , other environmental protections , compliance with nepa , fws and blm management roles , judicial review of legal challenges , and treatment of special areas within the coastal plain , among other matters . for more information on these issues , see crs report rl33872 , arctic national wildlife refuge ( anwr ) : an overview . 115-97 addressed some of these issues and not others , possibly owing in part to limitations imposed by the budget reconciliation process on the matters that can be considered germane . §§1601 et seq. to protect refuge resources and uses . the 115 th congress has considered several issues relating to oil and gas activities in the nwrs . issues of interest have included the general compatibility of oil and gas activity with nwrs purposes and oil and gas development in anwr specifically . ( see " recent developments " section for more information. ) 45 was introduced , under the authorities provided by the congressional review act ( cra ) , to disapprove the 2016 final rule pertaining to nonfederal oil and gas activities within the nwrs outside of alaska . although the window for considering h.j.res . 45 under the expedited procedures associated with the cra has elapsed , congress may consider the issues raised in this legislation . for example , congress may be interested in issues pertaining to permitting fees , the role of state regulators , and how to balance or prioritize facilitation of activities with concerns about wildlife and resource protection . separately in the 115 th congress , p.l . 115-97 addressed the long - standing issue of energy development in anwr by establishing an oil and gas program for the coastal plain within the refuge . 49 and s. 49 , introduced prior to the passage of p.l . 115-97 , proposed oil and gas leasing programs for the coastal plain that contained similar but not identical provisions to the enacted law . also introduced in the 115 th congress , h.r . 1889 and s. 820 would designate the coastal plain as wilderness under the wilderness act , which generally would prohibit commercial activities , including energy development . congress may remain interested in key aspects of the anwr debate that have been raised in p.l . congress could choose to address these issues through future oversight or legislation . appendix a. nonfederal oil and gas activities within the national wildlife refuge system appendix b . federal oil and gas wells within the national wildlife refuge syste . the nwrs is a network of lan ds and waters administered by the u.s . fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , an agency within the department of the interior ( doi ) . the nwrs contains 566 national wildlife refuges , 36 wetland management districts composed of waterfowl production areas ( wpas ) , and 3 wpas that lay outside of wetland management districts . issues pertaining to oil and gas wells in the nwrs include private property rights , economic and energy security benefits of oil and gas development , and the potential for adverse effects of oil and gas development on nwrs lands and wildlife .