parole . the ina authorizes dhs to "parole" inadmissible aliens into the united states , on a case - by - case basis , "for urgent humanitarian reasons or significant public benefit. paroled aliens are considered unadmitted for purposes of the ina despite their physical presence within the united states . parole offers little formal protection against removal: dhs typically grants parole for a fixed period but has discretion to terminate the parole whenever it determines that "neither humanitarian reasons nor public benefit warrants the continued presence of the alien in the united states. paroled aliens may obtain work authorization and do not accrue unlawful presence while the parole remains valid . dhs interprets its parole authority to include two types of discretionary grants of parole potentially relevant to aliens present in the united states in violation of the ina: parole in place . although the parole power generally applies to aliens seeking to enter the country , dhs claims the authority to grant parole to aliens who are physically present in the united states following surreptitious entry . dhs calls this exercise of the parole power "parole in place" and , as a matter of policy , appears to reserve it primarily for the immediate relatives of certain members of the u.s. armed forces . parole in place removes significant legal obstacles to an unlawfully present alien's ability to obtain lpr status without leaving the united states , if the alien qualifies for an immigrant visa on an independent basis ( such as a qualifying family relationship with a u.s. citizen ) . advance parole . advance parole , another exercise of the executive parole authority directed toward physically present aliens , allows aliens to depart the united states with parole already approved , so as to facilitate their re - entry . upon being paroled back into the country , such aliens receive the same advantages as recipients of parole in place and other parolees ( eg , eligibility for work authorization and a clearer path to adjustment of status ) . administrative closure . when immigration and customs enforcement ( ice , a component of dhs responsible for interior enforcement ) decides to discontinue temporarily a removal proceeding against a particular alien before the department of justice's executive office of immigration review ( eoir ) — because ice deems the case low - priority , because the alien has obtained or is seeking a form of discretionary relief such as daca , or for some other reason — ice may ask the presiding immigration judge to place the proceeding in a status called "administrative closure. an immigration judge may also place removal proceedings in administrative closure upon the alien's motion and over the government's objection , although this course of events may be less common . the effect of administrative closure is to suspend but not terminate the removal proceeding . as such , administrative closure offers little formal protection from removal: the alien cannot be removed while the proceedings are suspended , but ice can move to re - activate the proceedings at any time and will likely succeed in doing so if the alien is not in the midst of pursuing independent protections from removal outside of immigration court .