it begins with an overview of ecpa and the sca . next , the report discusses the questions raised in the microsoft litigation and the impact of the cloud act on those issues . finally , the report examines the new form of international agreements authorized by the cloud act and the commentary on the benefits and drawbacks of the potential new international data sharing agreements . enacted in 1986 , ecpa is one of the primary federal laws regulating disclosure of electronic communications held by private entities . ecpa is structured on three main titles . title i , commonly referred to as the wiretap act , governs the interception of real - time wire , oral , or electronic communications . title ii added a new chapter to the united states code entitled "stored wire and electronic communications and transactional records access," and generally is referred to as the stored communications act or sca . the sca applies to many forms of electronic communications and associated data , including emails ; text messages ; private messages , wall postings , and other comments made on or via social media sites ; and private youtube videos . title iii of ecpa regulates the use of a pen register , a device that allows users to capture the routing information associated with communications , such as telephone numbers dialed . each title in ecpa contains restrictions on the circumstances in which the relevant data can be used or disclosed . as technology has evolved since ecpa's enactment in 1986 , law enforcement has shifted its primary focus from the interception of live communications pursuant to the wiretap act to seeking the now - common forms of stored communications governed by the sca . but the sca does not apply the same provisions to every communication or data that falls under its ambit . rather , the scope of the sca may be impacted by whether the law is applied to a provider of "electronic communication services" ( ecs ) or "remote computing services" ( rcs ) . although some sca requirements vary depending on the provider , the act has two core components that apply to both forms of provider: ( 1 ) prohibitions on disclosure of certain data and ( 2 ) mandatory disclosure provisions . while the complexities of the sca coupled with major changes in technology have led some to call for broad reforms to the law , one discrete issue — the extraterritorial application of the sca — became the subject of particular interest as a result of a 2016 federal appellate court decision . as noted above , the sca mandates that service providers disclose the content of electronic communications when the government obtains a warrant based on probable cause . in 2013 , federal law enforcement officials sought an sca warrant requiring microsoft to disclose all emails and other information associated with an account with one of its customers . after finding that the united states demonstrated probable cause that the account was being used to further illegal drug trafficking , a united states magistrate judge issued a warrant requiring microsoft to disclose the contents of an email account and all records or information associated with the account "[t]o the extent that the information .