does the risk involved remain acceptable ? u.s. national security interests ; 3 . u.s. foreign policy objectives ; 4. funding and implementation ; and 5. risk of compromise , failure , loss of life , and unintended consequences . by extension , oversight of anticipated clandestine intelligence activities that might also shape the political , economic , or military environment abroad can apply the same framework , and , like oversight of covert action , address the risk of compromise , unintended consequences , and loss of life . statute requires the president update congress with notifications of changes in conditions from those described in the original notification of a covert action . congressional oversight consequently extends to periodically reviewing changes in the operational environment on the ground that may suggest a different outcome , a change in strategy , a shift in u.s. interests , or the development of unintended consequences . along these lines , â§3093 ( d ) ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) of title 50 u. s. code includes the following provision: the president shall ensure that the congressional intelligence committees , or , if applicable , [the gang of eight] , are notified in writing of any significant change in a previously approved covert action , or any significant undertaking pursuant to a previously approved finding , in the same manner as findings are reported pursuant to subsection ( c ) . in determining whether an activity constitutes a significant undertaking for these purposes , the president shall consider whether the activity - involves significant risk of loss of life ; requires an expansion of existing authorities , including authorities relating to research , development , or operations ; results in the expenditure of significant funds or other resources ; requires notification ; gives rise to a significant risk of disclosing intelligence sources or methods ; or presents a reasonably foreseeable risk of serious damage to the diplomatic relations of the united states if such activity were disclosed without authorization . former cia inspector general l. britt snider has suggested that congress , in carrying out its oversight responsibility , might be vulnerable to failure to review the premises and conditions for the covert action that may have changed , perhaps significantly , subsequent to the initial notification . over the succeeding years those efforts have been both beneficial and occasionally burdensome . in protecting against the ic's abuse of its authorities , congress has helped ensure intelligence activities were legal , ethical and consistent with american values . congress's influence in ic organizational reform has resulted in improved performance and accountability . on other occasions , however , congressional oversight has tended toward micromanagement resulting in strains in the relationship with the ic . this report posits a potential framework for congressional oversight of intelligence - related programs and activities using the existing committee structure and notification standards for the most sensitive intelligence activities: covert action and clandestine intelligence collection . the framework may assist congress in assessing the premises justifying each of these activities , their impact on national security , operational viability , funding requirements , and possible long - term or unintended consequences .