age . plans may not charge an older individual more than three times the premium that they charge a 21-year - old individual . each state must use a uniform age rating curve to specify the rates across age bands . for plan years beginning on or after january 1 , 2018 , plans must use one age band for individuals aged 0-14 years , one - year age bands for individuals aged 15-63 years , and one age band for individuals aged 64 years and older . under the rate review program , proposed annual health insurance rate increases that meet or exceed a federal default threshold are reviewed by a state or the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) . the federal default threshold for plan years beginning in 2019 is 15% . states have the option to apply for state - specific thresholds . plans subject to review are required to submit to cms and the relevant state a justification for the proposed rate increase prior to its implementation , and cms and the state must publicly disclose the information . the rate review process does not establish federal authority to deny implementation of a proposed rate increase ; it is a sunshine provision designed to publicly expose rate increases determined to be unreasonable . a risk pool is used to develop rates for coverage . a health insurance issuer must consider all enrollees in plans offered by the issuer to be members of a single risk pool . specifically , an issuer must consider all enrollees in individual plans offered by the issuer to be members of a single risk pool ; the issuer must have a separate risk pool for all enrollees in small - group plans offered by the issuer . ( however , states have the option to merge their individual and small - group markets ; if a state does so , an issuer will have a single risk pool for all enrollees in its individual and small - group plans. ) an issuer must consider the medical claims experience of enrollees in all plans offered by the issuer in a single risk pool when developing rates for the plans . plans are prohibited from restricting the length of a hospital stay for childbirth for either the mother or newborn child to less than 48 hours for vaginal deliveries and to less than 96 hours for caesarian deliveries . plans that provide coverage for mental health and substance use disorder services must offer coverage for those services at parity with medical and surgical services , specifically in the following four areas: annual and lifetime limits , treatment limitations , financial requirements , and in - and out - of - network covered benefits . plans that provide coverage for mastectomies also must cover prosthetic devices and reconstructive surgery . health insurance issuers are prohibited from ( 1 ) using genetic information to deny coverage , adjust premiums , or impose a preexisting - condition exclusion ; ( 2 ) requiring or requesting genetic testing ; and ( 3 ) collecting or acquiring genetic information for insurance underwriting purposes .