signup is for the crop year 2018 . three issues that could figure into future policy debate as a result of this program change include the potential for large budget costs if commodity markets weaken further , the realignment of program payment acres , and considerations surrounding the potential for re - opening of the wto u.s. - brazil cotton disput . projections for plc payments on seed cotton base are sensitive to changes in market prices . in april 2018 cbo released new baseline projections of usda's mandatory farm program outlays including seed cotton as a covered commodity . under slightly different market price expectations , cbo estimated the cost of seed cotton payments under the arc and plc programs to be $2.015 billion over five years ( 2018-2022 ) , up 59% from the february 2018 score . figure 1 compares the historical and projected weighted seed cotton price since 1980 and compares it with the plc reference price and loan rate established for seed cotton in the bba . the reallocation of generic base to seed cotton or other covered commodities , combined with the elimination of payments to residual base ( unallocated generic base ) , suggests that a significant portion of historical upland cotton base acres could become ineligible for revenue support payments . the likelihood of plc payments to seed cotton base , as suggested in the previous section , could provide an incentive for reallocating generic base to seed cotton rather than to other program crops . upland cotton producers planted an average of 10.8 million acres during the 2009-2015 period compared with 17.6 million acres of generic base ( figure 2 ) . or brazil could choose to operate outside of the wto framework and impose retaliatory tariffs ( or a similar trade action ) on selected u.s. agricultural products . finally , brazil could avoid the issue of whether the mou has been violated by simply awaiting the mou's expiration on september 30 , 2018 . there is some ambiguity about how brazil may proceed with charges against u.s. cotton programs after the mou's expiration — whether brazil could use the existing dispute settlement case and extend its retaliation authority or would have to start a new wto dispute settlement case . a potential counterargument would be that , under the seed cotton related provisions of the bba , congress has replaced coupled payments linked to crops planted on generic base acres with decoupled payments under the new seed cotton program , thus making u.s. farm programs more wto - compliant , not less . it is also unclear how to interpret the cgcs repeat payments , which , although linked to the previous year's plantings , were separated by a year ( 2017 ) of non - payments . thus , cgcs payments are not decoupled from producer behavior ( potentially leading to distortive incentives ) , but they do not occur on a continuous basis such that cotton producers may not necessarily factor cgcs payments into their production behavior .