appendix a . additional crs resources to gain a deeper understanding of the topics covered in this report , readers may also wish to consult the following crs reports: crs report r40425 , medicare primer , coordinated by patricia a. davis crs report r43122 , medicare financial status: in brief , by patricia a. davis crs report r44766 , medicare advantage ( ma ) – proposed benchmark update and other adjustments for cy2018: in brief , by paulette c. morgan crs report r40611 , medicare part d prescription drug benefit , by suzanne m. kirchhoff crs report r42506 , the budget control act of 2011 as amended: budgetary effects , by grant a. driessen and marc labonte crs report r42050 , budget "sequestration" and selected program exemptions and special rules , coordinated by karen spar crs report r42972 , sequestration as a budget enforcement process: frequently asked questions , by megan s. lynch crs report r41157 , the statutory pay - as - you - go act of 2010: summary and legislative history , by bill heniff jr. crs report r41965 , the budget control act of 2011 , by bill heniff jr. , elizabeth rybicki , and shannon m. mahan crs report 98-721 , introduction to the federal budget process , coordinated by james v. saturno appendix b . budget terminology definitions as defined by balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( bbedca ; p.l . 99-177 ) and simplified where appropriate: budget authority — authority provided by federal law to enter into financial obligations that will result in immediate or future outlays involving federal government funds . budgetary resources — an amount available to enter into new obligations and to liquidate them . budgetary resources are made up of new budget authority ( including direct spending authority provided in existing statute and obligation limitations ) and unobligated balances of budget authority provided in previous years . discretionary appropriations — budgetary resources ( except to fund direct - spending programs ) provided in appropriation acts . mandatory spending — also known as direct s pending , refers to budget authority that is provided in laws other than appropriation acts , entitlement authority , and the supplemental nutrition assistance program . medicare benefit payments — all payments for programs and activities under title xviii of the social security act . revised nonsecurity category — discretionary appropriations other than in budget function 050 . revised security category — discretionary appropriations in budget function 050 . sequestration — the cancellation of budgetary resources provided by discretionary appropriations or direct spending laws . for definitions of other budget terms mentioned in this report but not defined by bbedca , see u.s. government accountability office , a glossary of terms used in the federal budget process , gao - 05-734sp , september 1 , 2005 , p. 23 , https: / / www.gao.gov / assets / 80 / 76911.pdf . part c is funded through both the hi and smi trust funds . part d is a private plan option that covers outpatient prescription drug benefits . this portion of the program is optional .