appendix a . acronyms used in the repor . recently , p.l . 115-120 extended the authorization for chip allotments through fy2023 . two formulas are used to determine state allotments: an even - year formula and an odd - year formula . in even years , such as fy2018 , state chip allotments are based on each state's federal allotment for the prior year . in odd years , state chip allotments are based on each state's spending for the prior year . abstinence education grant funds are allocated to each jurisdiction based on its relative proportion of low - income children nationally . the fy2015 annual appropriations law ( p.l . 113-235 ) included a provision that enabled hhs to reallocate fy2015 abstinence education funds that would have been designated for states that did not apply for the funds . these fy2015 funds were available only to states that had applied for the funds , and states could use them to implement elements described in "abstinence education," as the term is defined in the law . macra extended this language to program funding for fy2016 and fy2017 . section 50502 provides that fy2018 and fy2019 sexual risk avoidance education allotments are to be made to states ( and territories ) that have applied for mch services block grant funds . allotments are based on two factors . first , funding is available based on the amount provided to the program minus any reservations ( up to 20% ) made by hhs for administering the program . second , funds are allocated to states based on their relative proportion of low - income children nationally . further , section 50502 enables hhs to competitively award fy2018 and fy2019 funds to one or more entities within a state / territory that had not previously applied for its share of funding . the entity or entities would receive the amount that would have been otherwise allotted to that state . the hhs secretary is required to publish a notice to solicit grant applications for the remaining competitive funds . the increased likelihood of avoiding poverty when youth attain self - sufficiency and emotional maturity before engaging in sexual activity . the foundational components of healthy relationships and their impact on the formation of healthy marriages and safe and stable families . how other youth risk behaviors , such as drug and alcohol usage , increase the risk for teen sex . how to resist , avoid , and receive help regarding sexual coercion and dating violence , recognizing that even with consent teen sex remains a youth risk behavior . if sexual risk avoidance education includes any information about contraception , such information must be medically accurate and must help students understand that contraception reduces physical risk but does not eliminate risk . in addition , sexual risk avoidance education may not include demonstration , simulations , or distribution of such contraception devices . title v of the social security act does not address evaluation activities for the abstinence education grant program ; however , the bba97 directed hhs to conduct evaluation activities of the title v abstinence education program .