such operations are both overt and covert . they range from such overt actions as political alliances , economic measures , and "white" propaganda to such covert operations as clandestine support of 'friendly' foreign elements , "black" psychological warfare and even encouragement of underground resistance in hostile states . in this sense , iw is a form of political warfare , where targets include a nation state's government , military , private sector , and general population . taking place below the level of armed conflict , iw is the range of military and government operations to protect and exploit the information environment . it consists of both offensive and defensive operations: the protection and assurance of one's own information ( information security ) , and information operations to advance interests . it is conducted not only in crisis , conflict , and warfare in the operational sense , but is ongoing in peacetime as well . whether attacking government agencies , political leadership , or news media in order to influence public opinion or to compel decisionmakers to take certain actions , ultimately the target of information warfare activities is human cognition . for this reason , information warfare is sometimes referred to as persuasion or influence operations , or even psychological operations . yet information warfare may not always involve compelling or coercing decisions ; rather , it may be part of a "divide and conquer" strategy targeting civil society , sowing confusion in a target population in order to create decision paralysis . decisionmakers in this case are constantly bombarded by contradictory reports , with no readily available means of discerning the truth . in the absence of reliable information and facing heightened opposition from factions on both sides of an issue , decisionmakers may be unable to act . this is the informational equivalent of what carl von clausewitz coined as the "fog and friction" of war . the fog of war refers to the uncertainty in situational awareness experienced by participants in military operations , while friction is a by - product of this fog . iw is a whole - of - society endeavor , in which civilians may be knowingly or unknowingly functioning as proxies on behalf of a government . for example , the russian concept of iw describes preemptive operations to achieve political goals and to control the information space , deploying all elements of society to include patriotic hacker groups and private citizens . the chinese theory of iw is integrated into "the people's war" concept and involves the use of information technologies by hundreds of millions of people in order to influence an adversary's policymakers , and to gain an advantage against an asymmetric threat . authoritarian regimes and their control over information infrastructure facilitate the use of a wide range of actors and techniques . these regimes may compel ordinary citizens to act as agents of information warfare with financial rewards , by appealing to a sense of patriotism , or through threats and coercion . information warfare may be a prelude to an armed conflict , a preparation of the battlefield preceding the deployment of forces .