proxy voting is not permitted in the select committee . not later than the last day of the 115 th congress ( 2017-2018 ) , the senate is to vote on a motion to proceed to a bill containing the legislative language recommended by the joint select committee . the text of the joint select committee on solvency of multiemployer pension plans report is to be made publicly available in electronic form at least 24 hours before the panel votes to approve it . any select committee member who , at the time the joint select committee votes to approve its report , gives notice of his or her intention to file supplemental , minority , or additional views in the document will have two calendar days thereafter to do so . all properly noticed views are to be included in the final select committee report . after being approved by the requisite majorities , the joint committee is to , within 15 calendar days , submit its report along with legislative language to the president , the vice president , the speaker of the house , and the majority and minority leaders of the house and senate . the joint select committee must also make its full report , the accompanying legislative language , and a record of votes taken available to the public "promptly. a lesser quorum — five members — may hold hearings . the joint committee is authorized to hold hearings , require the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents ( it has subpoena power ) , take testimony , receive evidence , and administer oaths as it considers advisable . the joint committee is to hold no fewer than five total public hearings or meetings and no fewer than three public hearings , which may include field hearings . an announcement of the date , location , and subject of a hearing is to be made at least seven days in advance , unless the committee co - chairs determine that good cause exists to hold the hearing earlier . ( this is the same notice requirement imposed on the standing committees of the house and senate. ) each co - chair is entitled to select an equal number of witnesses for each hearing . ( no such guarantee exists in the standing committees. ) witnesses at the hearing of the joint select committee are to file their written testimony with the panel at least two calendar days before appearing , unless this deadline is waived by the co - chairs for good cause . the law directs the joint select committee on solvency of multiemployer pension plans to vote , no later than november 30 , 2018 , on a report that contains detailed findings , conclusions , and recommendations , as well as proposed legislative language to carry out these recommendations . it further states that , for such a report to be approved , it must be supported by a majority of the joint committee members appointed by the speaker and majority leader of the senate and by a majority of joint committee members appointed by the house and senate minority leaders .