the fec currently retains its policymaking quorum . media reports suggest that additional commissioners may be considering leaving the agency , although such reports are relatively common and do not necessarily foreshadow actual departures . if there are any departures before additional confirmations , it would be impossible for the fec to reach a policymaking quorum . as explained previously , this means that even if all remaining commissioners agreed on an outcome , the agency would have too few votes to execute its most consequential duties . this nomination was returned to the president at the end of the first session . the white house resubmitted the nomination on january 8 , 2018 , at the start of the second session of the 115 th congress . it is unclear whether any other commissioners currently plan to leave . for several years , periodic reports have suggested that one or more other commissioners also plan to depart . if any of the four remaining commissioners departed , the agency would be without a policymaking quorum . congress originally designed eight positions for the fec: six commissioners and two nonvoting ex officio members ( the clerk of the house and secretary of the senate ) . under that structure , two commissioners were appointed by the president , two by the president pro tempore of the senate , and two by the speaker of the house . two federal court decisions altered the fec's original design . first and most significantly , in buckley v. valeo ( 1976 ) the supreme court of the united states invalidated the original appointments method , holding that congressional appointments violated the constitution's appointments clause . almost 20 years later , a federal court again found fault with the fec's appointment structure . in 1993 , the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia held in fec v. nra political victory fund that the presence of the two congressional ex officio members violated constitutional separation of powers . congress did not amend feca responding to this decision , although the ex officio members are no longer appointed . in a broad revision of feca in 1976 , undertaken in response to the buckley decision , congress adopted the current appointment method . today , all commissioners are presidentially appointed subject to senate advice and consent . members of the congressional leadership or committees of jurisdiction ( the house committee on house administration and senate rules and administration committee ) apparently continue to influence the appointment process . feca specifies few qualifications for fec commissioners , noting simply that they "shall be chosen on the basis of their experience , integrity , impartiality , and good judgment. as one former general counsel notes , although many commissioners are lawyers , "a commissioner does not have to be a lawyer and the commission has a long history of having non - lawyers serve as members. commissioners typically have experience as congressional staffers , political professionals , election lawyers , or some combination thereof . no more than three commissioners may be affiliated with the same political party . in practice , the commission has been divided equally among democrats and republicans , although one current commissioner identifies as an independent .