114-182 ) , which amended tsca . 114-182 broadly amended the information gathering , chemical evaluation , and regulation authorities of tsca and also provided additional procedures and standards for confidential treatment or disclosure of information submitted to epa under tsca . even then , epa authority to regulate a chemical depends on existing regulations promulgated under other statutes . section 20 generally requires the plaintiff of the suit to have given 60 days' notice of the claims to the administrator and the alleged violator prior to filing the suit . however , citizen suits are not available if epa or the department of justice is already "diligently prosecuting" the alleged violator to require compliance with the act's requirements , though a citizen who has given notice may intervene in the ongoing enforcement proceeding as a matter of right . if a citizen suit is successful , the court may require the violator to take actions to correct a violation and may impose civil penalties on the violator . tsca section 19 governs many aspects of judicial review of various epa actions . in general , section 19 requires that petitions for judicial review of most rules and orders under tsca , and civil actions challenging low - priority designations , be filed within 60 days after epa takes final action . section 19 gives exclusive jurisdiction to the federal courts of appeals . for civil actions challenging low - priority designations , jurisdiction is limited specifically to the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit . review is presumptively limited to the administrative record . the standard of review for most epa rules and orders under tsca is that "the court shall hold unlawful and set aside such rule [or order] if the court finds that the rule [or order] is not supported by substantial evidence" in the record rather than the usual and more deferential "arbitrary or capricious" standard under apa . several other tsca provisions ( sections 11 , 15 , 16 , and 17 ) also relate to enforcement of the act . to enforce tsca rules , orders , and consent agreements , the act provides inspection and administrative subpoena authority to epa and provides epa with administrative and judicial mechanisms to restrain violations and apply civil or criminal penalties to violators . administrative civil penalties are capped and further limited if a state enforces for the same violation under its own law . section 22 authorizes the president through epa to waive compliance with any tsca requirement for national defense purposes . tsca includes provisions intended to protect employees of regulated entities from retaliation for taking part in a proceeding under the act or from potential effects on employment because of economic costs of the act . section 23 authorizes the department of labor to investigate alleged retaliations and provides the department with administrative and judicial mechanisms to resolve such allegations . section 24 directs epa to investigate allegations of potential effects on employment resulting from a tsca requirement and to prepare recommendations based on the investigation .