a complainant who was constructively discharged may also be eligible for awards of backpay or frontpay . in addition to damages , a title vii sexual harassment plaintiff may also seek injunctive relief . as a general matter , "[a] district court has broad discretionary powers to craft an injunction to the specific violations found to ensure that the employer complies with the law. by way of example , in eeoc v. wilson metal casket , the sixth circuit upheld an injunction which prohibited the harassing supervisor from "asking any female employee to accompany him off the premises of the company unless accompanied by at least one other employee , and kissing or placing his hands on any female employee in the work place. the court upheld this injunction even though none of the enjoined conduct was itself , standing alone , likely illegal ; the court noted that the injunction "appropriately enjoins conduct which allowed sexual harassment to occur. finally , reasonable attorney's fees are available to a prevailing party , either a plaintiff or a defendant , under title vii . prevailing plaintiffs generally recover fees unless there are special circumstances that preclude such recovery . a prevailing plaintiff is one who obtains relief which "materially alters the legal relationship between the parties" ; for example , the appropriate attorney fee when a plaintiff receives an award limited to nominal ( $1 ) damages is generally "no fee at all. defendants who prevail are entitled to fees only if the plaintiff's claim was frivolous , unreasonable , or groundless . the total amount of combined compensatory and punitive damages that a plaintiff can recover is limited by statute . for employers with more than 14 but fewer than 101 employees , a plaintiff's maximum damages are limited to $50,000 ; for 201 employees , $100,000 ; for 501 employees , $200,000 ; for employers with more than 500 employees damages are capped at $300,000 . a plaintiff may also recover punitive damages against nongovernmental entities upon a showing of "malice or reckless indifference to the federally protected rights" of the complainant . even when a plaintiff establishes the requisite elements of a prima facie case with respect to harassment — with a commonly contested issue being whether the conduct was sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the plaintiff's working environment — the plaintiff must also show a basis for holding the employer liable for the harassment . the existing legal standard for evaluating employer liability is based on a framework arising from several supreme court decisions: meritor savings bank v. vinson , which held that employers are not always "automatically liable for sexual harassment by their supervisors," followed by two companion decisions , faragher v. city of boca raton and burlington industries , inc. v. ellerth , which further delineated when employers could be held liable for workplace harassment . like harassment claims under title vii , the legal standards for establishing employer liability for workplace harassment are not expressly included or addressed in the statutory text of title vii . indeed , the supreme court has repeatedly noted that congress — in amending title vii after its 1986 meritor decision — has not altered or overruled meritor 's limitation on employer liability for harassment .