u.s. ftas and the trade deficit . rtas and the multilateral trading system . the proliferation of global rtas in the past several decades has fundamentally altered the nature of the global trading system . on one hand these new agreements have afforded the united states and other countries an opportunity to move forward with new trade negotiations in the face of stalled multilateral action , reducing trade barriers among major world trading partners and establishing commitments on new nontariff issues where multilateral negotiations lag behind the current commercial environment . effects of global rtas on u.s. economy and stakeholders . trade agreements that do not involve the united states can make u.s. exports more costly in foreign markets relative to exports from countries that are party to the agreements and not subject to tariffs . they may also make u.s. producers reliant on imported components less competitive than foreign producers that face lower tariff barriers on their imports . certain u.s. industries , including agriculture , export a high share of their production and / or face relatively high tariffs in foreign markets , making them particularly sensitive to tariff changes . these industries have raised concerns over the potential disadvantage in foreign markets due to other countries rta negotiations . rtas among top u.s. export partners , with which the united states does not currently have ftas , have the potential for the most significant negative consequences . given the size of the trading relationship and existing tariff levels , the eu - japan fta , for example , could have a significant effect on u.s. auto and agriculture producers , since it is to eventually eliminate a 10% eu auto tariff on imports from japan and remove or lower relatively high japanese agriculture tariffs on imports from the eu . likewise , the recently concluded cptpp agreement would eliminate most tariffs among the 11 parties and likely lead to diminished u.s. exports to japan and other growing asian economies . resumed u.s. engagement in the t - tip negotiations and u.s. pursuit of ftas , bilaterally or collectively , with the cptpp countries could eliminate the potential for discrimination against u.s. exports to these markets . potential questions for congress include what industries are most likely to be negatively affected by the implementation of new rtas among top u.s. trade partners ? what is the best u.s. response to these potential negative consequences ( eg , pursuit of multilateral , bilateral , or regional fta negotiations ) ? prioritization of future fta negotiating partners . the trump administration has stated an interest in negotiating new u.s. ftas on a bilateral basis , and has mentioned tpp partner countries , such as japan , as well as the united kingdom , as potential partners . to date no tpp countries have formally announced interest in negotiating with the united states bilaterally . some question whether this lack of interest in new trade negotiations stems from the contentious nature of the current u.s. talks with the nafta parties and other recent trade actions . congress has periodically encouraged the executive branch to negotiate or explore the possibility of an fta with specific trade partners .