presumed to have the same meaning. drones ? does it encompass the service vehicles of the park's caretakers , or an ambulance responding to a parkgoer's injury ? would it prevent the city from bringing in a world war ii truck and mounting it on a pedestal as part of a war memorial ? while many would read the hypothetical law to prohibit an enthusiastic mother from driving a minivan full of young soccer players into the park , it may not be so simple to justify that seemingly reasonable interperetation . if the soccer mom challenged the decision of a hypothetical department of parks and recreation to prohibit her from entering , how would the department's lawyers justify this position ? should they refer primarily to the law's text , or to its purpose ? what tools should they use to discover the meaning of the text or the lawmaker's purpose ? how does their theory of interpretation influence their answers to the harder problems of application ? this deceptively simple hypothetical has endured because it usefully illustrates the challenges of statutory interpretation . even a statutory provision that at first appears unambiguous can engender significant difficulties when applied in the real world . supreme court justice felix frankfurter once aptly described the problem of determining statutory meaning as inherent in "the very nature of words. the meaning of words depends on the context in which they are used and might change over time . words are "inexact symbols" of meaning , and even in everyday communications , it is difficult to achieve one definite meaning . these "intrinsic difficulties of language" are heightened in the creation of a statute , which is crafted by a complicated governmental process and will likely be applied to an unforeseeable variety of circumstances . statutes are usually written in general terms , which may compound the difficulty of applying a provision to specific situations . however , this generality — and the ensuing ambiguity — is often intentional: statutes are frequently drafted to address " categories of conduct. the enacting legislature may have sought to ensure that the statute would be general enough to capture the situations it could not foresee , or may have intended to delegate interpretive authority to the agency responsible for enforcing the statute . vague or ambiguous language might also be the result of compromise . or a statute might be silent with respect to a particular application because congress simply did not anticipate the situation . when a statute becomes the subject of a dispute in court , judges usually must interpret the law , ambiguous or not . as chief justice john marshall stated in marbury v. madison : "it is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is. judicial pronouncements about statutes are generally the final word on statutory meaning and will determine how the law is carried out — at least , unless congress acts to amend the law . in the realm of statutory interpretation , many members of the judiciary view their role in "say[ing] what the law is" as subordinate to congress's position as the law's drafter .