these same counties are mapped in figure 1 . decennial census of population and housing , "long form" poverty estimates are computed using data from household surveys , which are based on a sample of households . in order to obtain meaningful estimates for any geographic area , the sample has to include enough responses from that area so that selecting a different sample of households from that area would not likely result in a dramatically different estimate . if estimates for smaller geographic areas are desired , a larger sample size is needed . a national - level survey , for instance , could produce reliable estimates for the united states without obtaining any responses from many counties , particularly counties with small populations . in order to produce estimates for all 3,143 county areas in the nation , however , not only are responses needed from every county , but those responses have to be plentiful enough from each county so that the estimates are meaningful ( i.e. , their margins of error are not unhelpfully wide ) . before the mid - 1990s , the only data source with a sample size large enough to provide meaningful estimates at the county level ( and for other small geographic areas ) was the decennial census . the other household surveys available prior to that time did not have a sample size large enough to produce meaningful estimates for small areas such as counties . income questions were asked on the census long form , which was sent to one - sixth of all u.s. households ; the rest received the census short form , which did not ask about income . while technically still a sample , one - sixth of all households was a large enough sample to provide poverty estimates for every county in the nation , and even for smaller areas such as small towns . the long form was discontinued after census 2000 , and therefore poverty data are no longer available from the decennial census . beginning in the mid - 1990s , however , two additional data sources were developed to ensure that poverty estimates for small areas such as counties would still be available: the american community survey ( acs ) , and the small area income and poverty estimates program ( saipe ) . american community survey ( acs ) the acs replaced the decennial census long form . it was developed to accommodate the needs of local government officials and other stakeholders who needed detailed information on small communities on a more frequent basis than once every 10 years . to that end , the acs questionnaire was designed to reflect the same topics asked in the census long form . in order to produce meaningful estimates for small communities , however , the acs needs to collect a number of responses comparable to what was collected in the decennial census . in order to collect that many responses while providing information more currently than once every 10 years , the acs collects information from respondents continuously , in every month , as opposed to at one time of the year , and responses over time are pooled to provide estimates at varying geographic levels .