they have the approval of the majority and minority leaders . i ask consent that these requests be agreed to and these requests be printed in the r ecord . if no senator objected , the congressional record would print , as if they were spoken on the floor , a series of unanimous consent requests for each committee to meet at stated times , each request being ordered "without objection. perhaps partly due to this practice , it was widely understood in the senate that unanimous consent was necessary to permit committees to meet after the senate was in session for two hours or past 2:00 p.m . if leaders usually honored any request to prevent committees from meeting , then that practice would also leave the impression that unanimous consent was required . currently , permission for senate committees to sit during times prohibited by the two - hour rule is being granted almost exclusively by joint leadership agreement instead of by unanimous consent , a change from prior practice . a senator on the floor now typically states i have [number] requests for committees to meet during today's session of the senate . they have the approval of the majority and minority leaders . the presiding officer responds , "duly noted" to the senator ; no opportunity is afforded for a senator to object , because unanimous consent is not requested . the list of committees authorized to meet is then printed in the congressional record following the statement made on the floor . joint leadership permission has been used over 130 times since november 30 , 2016 , to authorize one or more senate committees to meet during restricted hours and now appears to be the preferred way to provide a waiver of the rule . the change in practice might be in response to an apparent increase in invoking the rule , discussed in the final section of this report . notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection , any standing committee of the senate may sit without special leave for any purpose as authorized by paragraph 5 of rule xxv of the standing rules of the senate . the cumulative effect of the 1970 statutory provision and the still - existing provisions of senate rule xxv adopted in 1964 were to exempt the appropriations committee from any restrictions on meeting and to permit a committee to sit during a restricted period not just if it obtained the unanimous consent of the senate to do so but also if the majority and minority leaders ( or their designees ) jointly authorized it to do so . the present form of the two - hour rule , which combined the provisions of the 1964 standing rule and the 1970 statutory provision , was adopted by the senate on february 4 , 1977 , via section 402 of s.res . 4 , a resolution implementing the recommendations of the temporary select committee to study the senate committee system . the 1977 rules change added an exception for the committee on the budget , created in 1974 , from the existing restrictions on meeting . subsequent senate action relocated the two - hour rule unchanged from rule xxv to its current place in section 5 ( a ) of rule xxvi .