appendix a . members. under this request , no u.s. contribution would have exceeded 25% of all assessed contributions for a single operation , which is the cap established in section 404 ( b ) of the foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 1994 and 1995 ( p.l . the state department maintained that it expected that the "unfunded portion of u.s. assessed expenses will be met through a combination of a reduction in the u.s. assessed rate of contributions , reductions in the number of u.n. peacekeeping missions , and significant reductions in the budgets of peacekeeping missions across the board. the department also requested that congress provide two - year funds for cipa ( in other words , that congress make funds available for both the fiscal year for which the funds were appropriated and the subsequent fiscal year ) "due to the demonstrated unpredictability of the requirements in this account from year to year and the nature of multi - year operations that have mandates overlapping u.s. fiscal years. the house committee bill would have provided $1.36 billion for cio and $1.59 billion for cipa , for a combined total of $2.95 billion for these accounts , which was 29% higher than the department's request and 4% higher than the fy2018 funding levels . the senate committee bill would have provided $1.44 billion for cio and $1.68 billion for cipa , for a combined total of $3.12 billion . this figure was 36% higher than the department's request and 9% higher than the fy2018 level . the senate committee bill included a provision not present in recent appropriations laws mandating that funds appropriated for cio "are made available to pay not less than the full fiscal year 2019 united states assessment for each respective international organization. with regard to cipa , both the house and senate committee reports noted that appropriated monies were intended to support an assessed peacekeeping cost at the statutory level of 25% rather than the u.n. assessed rate for the united states of 28.4% . both committee reports called on the department to review peacekeeping missions for cost savings and work to renegotiate rates of assessment . 116-6 provided $1.36 billion for cio and $1.55 billion for cipa , for a total of $2.91 billion — slightly less than both the house and senate committee bills . this figure was still 2% higher than the fy2018 figure and 27% higher than the department's request . while the law did not include the aforementioned senate committee bill provision regarding payment of full u.s. assessments for organizations funded through the cio account , the law's joint explanatory statement noted that it assumed the payment of the full united states assessment for each relevant organization ( with some exceptions , including organizations from which the united states has withdrawn ) and required the secretary of state to consult with the committees on appropriations with respect to any decision not to provide the full assessment for any such organization . with respect to cipa , the joint explanatory statement noted that sufficient funds are provided for contributions to peacekeeping missions at the statutory level of 25% .