that doesn't mean we're done . we're not even finished with these issues yet , and there is still work to be done on other vital issues like intra - afghan dialogue and a complete ceasefire. after a longer series of talks that ended on march 12 , 2019 , khalilzad announced that an agreement "in draft" had been reached on counterterrorism assurances and u.s. troop withdrawal . he noted that after the agreement is finalized , "the taliban and other afghans , including the government , will begin intra - afghan negotiations on a political settlement and comprehensive ceasefire. the taliban have long refused to negotiate with representatives of the afghan government , which they characterize as a corrupt and illegitimate puppet of foreign powers , and kabul is not directly involved in the ongoing u.s. - taliban negotiations . some observers have criticized that arrangement ; former u.s . ambassador to afghanistan ryan crocker argued that by not insisting on the inclusion of the afghan government in these negotiations "we have ourselves delegitimized the government we claim to support," and advocated that the u.s. halt talks until the taliban agree to include the afghan government . afghan president ashraf ghani has promised that his government will not accept any settlement that limits afghans' rights . in a january 2019 televised address , he further warned that any agreement to withdraw u.s. forces that did not include kabul's participation could lead to "catastrophe," pointing to the 1990s - era civil strife following the fall of the soviet - backed government that led to the rise of the taliban . president ghani's concern about being excluded from the talks surfaced in mid - march when his national security advisor accused khalilzad of "delegitimizing the afghan government and weakening it," and harboring political ambitions within afghanistan , leading to a shark rebuke from the state department . according to a former state department official , "the real issue is not the personality of an american diplomat ; the real issue is a policy divergence. it remains unclear what kind of political arrangement could satisfy both kabul and the taliban to the extent that the latter fully abandons armed struggle in pursuit of its goals . the taliban have recently given some more conciliatory signs , with one spokesman saying the group is "not seeking a monopoly on power. still , many afghans , especially women , who remember taliban rule and oppose the group's tactics and beliefs , remain wary . the unsettled state of afghan politics is a major complicating factor for current negotiations . the leadership partnership ( referred to as the national unity government ) between president ashraf ghani and chief executive officer ( ceo ) abdullah abdullah , which was brokered by the united states in the wake of the disputed 2014 election , has encountered challenges but remains intact . however , a trend in afghan society and governance that worries some observers is increasing political fragmentation along ethnic lines . such fractures have long existed in afghanistan but were relatively muted during hamid karzai's presidency . these divisions are sometimes seen as a driving force behind some of the political upheavals that have challenged ghani's government .