liberty . without due process of law. the court held that the concept of liberty "presumes an autonomy of self that includes freedom of thought , belief , expression , and certain intimate conduct. notably , the text of the fourteenth amendment does not define "liberty," and the court's holding in lawrence is more broadly grounded in general views about the proper role of government in not punishing behavior that provides no discernible harm to the public at large . a particularly famous example of an argument based on the "ethos of the law" is contained in the court's decision in bolling v. sharpe . the court decided bolling on the same day it decided brown v. board of education , which held that a state , in segregating its public school systems by race , violated the fourteenth amendment . specifically , the court held that the practice of "separate but equal" as applied to schools violated the equal protection clause , a provision that prohibits state governments from depriving their citizens of the equal protection of the law . bolling , however , involved the district of columbia school system , which was not subject to the fourteenth amendment because the district of columbia is not a state , but rather a federal enclave . furthermore , the fifth amendment , which applies to the actions of the federal government , provides that no person shall "be deprived of life , liberty , or property , without due process of law" but does not explicitly contain an equal protection clause . nevertheless , the court struck down racial segregation in dc public schools as a violation of the fifth amendment's due process clause , determining that due process guarantees implicitly include a guarantee of equal protection . the court's reasoning was based on the due process clause being derived "from our american ideal of fairness," ultimately holding that the fifth amendment prohibited the federal government from allowing segregation in public schools . proponents of using moral or ethical reasoning as an approach for making sense of broad constitutional text , such as the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment , argue that general moral principles underlie much of the text of the constitution . thus , arguments about what the constitution means based on moral reasoning produce "more candid opinions," as judges often rely upon moral arguments but disguise them as textual arguments or arguments based on precedent . some also argue that the framers designed the constitution as an instrument that would grow over time . thus , supporters of moral reasoning in constitutional interpretation contend that its use appropriately leads to more flexibility for judges to incorporate contemporary values when deriving meaning from the constitution . ethical arguments can also fill in gaps in the text to address situations unforeseen at the time of the founding , consistent with the understanding of the bill of rights as a starting point for individual rights . critics of using moral reasoning in constitutional interpretation have argued that courts should not be "moral arbiters. they argue that ethical arguments are based on principles that are not objectively verifiable and may require a judge to choose between "competing moral conventions.