some of these concerns are discussed below . although blockchain is already being used to execute financial transactions , it is relatively nascent in other sectors of the economy . because of its novelty , blockchain is being piloted by industry , but at this time does not appear to be a replacement for existing systems . given these conditions , the technology does not contain the same level of adoption that previous technology had when facing potential legislative action . however , in addition to examining legislative options concerning the technology's use , congress may , if it chooses to do so , provide oversight of federal agencies seeking to ( 1 ) use it for government business , and / or ( 2 ) regulate its use in the private sector . for example , the general services administration and the department of homeland security are examining blockchain as a way to achieve efficiencies in the current business of government . they are seeking ways to better manage identities , assets , data , and contracts . additionally , federal agencies are creating test beds for blockchain technology . the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) has established a "workbench" to test blockchain . the workbench is a virtual environment within nist that is being used as a platform for research and testing . test beds like this one can serve as a model or shared service for other federal agencies to examine blockchain applications and uses , providing those agencies first - hand experience with the technology as well as information concerning its limitations . this experience can better inform program managers so that they can determine if they seek to use the technology and it can also help them in their interactions with the private sector concerning the technology . agencies such as the securities and exchange commission and the commodities futures trading commission are issuing advisories to industry concerning blockchain technology . in some cases , these actions are to positively declare that the current legal framework governing other transactions also apply to transactions on a blockchain . in these areas , congress may evaluate whether agencies are achieving congress's policy goals . these goals may be technology agnostic and thus already established , or congress may develop new policy goals for the adoption of emerging technology across a variety of sectors . another potential issue of congressional interest is where the concentration of federal authority over blockchain expertise , research , and authority should reside . issues such as this typically arise at the onset of a new technology . one option is to place authority for a technology within a single agency ( eg , nuclear energy in the department of energy ) . historically , this option has been used when a technology is advanced and in relatively wide use , or is targeted at a specific industry or has a very specific application .