consistent with e.o . 12866 , omb circular a - 4 notes that good regulatory analysis informs consideration of whether benefits of an action "are likely to justify the costs. the "justify" criterion does not require monetized benefits to outweigh monetized costs . 12866 and circular a - 4 recognize that quantified benefit and cost estimates may not capture all of the anticipated benefits and costs of a regulatory proposal , because it is difficult to quantify some impacts . while circular a - 4 directs agencies to quantify the benefits and costs of economically significant regulations "whenever possible" by applying "sound and defensible values or procedures," it also directs analysts to identify which non - quantified impacts "are of sufficient importance to justify consideration in the regulatory decision. epa's 2015 analysis concluded that the monetized benefits of the cpp outweighed the monetized costs . the 2017 analysis presented less favorable benefit - cost comparisons of the cpp . traditionally , benefit - cost comparisons are shown as estimates of the "net impact," which is the difference between total benefits and total costs . "net benefits" result when the benefits outweigh the costs , and "net costs" result when the costs outweigh the benefits . all of the net impact estimates presented in the 2015 analysis showed benefits outweighing the costs , with the difference ranging from $25 billion to $45 billion in 2030 . in contrast , the 2017 net impact estimates ranged from costs outweighing benefits ( i.e. , net costs of the proposed repeal ) to benefits outweighing costs ( i.e. , net benefits of the proposed repeal ) . the estimates for 2030 ranged from $28.3 billion in net costs of the proposed repeal to $14 billion in net benefits of the proposed repeal . the 2017 analysis did not explicitly state the agency's view about whether the benefits of the repeal are likely to outweigh the costs of the proposed repeal . table 1 presents the highest and lowest net impacts reported for each analysis year in the 2015 and 2017 analyses . the benefit - cost estimates derived from the aeo 2017 projections likewise showed a range of net costs and net benefits of the proposed repeal under different assumptions . half of these benefit - cost comparisons showed net benefits to repeal the cpp , and the other half showed net costs to repeal . the aeo - based benefit - cost estimates are generally the same order of magnitude as proposed repeal estimates in table 1 , though as previously noted , they are not directly comparable due to modeling differences . the aeo - based estimates of the proposed repeal for 2030 ranged from $30.6 billion in net costs to $14.0 billion in net benefits . the effect of updated power sector projections on the proposed repeal's benefit - cost estimates is unclear . epa noted that the benefit - cost estimates based on its 2015 power sector modeling did not reflect changes that have since occurred in the power sector .