the report is filed with the clerk of the house . house rules do not require committee approval of the report , although a copy of the report must be available to each committee member for at least seven calendar days . house committee activity reports generally include a letter of transmittal from the chair of the committee to the clerk . one committee — the house ethics committee , which is comprised of an equal number of members from the majority and minority party pursuant to house rule x — generally has included a transmittal letter signed by both the chair and ranking minority member . a few committees have included in their transmittal letters a disclaimer indicating the "document is intended as a general reference tool , and not as a substitute for the hearing records , reports , and other committee files. pursuant to senate rule xxvi , paragraph 8 ( b ) , reports are to be filed by march 31 . as stated above , the senate appropriations committee and senate budget committee are exempt from this requirement . this internal congressional examination culminated in the legislative reorganization act of 1970 . pursuant to this act , the "continuous watchfulness" function of committees was transformed to one providing for "legislative review. the act called for each standing committee of the senate and the house of representatives to review and study , on a continuing basis , the application , administration , and execution of those laws , or parts of laws , the subject matter of which is within the jurisdiction of that committee . the 1970 act also formalized the requirement for periodic activity reports . a report accompanying the legislation summarized the linkage between the new role for committees and the reporting requirement , stating that the intent of this requirement of a report every two years is to provide the house with an additional means of appraising the results of the legislation which it has approved and to emphasize the importance of the legislative review function of the house standing committees . the requirement for these reports , which appears at 2 u.s.c . §190d , was subsequently incorporated into the house and senate rules . house rules for the 115 th congress state that the committee activity reports are to include separate sections summarizing the committee's legislative and oversight activities conducted pursuant to house rule x and house rule xi ; a summary of the committee's oversight and authorization plans , which are required by house rule x , clause 2 ( d ) ; a summary of the actions taken and recommendations made with respect to these authorization and oversight plans ; a summary of any additional oversight activities undertaken by a committee and any recommendations made or related actions ; and a delineation of any hearings held on the topics of waste , fraud , abuse , or mismanagement . pursuant to clause 2 of house rule xi , committees are required "to hold at least one hearing during each 120-day period" on these topics . the hearings are to focus in particular on reports from inspectors general or the comptroller general of the united states and programs or operations that are considered "high - risk.