law. finally , in several academic publications , judge kavanaugh explored what he believes to be one of the most important questions in american constitutional law: whether the president has the power to take the united states into war overseas without congressional authorization . judge kavanaugh described the constitution's war - making power as shared between the legislative and executive branches . in the realm of congressional power , according to judge kavanaugh , the legislative branch has broad authority to control whether the united states wages war and to regulate some aspects of how the executive conducts military operations , such as surveillance , detention , interrogation , and military commissions . in the field of executive power , judge kavanaugh noted that article ii makes the president commander in chief of the armed forces . but , according to the nominee , it is difficult to determine the extent to which the president's war powers are "exclusive and preclusive" — meaning they cannot be regulated by congress . other than the power to command troops on the battlefield during a congressionally authorized war , judge kavanaugh has stated that the scope of the president's preclusive war powers are unsettled — although he did suggest in dicta that a statute regulating the president's "short - term bombing of foreign targets in the nation's self - defense" may not survive constitutional scrutiny . ultimately , judge kavanaugh appears to believe that constitutional questions concerning war and national security will continue to be the subject of "heated debate," and that all three branches of government will play a role in resolving them . the roberts court has been closely divided when interpreting the second amendment , and justice kennedy's replacement will likely play an important role going forward in shaping the jurisprudence governing the scope of the second amendment's right to keep and bear arms . justice kennedy provided key deciding votes in the two landmark second amendment rulings of the roberts court . first , in 2008 , he joined the five - justice majority in district of columbia v. heller ( heller i ) , which held for the first time that the second amendment protects an individual's right to possess a firearm . then in 2010 , he joined another 5-4 majority in mcdonald v. city of chicago , which held that the second amendment is applicable to the states via the fourteenth amendment . neither heller i nor mcdonald purported to define the full scope of the right protected by the second amendment , although the court cautioned that "the right secured by the second amendment is not unlimited. and the court has issued virtually no opinions meaningfully interpreting the second amendment since mcdonald . accordingly , in the wake of heller i , the various federal circuit courts have examined the contours of the second amendment with little guidance from the high court , requiring the lower courts to identify the appropriate standard of review for federal and state firearm restrictions . and judge kavanaugh undertook this task a year after mcdonald was decided in heller ii , in which he authored a notable dissent construing and applying heller i differently from the prevailing method that other federal district and circuit courts use .