maskaly et al . what effect do sros have on the school environment ? can the presence of an sro at a school prevent a shooting ? what steps can be taken to maximize the benefits of sro programs ? one issue policymakers might consider is whether there is a need for a large - scale expansion of sro programs . policymakers might have an interest in increasing the presence of sros stationed at schools across the country as a way of promoting school safety . if the desire to expand sro programs is principally related to concerns about potential shootings , it may be worth considering whether there is an epidemic of schools shootings . in the sections that follow , available data are reviewed and discussed to better understand whether there is a need for additional resources to prevent school - based homicides . figure 1 presents data on the number of at - school homicides of children ages 5-18 each school year from sy1992-1993 to sy2014-2015 . on average , there have been 23 at - school homicides each school year from sy1992-sy1993 to sy2014-2015 . while there were instances where there was a noticeable change in the number of at - school homicides from one school year to the next , the trend line ( the dashed line in the figure ) indicates that there has been a general downward trend in the number of at - school homicides during this period . multiple - victim shooting incidents at schools in the united states can cause a spike in the number of at - school homicides . for example , the 20 students killed at sandy hook elementary school in connecticut accounted for nearly two - thirds of the at - school homicides during sy2012-2013 . without those deaths , the number of at - school homicides would have been in - line with the number of at - school homicides in sy2011-2012 and sy2013-2014 . however , not all spikes in at - school homicides are attributable to multiple - victim schools shootings . there were 32 at - school homicides during sy2006-2007 , and the deadliest school shooting during that year involved the deaths of five students at the nickel mines school in pennsylvania . while any homicides that occur at schools would likely undermine a community's sense of their children's safety , data from this period indicate that most children who are victims of homicide are killed when they are not at school . nces reported that during sy2014-2015 there were 1,168 homicides of children ages 5-18 , of which 20 occurred at schools . fighting , bullying , and other problem behaviors at schools are generally not driving the current debate about the potential expansion of sro programs ; it is multiple - victim shootings at schools that are driving the discussion . while data on the number of homicides at schools provides insight into the prevalence of violent deaths that occur at schools each school year , they do not indicate how many students are the victims of multiple - victim shooting incidents .