none of these votes failed . it is prepared under the direction of the clerk of the house . after the close of a session , it is printed , distributed to members and selected government offices , and posted on the u.s. government publishing office ( gpo ) website . the speaker announces approval of the daily journal at the start of each legislative day . in current practice , the house automatically agrees to approval unless a member calls for a vote . occasionally , a member demands a journal vote to reconsider the journal 's content . more often , though , a journal vote is called for unrelated reasons , such as to assemble members before a major vote or to protest the actions of leadership . the journal is the official record of house proceedings . unlike the congressional record , it is not a transcript of debate . rather , it is a listing of legislative actions . if there is a discrepancy between the actions cited in the journal and the congressional record , the jo urnal is considered the correct account of actions taken . as such , it is the record of house activities that is provided as evidence in legal proceedings . the term house journal is used for both the daily journal and the session journal . after one legislative day adjourns , the journal clerk prepares the day's minutes and presents them to the speaker . at the start of the next legislative day , the speaker announces his or her approval of the previous day's journal ( the daily journal ) . when each session of congress concludes , the minutes of all the legislative days are assembled together into a session journal . gpo prints the session journal as a bound book and posts a digital copy on its website . if a vote is called , it is for approval of the daily journal containing those proceedings that occur between the commencement of one legislative day and its time of adjournment . in this report , all subsequent references to journal are to the daily journal . under house rules i and xiv , the speaker announces his or her approval of the journal as the first order of business after the chaplain's prayer . without objection , the journal stands approved . however , if a member does object , that member may demand a vote on the speaker's approval . according to the u.s. house of representatives roll call votes database , the house held 472 journal - approval record votes from 1991 to 2016 ( 102 nd - 114 th congresses , table 1 ) . instead , such votes have received support , on average , from three out of four members . the 75% approval rate is not a strict reflection of party - line division . however , party and political considerations may play a role in the decision to demand or vote against approval of the journal . from 1991 through 2016 , there were 472 journal - approval record votes ( 2.8% of the total number of record votes ) .