a provision in h.r . 4 would expand permissible uses of pfc revenues to include projects to prevent airport power outages . there is no similar provision in s. 1405 . almost all commercial service airports in the united states are owned by local and state governments , or by public entities such as airport authorities or multipurpose port authorities . in 1996 , congress established the airport privatization pilot program ( appp ) to explore the prospect of privatizing publicly owned airports and using private capital to improve and develop them . in addition to reducing demand for government funds , privatization has been promoted as a way to make airports more efficient and financially viable . privatization refers to the shifting of governmental functions , responsibilities , and sometimes ownership , in whole or in part , to the private sector . with respect to airports , "privatization" can take many forms , up to and including the transfer of an entire airport to private operation and / or ownership . in the united states , most cases of airport privatization fall into the category of "partial privatization" ; full privatization , either under or outside the appp , has been rare . section 149 of the federal aviation reauthorization act of 1996 ( 49 u.s.c . 104-264 ) authorizes the faa administrator to exempt airports participating in the appp from some or all of the requirements to use airport revenue for airport - related purposes , to repay federal grants , or to return airport property acquired with federal assistance upon the lease or sale of the airport deeded by the federal government . the law originally limited participation in the appp to no more than five airports . the faa modernization and reform act of 2012 ( p.l . 112-95 ) increased the number of airports that may participate from five to 10 . only one large hub commercial airport may participate in the program , and that airport may only be leased , not sold . only general aviation airports can be sold under the appp . airport operators have generally not found privatization an attractive option . since its inception , 11 airports have applied to enter the appp ; two airports , stewart international airport in upstate new york and luis muñoz marín international airport in puerto rico , have completed the entire privatization process . however , stewart international airport later reverted to public ownership . there are three active applicants in the program . the others applied to privatize , but eventually chose not to proceed . language in h.r . 4 would allow more airports to enter the pilot program . such a change , by itself , would not address the factors that have discouraged airports from entering the program . these include the requirement under the appp that 65% of air carriers serving the airport approve a lease or sale of the airport ; restrictions on increases in airport rates and charges that exceed the rate of increase of the consumer price index ( cpi ) ; and a requirement that a private operator comply with grant assurances made by the previous public - sector operator to obtain aip grants .