appendix a . relevant statutory authorities and regulations the following is a listing of selected authorities and regulations pertaining to the duplication of disaster assistance benefits . this list should be considered representative , not exhaustive . stafford act ( 42 u.s.c . small business act ( 15 u.s.c . §636 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ) the first proviso in 15 u.s.c . §636 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( a ) states that sba is authorized to make disaster loans "provided that such damage or destruction is not compensated for by insurance or otherwise. §5155 ) the stafford act is the primary statute governing the provision of federal disaster assistance , particularly fema assistance . section 312 of the stafford act requires federal agencies that provide financial disaster assistance to ensure that individuals , businesses , or other entities suffering losses as a result of a major disaster or emergency do not receive assistance for losses for which they have already been compensated . section 312 also requires the president to establish procedures that ensure uniformity in preventing duplication of benefits . under section 312 , any person , business , or other entity that has received or is entitled to receive federal disaster assistance is liable to the united states for the repayment of such assistance to the extent that such assistance duplicates benefits available for the same purpose from another source , including insurance and other federal programs . stafford act ( 42 u.s.c . §5174 ) section 408 ( a ) ( 1 ) states that the president may provide assistance to individuals and households who , as a result of a major disaster , "have necessary expenses and serious needs in cases in which the individuals and households are unable to meet such expenses or needs through other means. fema regulation 44 c.f.r . 206.191 , which establishes the policies implementing section 312 of the stafford act , states that it is fema policy to prevent the duplication of benefits between its own programs , other assistance programs , and insurance benefits . the regulation requires individuals to repay all duplicated assistance to the agency providing the assistance . 206.191 , a federal agency providing disaster assistance is responsible for preventing or rectifying duplication of benefits when they occur . 206.191 also includes a "delivery sequence" hierarchy intended to prevent waste , fraud , and abuse of program assistance , including the duplication of benefits ( see figure 2 ) . 206.111 defines financial ability of the applicant of pay housing costs . according to 44 c.f.r . 206.111 if the "household income has not changed subsequent to or as a result of the disaster then the determination is based upon the amount paid for housing before the disaster . if the household income is reduced as a result of the disaster then the applicant will be deemed capable of paying 30 percent of gross post disaster income for housing . when computing financial ability , extreme or unusual financial circumstances may be considered by the regional administrator. small business act ( 15 u.s.c . §647 ) section 18 ( a ) of the small business act ( p.l .