in addition to these collections , ihs collects rent from facilities it owns . table 1 presents ihs's funding from fy2014 through the proposed president's fy2019 budget submission . the table generally shows increases in both appropriated funds and funds collected by ihs through fy2018 . the table presents ihs's three budget accounts — indian health services , contract support costs , and indian health facilities — and the funds collected and allocated to programs under these accounts . collections and proposed and actual mandatory funding are subtracted from program - level funding to show the agency's discretionary budget authority . although appropriations for ihs have increased over time , the fy2018 appropriation represents a larger increase than in prior years . in particular , the fy2018 appropriation included increases for a number of programs funded under the indian health facilities account , which includes maintenance and improvement and construction of new facilities . the president's budget request proposes to shift the fy2019 appropriation to discretionary funding . the fy2019 president's request represents a decrease from fy2018 levels for a number of ihs programs and activities . however , final fy2018 appropriations had not been enacted during the period in which the fy2019 president's request was being formulated . while the total request for ihs represents a decrease from fy2018-enacted levels , it represents an increase from fy2017-enacted levels and the fy2018 annualized continuing resolution levels that were in place at the time the fy2018 request levels were being determined . ihs facilities collect payments from third - party payors for services provided to ihs beneficiaries who are also enrolled in other programs . these collections are an important source of ihs's clinical services ( see table 1 ) . medicaid is the largest source of ihs's collections — accounting for approximately 68% of all third - party collections in fy2017 , the most recent year of final data available — followed by medicare ( 21% in fy2017 ) and private insurance ( 9% in fy2017 ) . it provides services either directly or through facilities and programs operated by indian tribes or tribal organizations through self - determination contracts and self - governance compacts authorized in the indian self - determination and education assistance act ( isdeaa ) . the snyder act of 1921 provides general statutory authority for ihs . in addition , specific ihs programs are authorized by two acts: the indian sanitation facilities act of 1959 and the indian health care improvement act ( ihcia ) . the indian sanitation facilities act authorizes the ihs to construct sanitation facilities for indian communities and homes . ihcia authorizes programs such as urban health , health professions recruitment , and substance abuse and mental health treatment , and permits ihs to receive reimbursements from medicare , medicaid , the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , and third - party insurers . finally , the public health service act provides funds for the special diabetes program for indians grants administered by ihs . the ihs has three major sources of funding , described here in order of magnitude: ( 1 ) discretionary appropriations , ( 2 ) collections , and ( 3 ) mandatory appropriations .