one of these has been introduced: the purchase of reinsurance . two others are in progress: the reduction of premium subsidies for some properties and reporting to make premium subsidies and cross - subsidies more transparent . although bw - 12 directed fema to make a recommendation about the best manner in which to accomplish the privatization of the nfip , fema presented the report without a recommendation , arguing that any privatization strategy is complex and involves significant policy decisions that would require input from a variety of stakeholders . they concluded that there is no single , clear solution ; it is heavily politicized ; and harsh criticism of any change is inevitable . currently few private insurers compete with the nfip in the primary residential flood insurance market . one illustration of this is that the naic only began systematically collecting separate data on private flood insurance in 2016 . as discussed in the following sections , private insurers have identified a number of potential barriers to more widespread private sector involvement in providing flood insurance . in fact , private sector flood risk analytics and modeling have improved significantly before any sizable entry of private insurers into the market . another argument was that , in contrast to the nfip , which cannot diversify its portfolio of flood risk by insuring unrelated risks , the insurance industry can diversify catastrophic risks with uncorrelated or less correlated risks from other perils , other geographic regions , non - catastrophic risks , or risks from unrelated lines of business . fema considered a range of concrete steps by which the barriers to private sector involvement could be addressed . currently the discussion is more focused on sharing risk , with the recognition that neither the nfip nor the private sector is likely to be able to write all of the policies needed to cover all of the flood risk in the united states . fema has identified the need to increase flood insurance coverage across the nation as a major priority for nfip reauthorization , and this also forms a key element of their 2018-2022 strategic plan . fema has developed a "moonshot" with the goal of doubling flood insurance coverage by 2023 through the increased sale of both nfip and private policies . for hurricane irma , the average nfip claim in florida was $51,773 , while the average ia payment was about $1,315 . the 2017 hurricane season highlighted the flood insurance gap in the united states , where many people that are exposed to flood risk are not covered by flood insurance . however , the private market is unlikely to expand significantly without congressional action . the concerns of private companies related to the mandatory purchase requirement and continuous coverage and the concerns of some members of congress about adverse selection are among the most pressing issues likely to be addressed in any long - term nfip reauthorization . the provisions in the 115 th congress legislation that related to private flood insurance , and the issues raised as barriers to private sector involvement , are summarized below and compared side - by - side in table a - 1 .