115-25 to improve the agency's hurricane predictions . for example , noaa does not make a seasonal hurricane landfall forecast , and it does not predict levels of hurricane activity for any particular area within the atlantic region . hurricane landfalls are determined largely by weather patterns after the storm has formed , which are predictable only days before the hurricane makes landfall ( see " improvements and challenges " ) . noaa also includes the following with its outlook: it only takes one hurricane ( or tropical storm ) to cause a disaster . components of atmospheric circulation patterns that developed and are not conducive to hurricane formation ; and 4 . consistent with the first three items , all hurricane models predict a less active season than they did in may . although the atlantic hurricane season runs from june 1 to november 30 , the cpc notes that most of the predicted activity is expected to occur during the peak hurricane months of august to october . because ocean and atmospheric conditions may change , the cpc typically issues an update in august to its initial may outlook to coincide with the onset of the peak season . noaa includes several disclaimers when issuing its seasonal outlook . residents , businesses , and government agencies of coastal and near - coastal regions are urged to prepare for every hurricane season regardless of this , or any other , seasonal outlook . congress enacted section 104 , title i , of p.l . 115-25 ( the weather act ) specifically to improve hurricane forecasting with a focus on improving the prediction of rapid intensification and track of hurricanes ; improving the forecast and communication of storm surges from hurricanes ; and incorporating risk communication research to create more effective watch and warning products . congress has continued to focus on these issues in the second session of the 115 th congress . at an april 12 , 2018 , hearing before the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation , the acting noaa administrator stated that forecasts for the 2017 hurricane season "were the best the nhc [national hurricane center] ever produced. however , despite clear improvements in hurricane forecasting , some stakeholders point to the need for even better forecasts . one witness representing the red cross at the april 12 , 2018 , hearing , identified some uncertainties with predicting the track of hurricane irma that "challenged planners across the state [of florida]. a witness representing the national transportation safety board noted that the track for hurricane joaquin in 2015 was difficult to forecast because of moderate wind shear and recommended that noaa improve the performance of its forecast models in moderate wind - shear environments . in the weather act , congress required a detailed plan for noaa's hurricane forecast improvement program under section 104 within a year of enactment ; however , the plan was unavailable as of early july 2018 . other sections of the weather act address aspects of the noaa weather enterprise that also could lead to improvements in hurricane forecasting .