scalability . t rading . many cryptocurrency trading platforms are registered as money - transmission services ( mts ) instead of national securities exchanges . mts are money transfer or payment operations that are mainly subject to state instead of federal regulations . because mts were not designed for cryptocurrency trading activities , they are said to be inefficient when operating across state lines . in addition , these services raise major investor protection concerns because they are not subject to the same level of regulatory oversight as national securities exchanges . the sec recently issued a statement clarifying that the online platforms for trading digital assets could be potentially unlawful . in response to increased regulatory attention , numerous crypto exchanges have become federally regulated as of july 2018 . for example , one of the largest crypto exchanges , coinbase , has obtained multiple licenses through acquisitions and is now under sec and finra oversight . cyber s ecurity . investors risk losing their investments as well as personal information through hacker attacks . one study estimates that more than 10% of ico proceeds are lost as a result of attacks . current blockchain networks are said to have limited capacity and scalability . for example , major network congestion occurred in november 2017 , when the trading of virtual cats , "cryptokitties," clogged ethereum . this has led to discussions regarding the fundamental design of blockchain technology , which requires that every transaction be processed by all network nodes , limiting the number of concurrent transactions . new blockchain solutions that could potentially circumvent network congestions have gained traction as measured by the amount of investments attracted . for example , proposed solutions provided by oasis labs and block.one ( the developer of the eos platform ) have attracted $45 million through a private token presale and $4.2 billion through an ico , respectively . but the new blockchains' scalability has not yet been demonstrated in full . market infrastructure . some observers argue the market infrastructure needed to support smaller ipos — such as specialized investment banks and analyst coverage of smaller public companies — is lacking , especially when compared to the market infrastructure for larger ipos . agency conflict . agency conflict refers to the conflict between owners and managers over the control and use of corporate resources — conflicts that can potentially undermine corporate financial health and efficiency . in corporate finance , the owners of firms are generally referred to as stockholders . some argue that some organizations may choose to rely more heavily on public and private debt , rather than public equity , thus potentially avoiding certain agency conflict issues because of the absence of public stockholders . as such , capital funding through private offerings could reduce agency conflicts for those companies and generate operational efficiency and productivity . financial globalization . financial globalization refers to the ease by which capital can flow around the world to find its most valued use . financial globalization has increased significantly as countries have removed barriers to capital flows and new tools have facilitated cross - border investments .