cities. the second study attempted to address some of the shortcomings of the first by using traffic stop and crime data for jurisdictions in missouri to evaluate the link between de - policing and crime rates . their analysis found that police made about 67,000 fewer stops in 2015 compared to 2014 , but the reduction in the number of stops did not correspond with a decrease in the number of searches or arrests . part i offenses include four "violent" offenses ( murder and non - negligent manslaughter , forcible rape , robbery , and aggravated assault ) and four "property" offenses ( burglary , larceny - theft , motor vehicle theft , and arson ) . the fbi collects data on the number of arrests made for the eight part i offenses and 21 other offenses , known as part ii offenses . the ucr , with the exception of nibrs , is a summary system , meaning that offense data submitted to the fbi by local law enforcement agencies show the total number of known part i offenses . likewise , ucr arrest data show the total number of persons arrested by reporting law enforcement agencies . law enforcement agencies voluntarily submit crime data to the fbi for inclusion in the ucr . such data are submitted monthly either directly to the fbi or via a state ucr program , which in turn submits data to the fbi . even though participation is voluntary , most law enforcement agencies participate . in 2016 , approximately 18,400 law enforcement agencies reported data to the ucr . these agencies' jurisdictions contain about 323.4 million people , meaning that over 99% of the country's population was served by a law enforcement agency that reported crime data to the fbi . while ucr crime data published by the fbi is usually considered to be the official measure of crime in the united states , these data have limitations that should be considered when using them to evaluate crime trends . limited offense data . the ucr srs collects offense data on a limited number of crimes ( i.e. , part i crimes only ) . known offense data are not available for part ii crimes , which tend to be committed at a greater frequency than part i crimes . currently , the ucr srs does not collect known offense data on crimes commonly covered by the media , such as kidnapping , bribery , or child pornography . unreported crimes . the ucr collects data on the number of offenses known to law enforcement . however , not all crimes that occur are known to the police . for example , in 2016 only 42% of violent victimizations were reported to the police . in some cases , the victim ( s ) or witness ( es ) to a crime might not report the incident to the police because of fear of reprisal , the belief that the police would not or could not do anything to help , or a belief that the crime was a personal issue or too trivial to report . the reporting practices of law enforcement . ucr data can be affected by the reporting practices of local law enforcement .