in response to e.o . 13520 , omb created a central website , paymentaccuracy.gov , which includes data for all high - priority programs , as the executive order required . omb also revised omb circular a - 123 , appendix c , to incorporate the new requirements for high - priority programs . under the revised circular , a program is deemed high - priority if it has reported more than $750 million in improper payments in the most recent fiscal year ; not reported an improper payments amount for the most recent fiscal year , but has reported more than $750 million in improper payments in a previous fiscal year ; or not yet reported on improper payments for the program as a whole , but has determined that the total amount of improper payments for program components that have been measured exceeds $750 million . in fy2010 , congress passed the improper payments elimination and recovery act ( ipera ; p.l . 111-204 ) , which amended ipia to require improvements in agency risk assessments , improper payment estimation procedures , and corrective action plans . ipera also requires agencies to establish recovery audit programs for the purpose of recapturing overpayments . in addition , ipera requires the inspector general ( ig ) of each agency to determine whether the agency is in compliance with ipera and report the findings to the head of the agency , the comptroller general , the house committee on oversight and government reform , and the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs . an agency is deemed in compliance if it has published an annual financial statement ; conducted risk assessments for each program or activity ; published improper payment estimates , corrective action plans , and improper payment reduction targets for all risk - susceptible programs and activities ; and reported no improper payment rate that met or exceeded 10% . in 2012 , congress passed the improper payments elimination and recovery audit improvement act ( iperia ; p.l . iperia codifies e.o . it requires that omb identify a list of "high - priority" federal programs for greater levels of oversight . these programs must be chosen on the basis of the relatively high dollar value or error rate of improper payments , or because they are deemed more susceptible to improper payments when compared to other high - risk programs , regardless of size . iperia does not establish a dollar threshold for high - priority programs . iperia requires omb to establish annual targets , as well as quarterly and semi - annual actions for reducing improper payments for the high - priority programs . in addition , each agency with a high - priority program is required to submit an annual report on the steps it has taken , and plans to take , to prevent and recover future improper payments . the report is to be submitted to the agency's ig and posted on a website accessible to the public .