the program was extended into early 2019 . the imf has generally praised the government's economic performance , notably regarding revenue collection efforts , public debt audits aimed at identifying invalid claims , and accountability measures ( eg , the creation of a special prosecutor post ( see above ) and a proposed public financial management act ) . it has also called new government credit commitments "justified," while also warning that the national debt loads remain "at high risk of distress. annual foreign direct investment ( fdi ) has generally grown in recent years , especially in the energy sector . according to the u.n. conference on trade and development , fdi flows into ghana averaged $3.3 billion annually between 2014 and 2016 , while fdi stock averaged $26.5 billion . the world bank's 2019 doing business report ranks ghana 114 th out of 190 countries surveyed . this is far below its 2012 ranking of 63 rd among 183 countries , yet still placed ghana in the top - performing quarter of african countries . under mahama , ghana created an investment promotion center to oversee fdi and streamline investment procedures . while in its 2019 investment climate statement for ghana the state department reported that ghana has "one of the more open" investment climates in africa , it also cited a number of "troubling" foreign investment policy in recent years . the trump administration has not announced any major changes in u.s. policy toward ghana , but has proposed a sharp reduction to usaid and state department - administered aid for ghana , which could affect bilateral relations . according to the state department , the united states and ghana "share a long history promoting democracy , human rights , and the rule of law," and ghana is a model for its peers throughout africa "in promoting resilient democratic institutions , transparent and peaceful transitions of power and regional stability. there have also been robust "people - to - people" relations since the late 1950s , notably in the form of learning exchange visits and cooperation among educational and scientific institutions , and thousands of ghanaians have been educated in the united states . there are close cultural ties , notably between ghanaians and african - americans ; there is a substantial african - american expatriate community in ghana . despite generally amicable bilateral relations , the u.s. department of homeland security ( dhs ) in coordination with the department of state imposed visa sanctions on ghana in january 2019 , citing a "lack of cooperation in accepting their nationals ordered removed from the united states"—an issue of particular salience for the trump administration . the restrictions affect tourist and business visitor visas for certain government officials and , in some cases , their families and attendants . the united states had earlier warned that it might take such an action: in june 2018 , the united states alleged that ghana's government was insufficiently cooperating with u.s. deportation orders by not interviewing or providing travel documents to ghanaians being deported from the united states . mahama then won election in polls held in late 2012 .