374 and 70 stat . 387 ) was the first act that authorized separate funds for the er program . from 1956 through 1978 , funding for the program was drawn 40% from the treasury's general fund revenues and 60% from the highway trust fund ( htf ) . the htf is supported primarily by taxes paid by highway users , mainly on gasoline and diesel fuel . starting in 1979 , the er program was funded 100% from the htf . in 1998 congress made the annual $100 million htf authorization permanent . however , beginning in 2005 , while congress continued the $100 million permanent authorization from the htf , it authorized supplemental appropriations from the general fund . on december 4 , 2015 , the er program was reauthorized through fy2020 in the fixing america's surface transportation act ( fast act ; p.l . er funds may be used for the repair and reconstruction of federal - aid highways and roads on federally owned lands that have suffered serious damage as a result of either ( 1 ) a natural disaster over a wide area , such as a flood , hurricane , tidal wave , earthquake , tornado , severe storm , or landslide ; or ( 2 ) a catastrophic failure from any external cause ( for example , the collapse of a bridge that is struck by a barge ) . historically , however , the vast majority of er funds have gone for repair and reconstruction following natural disasters . as is true with most other fhwa programs , the er program is administered through state departments of transportation in close coordination with fhwa's division offices in each state . the decision to seek financial assistance under the program is made by state departments of transportation , not by the federal government . local officials who wish to seek er funding must do so through their state departments of transportation ; they do not deal directly with fhwa . as state departments of transportation normally deal with fhwa division office staff on many matters , they typically have working relationships that facilitate a quick coordinated response to disasters . the public transportation emergency relief program ( 49 u.s.c . ยง602 ) , established in section 20017 of the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century ( map - 21 ; p.l . 112-141 ) , is administered by the federal transit administration ( fta ) and is similar in intent to fhwa's er program . fta's program provides federal funding on a reimbursement basis to states , territories , local government authorities , indian tribes , and public transportation agencies for damage to public transportation facilities or operations as a result of a natural disaster or other emergency and to protect assets from future damage . in the past , funding for these purposes was provided by fema or through appropriations administered by fta following a specific disaster . for example , in response to the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , which caused severe damage to rapid transit lines in new york city , about $4.7 billion was provided in emergency supplemental appropriations for transit , some of which was administered by fta .