2 in the 112 th congress . the other house - passed bills listed in table 3 would have ( 1 ) repealed , restricted , or otherwise limited , specific provisions in the aca ; ( 2 ) eliminated appropriations provided by the aca and rescinded all unobligated funds ; ( 3 ) replaced the mandatory appropriations for one or more aca programs with authorizations of ( discretionary ) appropriations and rescinded all unobligated funds ; or ( 4 ) blocked or otherwise delayed implementation of specific aca provisions . the senate passed considerably fewer bills that would have modified the health care - related provisions of the aca than did the house in the 111 th - 115 th congresses ( table 4 ) . none of the senate - passed bills listed in table 4 would have repealed the aca in its entirety . two of the three bills listed in table 4 would have repealed or amended specific provisions in the aca , and the third bill would have extended a program that was modified under the aca . they issued an updated estimate in february 2011 . according to the february 2011 estimate , the aca would reduce federal deficits by $210 billion over the 10-year period fy2012-fy2021 , and the number of non - elderly uninsured individuals would be reduced by about 34 million in cy2021 . cbo and jct have not issued an updated cost estimate of the aca in its entirety since february 2011 ; however , they have issued many other aca - related cost estimates and analyses . the estimates have changed over time due to changes in the economy , the effects of enacted legislation , technical changes in the agencies' analyses ( eg , new survey and agency data on enrollment in health care programs ) , and the effects of administrative and judicial decisions ( eg , the 2012 u.s. supreme court decision effectively making state participation in the aca medicaid expansion voluntary ) . table 2 summarizes legislation amending the aca that has been enacted since march 30 , 2010 . each table entry identifies the congress in which the law was enacted , provides the public law number and date of enactment , and offers a brief description of the change ( s ) made to the aca . the laws are listed in reverse chronological order , beginning with the most recently enacted legislation and extending back to the first measure signed into law following enactment of the aca and the accompanying package of amendments in the hcera . during the 111 th congress , a number of clarifications and technical adjustments to the aca were enacted . in the 112 th - 115 th congresses , several more substantive aca amendments were signed into law . for example , title viii of the aca — the community living assistance services and supports ( class ) act — which would have established a voluntary , long - term care insurance program to pay for community - based services and supports for individuals with functional limitations was repealed . lawmakers also repealed a tax - filing provision ( irs form 1099 ) that had been included in the aca .