these instances are identified in table 2 . the most recent example of a formal call to order being made occurred on february 7 , 2017 . both methods of practice are examined in more detail below . crs conducted full - text searches of the congressional record and the senate journal using the legislative information system of the u.s. congress ( lis ) and the proquest congressional database in order to identify instances in which a call to order under senate rule xix had been formally invoked since june 14 , 1962 . in that case , a senator was called to order by the majority leader for quoting a former senator and reading passages from a letter written to the committee on the judiciary by a notable private individual , both of which negatively characterized a sitting senator . the presiding officer had previously warned the speaking senator that her remarks could be in violation of the rule xix provisions regarding disorderly language . when called to order , the speaking senator asked unanimous consent to proceed in order , but objection was heard to the request . a subsequent motion to allow the speaking senator to proceed in order was rejected by a vote of 43-50 . in practice , senators have utilized a number of different techniques to draw a speaker's attention to rule xix without formally invoking a call to order . senators have , for example , stated that they considered raising a rule xix call to order , indicated their belief that certain words transgressed the rule , cautioned their colleagues to be mindful of rule xix when speaking , made parliamentary inquiries of the chair about the application of the call to order mechanism , or directly asked the chair to read from the rule . these practices afforded senators the opportunity to express their displeasure with a speaker's remarks without having to formally call a colleague to order . this informal manner of lessening tensions and enforcing decorum in debate is perhaps unsurprising in a chamber that has traditionally valued comity and senatorial courtesy over a rigid adherence to procedure . most recently , at the urging of a senator , the presiding officer of the senate , on january 21 , 2018 , read paragraph 4 of rule xix aloud to the senate immediately following a request by a senator that it be read aloud . while it is not clear what specific words prompted the request that the rule be read , the incident occurred in the course of an animated floor debate regarding government funding during a lapse in appropriations . in another example , on october 4 , 2013 , a senator stated in debate that , in his judgment , certain statements made by another senator violated rule xix standards of decorum but that he was not going to raise a call to order related to them . in response to the senator's statement , the presiding officer read paragraph 2 of rule xix aloud "for the edification of all senators. there have been numerous other examples in recent years in which rule xix was mentioned in floor debate but a call to order was not formally invoked .