each of these three acts is discussed in more detail below . on february 17 , 2009 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 was enacted . fish and wildlife service programs " section above . from fy2009 through fy2018 , fws discretionary funding has averaged $1.5 billion , allocated across nine appropriations accounts ( figure 7 ) . during this time period , the majority of fws discretionary funding ( 81.67% ) has been provided to the resource management account , which provides funding for several activities , including ecological services , which includes activities related to fws's role in esa implementation ; habitat conservation ; national wildlife refuge system ; conservation and law enforcement ; fish and aquatic conservation ; cooperative landscape conservation ; science support ; and general operations . the remaining 18.33% has been allocated across eight appropriations accounts , each receiving between 0.27% and 4.35% of the total appropriation , on average ( figure 7 ) . selected assistant director and chief positions were established in statute . for example , the position of assistant director for wildlife and sport fish restoration was established by the fish and wildlife programs improvement and national wildlife refuge system centennial act of 2000 . fws's mission is to "work with others to conserve , protect and enhance fish , wildlife and plants and their habitats for the continuing benefit of the american people. to accomplish this mission , fws performs numerous administrative and enforcement activities , which are reflected in the agency's programmatic structure . these activities include but are not limited to the following: operation of the national wildlife refuge system ; restoration of fisheries and fish habitats ; protection of threatened and endangered species ; management of migratory birds ; assistance in international conservation efforts ; enforcement of federal wildlife laws ; and disbursement of funds to states and territories for wildlife and sport fish restoration and for hunting and fishing safety and education . in addition to activities entirely carried out by fws , cooperation , coordination , and partnerships are integral to fws activities . the service routinely partners with other federal , state , local , tribal , and private partners to carry out activities . congress has codified several of fws's programs in statutes , which provide guidance to the agency . in cases where programs are not directly established in statute , authority is derived from other fws enabling legislation , such as the fish and wildlife act of 1956 or the national wildlife refuge system administration act of 1966 . the following sections provide an overview of selected fws programs and certain statutes , treaties , and agreements relevant to each program . ( see figure 4 for a timeline of selected statutes related to fws. ) although many of fws's primary responsibilities are described , not all of the service's programmatic responsibilities are discussed herein . selected issues that may be of interest to congress are noted in each section . fws is funded through both discretionary and mandatory appropriations , which are provided on an annual basis .