appendix a . data sources and major publications a number of sources and major publications provide data about the federal stem education effort and the condition of stem education in the united states and around the globe . this appendix includes links to sources and publications where readers can find stem education data and information . national and international assessments national assessment of educational progress ( naep ) . the naep is the largest nationally representative and continuing assessment of u.s. k - 12 students , usually taken by students in grades 4 , 8 , and 12 . there are two naep assessments: main naep and long - term trends ( ltt ) . the main naep administers assessments in 12 subject areas , including mathematics and science . the ltt assesses mathematics and reading . in 2013 , ed launched a pilot naep assessment in technology and engineering literacy . the first such assessment was carried out in 2014 . trends in international mathematics and science study ( timss ) . timss is an international test that assesses the mathematics and science achievements of u.s. 4 th and 8 th grade students in a manner designed to be comparable across countries . the most recent timss assessment was administered in 2015 . program for international student assessment ( pisa ) . pisa assesses the reading , mathematics , and science literacy of 15-year - old students in dozens of industrialized and developing nations . data collection for the most recent pisa assessment was completed in fall 2015 . federal programs and inventories u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) , science , technology , engineering , and mathematics education : actions needed to better assess the federal investment ( gao - 18 - 290 ) . this 2018 gao report on federal stem education programs includes an inventory of federal stem education programs and policy recommendations . national science and technology council , a report from the federal inventory of stem education fast - track action committee ( nstc - 11 ) and a report from the federal coordination in stem education task force ( nstc - 12 ) . these reports provide an inventory of federal stem education investments from fy2008 to fy2010 actual ( in the 2011 report ) and an update with information from fy2011 enacted to fy2013 requested ( in the 2012 report ) . u.s. department of education , academic competitiveness council ( acc ) , report of the academic competitiveness council — the 2007 acc report provides an inventory of federal stem education programs with funding data from fy2005 actual to the fy2007 president's budget request . it also includes policy recommendations and an assessment of stem education program evaluations from across the federal enterprise . gao , higher education: federal science , technology , engineering , and mathematics programs and related trends ( gao - 06-114 ) . this 2005 gao report includes an inventory of federal stem education programs and assesses program goals and constituencies served . condition of stem education national science board , science and engineering indicators 201 6 . this publication provides , among other things , one of the most comprehensive collections of key stem indicators . it is published every two years .