bush veto in 1992 . the clinton administration suspended the gag rule in january 1993 . according to the clinton administration , during the first 18 years of the [title x] program , medical professionals at title x clinics provided complete , uncensored information , including nondirective abortion counseling . in february 1988 , [hhs] adopted regulations , which have become known as the "gag rule," prohibiting title x recipients from providing their patients with information , counseling , or referrals concerning abortion . subsequent attempts by the [george h.w. bush administration to modify the gag rule and ensuing litigation have created confusion and uncertainty about the current legal status of the regulations . other members of congress state that title x providers should not provide abortion referrals as a method of family planning . according to these members , current regulations on abortion referrals "undermine" the statutory requirement that no title x funds shall be used in projects "where abortion is a method of family planning. the trump administration has stated that "[c]ontrary to recent media reports , hhs's proposal does not include the so - called 'gag rule' on counseling about abortion that was part of the reagan administration's title x rule. members on both sides of the issue agree , however , that the proposed rule would make it harder for planned parenthood federation of america ( ppfa ) to receive title x funds . to assist congress as it considers issues related to title x , this report provides a brief overview of the title x program ; discusses the proposed rule's major elements and explains how the proposed rule differs from current title x rules and guidance ; provides hhs' rationale for the components of the proposed rule , as well as selected commentary from key stakeholders in reaction to the proposed rule ; and summarizes hhs's regulatory impact analysis . all 50 states , the district of columbia , and the u.s. territories and freely associated states ( collectively referred to as states ) are eligible to apply for title x grants , as are other public agencies and nonprofit organizations . grantees may use title x dollars to establish and operate family planning projects that provide effective methods of family planning services , such as contraception , as well as infertility services . in 2016 , there were 91 title x family planning services grantees . these grantees included 48 state , local , and territorial health departments and 43 nonprofit organizations , such as community health agencies , family planning councils , and planned parenthood affiliates . grants for family planning services fund a range of family planning and related preventive health services , such as contraceptive services ; natural family planning methods ; infertility services ; adolescent services ; breast and cervical cancer screening and prevention ; sexually transmitted disease ( std ) and human immunodeficiency virus ( hiv ) prevention education , counseling , testing , and referral ; preconception health services ; and reproductive life plan counseling . these services must be provided "without coercion and with respect for the privacy , dignity , social , and religious beliefs of the individuals being served.