these issues will be addressed in later sections of this report . while most economists are concerned over the long - term impact of sustained trade deficits on the economy , they question the role that trade agreements play in determining the trade deficit or the conclusion that the trade deficit is substantially the product of unfair treatment . instead , standard trade theory contends that trade represents an exchange of assets between willing participants who engage in trade because they believe it maximizes their best interests . on march 8 , 2018 , the trump administration announced that it would apply 10% tariffs on aluminum and 25% on steel products from several u.s. trading partners , based on an investigation under section 232 of the potential national security impact of these imports . similarly , the administration announced on may 24 , 2018 , a section 232 investigation into the potential national security implications of imported automobiles with potential imposition of new tariffs depending on the outcome of the investigation . the administration also announced on march 22 , 2018 , that it would impose new tariffs on $50 billion in chinese exports to the united states as a result of an investigation under section 301 of china's trade practices on intellectual property and forced technology transfers ; subsequently , the trump administration and the chinese government announced the possible imposition of additional tariffs on each other's imports . such effects could be offset somewhat by the extent to which the capital outflows tended to weaken the exchange value of the dollar and improve the price competitiveness of u.s , exports , potentially increasing production and employment in the export sector . recent data indicate that high unemployment rates have occurred during periods when there were smaller deficits in the merchandise trade accounts as a result of the overall industrial composition of the economy . for instance , in 2006 , the u.s. unemployment rate had fallen to about 4.0% , with the economy growing at an annual rate of 2.7% . at the same time , the economy experienced a merchandise trade deficit of over - $800 billion , as shown in figure 6 . in 2009 , however , the rate of economic growth had fallen to a negative 3.0% and the rate of unemployment had risen to 9.9% , but the trade deficit had fallen to - $510 billion . since 2009 , the annual u.s. merchandise trade deficit increased from around - $500 billion to around - $750 billion in 2011 ; it has remained within a narrow range through 2017 . during this same period , however , the rate of unemployment has fallen from nearly 10% in 2010 to under 4.0% in mid - 2018 . while many of the economic arguments can be arcane at times , economists generally contend that from the perspective of the economy as a whole , both consumers and producers benefit from liberalized trade and that the gains for the economy as a whole outweigh the costs , irrespective of the bilateral trade deficit or surplus .