the following sections address these topics . buprenorphine is one of three medications currently used to treat adults addicted to opioids . the precipitous rise in opioid misuse in the last decade and increasing financial burden of this epidemic highlight the need for effective treatments . despite marked increases in opioid abuse , deaths attributed to opioids , and related hospital admissions , the majority of individuals in need of treatment do not receive it . buprenorphine is regulated differently when used for opioid use disorder than when used for pain . table a - 2 summarizes each article , including its participants , study design and aims , and conclusions . the controlled substances act ( csa ) limits who may prescribe ( or administer or dispense ) buprenorphine to treat opioid use disorder , and the circumstances under which they may do so . these limits have implications for how patients gain access to buprenorphine and how they pay for buprenorphine . the different forms of buprenorphine ( eg , implants vs. sublingual , etc. ) also have implications for how patients gain access to buprenorphine and how they pay for it . buprenorphine is one of three medications currently used to treat adults addicted to opioids . the rise in opioid abuse in the last decade and substantial financial burden of this epidemic highlight the need for effective treatments . overall , buprenorphine appears to be an effective medication for treatment of opioid dependence . despite marked increases in opioid abuse , related hospital admissions , and overdose deaths , the majority of individuals in need of treatment do not receive it . prescribing practices for buprenorphine as a treatment for opioid use disorder are carefully regulated and include provisions that limit the number of patients certain providers can treat simultaneously . congress and the executive branch have made efforts to increase access to buprenorphine treatment while balancing potential risks of this opioid - replacement therapy . congress is likely to continue grappling with the opioid crisis for some time , as policymakers and medical and public health professionals wait for new data to indicate whether existing efforts have changed the trajectory of the opioid epidemic . striking a balance between providing access to buprenorphine and maintaining quality standards for those who prescribe or dispense it may prove challenging . report methodology much of the information in this crs report is based on a systematic review of the scientific literature on buprenorphine , undertaken in august 2017 . a systematic review is a single comprehensive report collating all of the relevant empirical evidence on a specific topic . systematic reviews use explicit , systematic methods to identify studies that fit pre - specified eligibility criteria . systematic reviews have become an increasingly important source of information for clinical practice and policymaking . they synthesize large amounts of information and provide better estimations of performance and generalizability than individual studies . crs' systematic review aimed to determine how well buprenorphine works in the treatment of opioid dependence compared to other treatments ( such as methadone ) or no treatment at all . studies were included if they were comparisons of buprenorphine with other interventions in outpatient community settings in the united states and were published in the past five years .