115-97 ) are scheduled to expire . congress and the president may consider proposals for deficit reduction if fiscal issues remain a key item on the legislative agenda . this report summarizes issues surrounding the federal budget , examines policy changes relevant to the budget framework for fy2019 , and discusses recent major policy proposals included in the president's fy2019 budget . it concludes by addressing major short - and long - term fiscal challenges facing the federal government . in march , cbo typically issues an analysis of the president's budget submission with revised baseline estimates and projections . these documents can be delayed as a result of the legislative agenda or if the president's budget is off schedule . in late summer , cbo issues an updated budget and economic outlook with new baseline projections . in these documents , cbo sets a current - law baseline as a benchmark to evaluate whether legislative proposals would increase or decrease outlays and revenue collection . baseline estimates are not intended to predict likely future outcomes , but to show what spending and revenues would be if current law remained in effect . cbo typically evaluates the budgetary consequences of most legislative proposals and the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) evaluates the consequences of revenue proposals . cbo also releases other periodic publications focusing on the future fiscal health of the united states . in its publication the long - term budget outlook , cbo makes projections on the state of the federal budget over the next 30 years . cbo discusses spending and revenue levels and the related issues that it expects will arise under different policy assumptions . in its budget options volumes , cbo provides specific policy options and the impact they will have on spending and revenues over a 10-year budget window . cbo also provides arguments for and against enacting each policy . omb documents the president's budget contains five major volumes: ( 1 ) the budget , ( 2 ) historical tables , ( 3 ) analytical perspectives , ( 4 ) appendix , and ( 5 ) supplemental materials . these documents lay out the administration's projections of the fiscal outlook for the country , along with spending levels proposed for each of the federal government's departments and programs . the historical tables volume also provides significant amounts of budget data , much of which extend back to 1962 or earlier . along with the administration's budget documents , the department of the treasury also releases its green book , which provides further detail on the revenue proposals that are contained in the budget . persistent deficits , however , lead to growing levels of federal debt that may lead to higher interest payments and may also have adverse macroeconomic consequences in the long term , including slowing investment and lowering economic growth . discussions over fy2019 discretionary appropriations legislation may be held in advance of the beginning of the fiscal year ( or afterwards in the case of supplemental or continuing appropriations ) . congress may elect to revisit the deficit reduction measures imposed by the bca as amended , which include discretionary caps on defense and nondefense budget authority through fy2021 and spending reduction measures on certain mandatory programs through fy2027 .