as reported , h.r . 3280 had two provisions that would have tightened u.s. economic sanctions on cuba , but they were not included in p.l . 3280 as reported. ) the treasury department's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) administers the main body of cuba embargo regulations , the cuban assets control regulations , which were first issued in 1963 , and have been amended many times over the years to reflect changes in u.s. policy toward cuba . section 130 would have provided that no funds made available by the act could be used to approve , license , facilitate , authorize , or otherwise allow the use , purchase , trafficking , or import of property confiscated by the cuban government . the provision appeared to be aimed at prohibiting the importation of rum and tobacco products by authorized u.s. travelers as accompanied baggage . in the 114 th congress , a similar provision had been included in the house appropriations committee version of the fy2017 fsgg appropriations bill , h.r . 5485 ( section 133 ) , but was not included in the fy2017 enacted omnibus appropriations measure . section 131 , which relates to a trademark sanction on cuba , would have provided that no funds made available by the act could have been used to authorize a general license or approve a specific license with respect to a mark , trade name , or commercial name that is substantially similar to one that was used in connection with a business or assets that were confiscated by the cuban government unless the original owner expressly consented . the provision , which would have prohibited ofac from licensing the payment of trademark registration fees , relates to a long - standing dispute between a cuban company and the bermuda - based bacardi limited over the havana club trademark . in january 2016 , ofac issued a specific license for the cuban company to make payments related to the renewal of the havana club trademark , and the u.s. patent and trademark office subsequently renewed the havana club trademark until 2026 . a similar provision had been included in h.r . 5485 in the 114 th congress , but was not included in the fy2017 final appropriations measure . most of the eac funding was for grants to states for the election reform program . table 1 shows the status of fsgg appropriations measures at key points in the appropriations process . table 2 lists the broad amounts requested by the president and included in the various fsgg bills , largely by title . specific columns in table 2 are fsgg agencies' enacted amounts for fy2017 , the president's fy2018 request , the fy2018 amounts from h.r . 3354 as passed by the house , the fy2018 amounts from the senate appropriations chairmen's draft bill , and the enacted amounts combined from p.l . the fsgg appropriations bill provides funding for more than two dozen independent agencies , performing a wide range of functions . table 3 details fsgg agencies' enacted amounts for fy2017 , the president's fy2018 request , the fy2018 amounts from h.r .