summary of gao opinion . the house passed s.j.res . 57 on may 8 , 2018 , and the president signed it into law on may 21 , 2018 . standing alone , a gao opinion deciding whether an agency action is a "rule" covered by the cra does not have legal effect . is this also the gao's understanding of its role ? in response , gao's general counsel , robert murphy , stated that the cra does not provide any identification of who is to decide what a rule is , unlike the issue of whether a rule is a major rule or not , which , as [oira administrator] ms. katzen pointed out , has been assigned to her . so in that sense , i cannot say that gao has a special role under the statute for making that determination . the decision , the opinion , that we issued last week on the question [of whether the tongass land management plan was a rule under the cra] was done in our role as adviser to the congress in response to the request of three chairmen of congressional committees . thus , gao acknowledged that its opinion was provided not pursuant to any specific provision of the statute , but in a more general , advisory capacity . in the years following , members continued to request gao opinions advising congress on the matter of whether an agency action should have been submitted . although gao has issued 21 opinions on the applicability of the cra since 1996 , congress's response to those opinions has varied over time . initially , the gao opinions finding that the agency actions in question were rules under the cra did not lead to the introduction of joint resolutions of disapproval — members appear not to have introduced any joint resolutions of disapproval following a gao opinion until 2008 . in 2008 , gao issued an opinion stating that a letter from the centers for medicare & medicaid services to state health officials concerning the state children's health insurance program was a rule for the purposes of the cra ; in response , senator john d. rockefeller introduced s.j.res . 44 to disapprove the guidance provided in the letter . according to a press release from the committee on finance at the time , however , the committee did not take further action on the resolution of disapproval because it had missed the window during which the action would have been required to be taken under the cra to use its expedited procedures . the first time either chamber took action on a resolution of disapproval introduced following a gao opinion was in 2012 , when the house passed h.j.res . 118 ( 112 th congress ) , a resolution of disapproval that would have overturned an information memorandum issued by the department of health and human services relating to the implementation of the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) program . the first time the senate took action on such a resolution of disapproval was on april 18 , 2018 , when it passed s.j.res .