nevertheless , there are some limitations to in - home care . would families with non - working spouses be eligible to receive a stipend ? would childcare stipends be a flat rate ( similar to basic allowance for subsistence ) or vary by geographic location and prevailing market rates ( similar to bah ) ? are there other oversight concerns for dod's cdp ? these issues are discussed in more detail in the following sections . debates about the provision of publicly - funded childcare programs often arise from philosophical differences regarding the role of government . those who oppose government support of childcare programs typically express social , fiscal , or equity concerns . some contend that childcare should be a parental responsibility rather than a social good to be provided by the government . some believe that it is best for a mother to stay home with her children and that when the government provides economic incentives for work outside the home it expresses a societal preference for out - of - home care . some carry this argument further and contend that subsidized childcare endorses and incentivizes single - parenthood or unstable family arrangements , which they contend may have negative economic and social consequences . research from a canadian effort to introduce universal subsidized childcare in one province found some evidence suggesting that in the short run , children and families experienced some undesirable outcomes , including negative behaviors among children ( eg , hyperactivity , aggressiveness ) and reduction in parental relationship quality . on the other hand , those who advocate for publicly - funded childcare programs often argue that childcare provides societal benefits and should be a community resource in the same manner as schools , libraries , and parks . in 2017 , the birthrate in the u.s. was the lowest in 30 years . falling birthrates can have some societal consequences , such as diminished economic growth and increased strain on entitlement programs such as social security . what are the pros and cons of different types of childcare support ? some studies have shown that accessible and affordable childcare helps to improve fertility rates as well as labor - force outcomes for women , who are often the default caregivers , allowing them to pursue a career and earnings outside of the home . for children , center - based childcare is associated with both positive and negative social and behavioral outcomes relative to those who receive home - based or parental care . effects are generally small , and depend on factors such as the length of time per day spent in care and the child's temperament and home environment . on the other hand , h igh - quality center - based care is generally correlated with slighter better cognitive , social , academic , and language skills . benefits are more pronounced for children from low - income households , and gains are sustained through adulthood . pointing to these potential positive outcomes for children and parents , some contend that it is in the government's best interest to regulate and / or subsidize childcare services to ensure broad access to high - quality care as a societal good .