in the 115 th congress , h.r . 6147 as passed by the house included many provisions , particularly in title ix , that would have amended the 2010 dodd - frank act and other statutes relating to the regulation of financial institutions and the authority and funding of financial regulators . many of these provisions were included in other legislation , notably h.r . title vii typically contains general provisions applying government - wide . the fsgg bill has also often contained provisions relating to the u.s. policy toward cuba . the house and senate fsgg bills fund the same agencies , with one exception . the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) is funded through the agriculture appropriations bill in the house and the fsgg bill in the senate . where the cftc is funded upon enactment depends on which chamber originated the law , which typically alternates annually . thus , the enacted amounts for the cftc typically are in the agriculture appropriations bill one year and fsgg the following year . this structure has existed in its current form since the 2007 reorganization of the house and senate committees on appropriations . although financial services are a major focus of the bill , the fsgg appropriations bill does not include funding for many financial regulatory agencies , which are instead funded outside of the appropriations process . it is not uncommon for legislative provisions addressing various financial regulatory issues to be included in titles at the end of the bill . although financial services are a focus of the fsgg bill , the bill does not actually include funding for the regulation of much of the financial services industry . financial services as an industry is often subdivided into banking , insurance , and securities . federal regulation of the banking industry is divided among the federal reserve , the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , the office of comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , and the bureau of consumer financial protection ( generally known as the consumer financial protection bureau , or cfpb ) . in addition , credit unions , which operate similarly to many banks , are regulated by the national credit union administration ( ncua ) . none of these agencies receives its primary funding through the appropriations process , with only the fdic inspector general and a small ncua - operated program currently funded in the fsgg bill . insurance is generally regulated at the state level , with some federal reserve oversight at the holding company level . there is a relatively small federal insurance office ( fio ) inside the treasury , which is funded through the departmental offices account , but fio has no regulatory authority . federal securities regulation is divided between the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) and the cftc , both of which are funded through appropriations . the cftc funding is a relatively straightforward appropriation from the general fund , whereas the sec funding is provided by the fsgg bill , but then offset through fees collected by the sec .