groundwater is found in aquifers . an aquifer is composed of ( 1 ) solid materials , such as rocks and mineral grains ; ( 2 ) interconnected spaces or openings ( pore space ) ; and ( 3 ) groundwater , which completely fills the pore space ( figure 2 ) . strictly speaking , an aquifer is sufficiently permeable ( i.e. , groundwater can move readily through the interconnected pores ) to transmit economic quantities of water to wells or springs . in other words , if a farmer drills a well into a water - bearing layer of rock or sediments ( sometimes called a formation ) and can pump sufficient quantities of groundwater to irrigate crops , water livestock , or use for drinking water and washing , then that formation can be considered an aquifer . §§9601 et seq. ) authorizes federal cleanup and enforcement actions to respond to releases of hazardous substances to the environment , including groundwater . in addition , the safe drinking water act ( 42 u.s.c . §§300f et seq. ) authorizes the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) to regulate underground injection activities to protect underground sources of drinking water , including injection wells used for aquifer recharge . this report focuses on issues related to groundwater supply , not groundwater quality . table 1 includes bills that would affect , in some manner , groundwater topics discussed in this report , including aquifer storage and recharge , groundwater - surface water interaction , treatment of groundwater rights by the federal government , aspects of tribal water rights , reclamation water recycling and reuse programs , drought relief , groundwater studies , and groundwater monitoring and assessment . this report is divided into two parts . other omitted bills pertain to groundwater quality ( i.e. , bills addressing groundwater protection or remediation ) , which is not addressed in this report . background on selected topics of interest in the 115 th congress , including relevant legislation , is discussed in more detail below . groundwater science has advanced markedly in the last century ; this primer presents an introduction to fundamental concepts relevant to groundwater use , management , and recharge . if the same farmer drilled a well but could not pump enough water to satisfy any needs , then the formation would not be considered an aquifer . the federal government directly and indirectly influences how groundwater is managed in the united states . several federal agencies monitor groundwater directly or with partners — through measurements at wells and springs — and remotely using satellites or other remote sensing devices to provide information on groundwater flow , storage , depletion , and other characteristics that help inform state and local groundwater management . these include the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) , the national aeronautics and space agency ( nasa ) , the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , and the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) . congress has provided other federal agencies with the authority to make water delivered from or water stored at federal water resource projects available for groundwater recharge , storage , and recovery .