this report provides a section - by - section summary of the scra . the fifth broad category of provisions of the scra provides certain rights regarding public lands and relieves servicemembers from having to pay certain taxes to multiple jurisdictions . it also prevents the attachment of certain personal or real property in order to satisfy tax liens . title vi provides courts the authority to deny remedies to servicemembers that would abuse the purpose of the scra . it also indicates how a servicemember's military and financial status can be established in court , and covers other procedural requirements . title vii of the scra provides a means for servicemembers to petition for relief without having to wait until a creditor brings an enforcement action against them . it also treats powers of attorney and provides relief from liability insurance premiums for servicemembers who need to maintain such policies for their civilian occupations . title viii provides the attorney general the authority to bring civil actions against violators of the scra . servicemembers who are aggrieved by a violation can join an action brought by the attorney general or can initiate their own civil action against a violator . this section authorizes the u.s. attorney general to commence a civil action in u.s. district court for violations of the scra by a person who ( 1 ) engages in a pattern or practice of violating the act ; or ( 2 ) engages in a violation that raises an issue of significant public importance . courts may grant any appropriate equitable or declaratory relief , including monetary damages . additionally , courts , in order to vindicate the public interest , may assess a civil penalty up to $55,000 for a first violation , and up to $110,000 for subsequent violations . finally , individuals alleging violations of the scra , for which the attorney general has commenced an action , are authorized to intervene in previously commenced cases as a plaintiff . in addition to the right to join a previously commenced case , persons aggrieved by a violation of the scra have the ability to commence a civil action in their own right . the court may grant appropriate equitable or declaratory relief , including monetary damages . the court is also authorized to award the costs of the action and reasonable attorney fees to an individual who prevails in a civil action under this section . this section provides that sections 801 and 802 do not preclude or limit any other remedies available under the law , including consequential or punitive damages for violations of the scra . one measure that affects many who are called to active duty is the cap on interest at an annual rate of 6% on debts incurred prior to a person's entry into active - duty military service . other measures protect military families from being evicted from rental or mortgaged property ; from cancellation of life insurance ; from taxation in multiple jurisdictions ; from foreclosure of property to pay taxes that are due ; and from losing certain rights to public land . sections 201 through 208 describe the general relief available in most kinds of court actions .