the public comment period closed on august 20 , 2018 . the bill was referred to committee but no further action was taken during the 115 th congress . several of the issues that were of interest during the 115 th congress are related to the financing of housing . the anpr states that "hud is committed to its mission of achieving fair housing opportunity for all," but that it believes that the current rule "is not fulfilling its purpose to be an efficient means for guiding meaningful action by program participants. a dditional information: for more on hud and fair housing , including hud's obligation to affirmatively further fair housing , see crs report r44557 , the fair housing act: hud oversight , programs , and activities . the fair housing act ( fha ) was enacted "to provide , within constitutional limitations , for fair housing throughout the united states. it prohibits discrimination on the basis of race , color , religion , national origin , sex , physical and mental handicap , and familial status . subject to certain exemptions , the fha applies to all sorts of private and public housing , including single family homes , apartments , condominiums , and manufactured homes . it also applies to "residential real estate - related transactions," which include both the "making [and] purchasing of loans … secured by residential real estate [and] the selling , brokering , or appraising of residential real property. in june 2015 , the supreme court , in texas department of housing community affairs v. inclusive communities project , confirmed the long - held interpretation that , in addition to outlawing intentional discrimination , the fha prohibits certain housing - related decisions that have a disparate impact on a protected class . historically , courts have generally recognized two types of disparate impacts resulting from "facially neutral decision[s]" that can result in liability under the fha . first , courts have recognized disparate impact when a "decision has a greater adverse impact on one [protected] group than on another. second , courts consider the "effect which the decision has on the community involved ; if it perpetuates segregation and thereby prevents interracial association it will be considered invidious under the fair housing act independently of the extent to which it produces a disparate effect on different racial groups. the supreme court's holding in inclusive communities that "disparate - impact claims are cognizable under the [fha]" mirrors previous interpretations of hud and all 11 federal courts of appeals that had ruled on the issue as of june 2015 . however , hud and these courts had not all applied the same criteria for determining when a neutral policy that causes a disparate impact violates the fha . in a stated attempt to harmonize disparate impact analysis across the country , hud finalized regulations in 2013 that established uniform standards for determining when such practices violate the act . the inclusive communities court did not expressly adopt the standards established in hud's disparate impact regulations , but instead embraced a similar , but not identical , three - step burden - shifting test for assessing disparate impact liability under the fha .