work of the tag units can be seen in a number of investigations . for example , in september 2017 , through operation regional shield , over 3,800 gang members — from ms - 13 and the 18 th street gang — in the united states , el salvador , guatemala , and honduras were charged with crimes including murder , arson , racketeering , and conspiracy to distribute marijuana ; the fbi's tag units were involved with the investigations in central america . in the united states , over 70 individuals were charged , including 17 ms - 13 members who were alleged to have committed murder and other crimes on long island , ny . the fbi , through the direction of congress , established the national gang intelligence center ( ngic ) in 2005 . the ngic was established to coordinate intelligence information from federal , state , and local policing agencies . it supports law enforcement investigations by providing strategic and tactical analysis of intelligence . agencies contributing to the ngic share gang information and resources to identify and respond to the greatest gang threats . within the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , ice homeland security investigations ( hsi ) has a national gang unit ( ngu ) that works to deter and disrupt domestic gang operations — specifically those of transnational criminal gangs , prison gangs , and outlaw motorcycle gangs ( omgs ) . the ngu also "identifies and develops intelligence on gang membership , associations , activities , and international networks. one ongoing hsi gang initiative is known as operation community shield , which ice launched in 2005 to disrupt and dismantle transnational criminal gangs . ice hsi reports that in fy2017 it arrested 796 ms - 13 gang members and associates ( up from 434 in fy2016 ) through this program . to put these 796 ms - 13 arrests in the context of other gang - related arrests , during the same time , "hsi made 4,818 criminal arrests related to gang activity and 892 administrative arrests as a result of gang investigations . additionally , [ice enforcement and removal operations] administratively arrested 5,225 gang members and associates" in fy2017 . operation community shield has included a number of operations that specifically target ms - 13 . through operation raging bull , ice and its domestic and international law enforcement partners arrested 267 ms - 13 members and associates from september through november 2017 . of the 267 arrests , 214 were in the united states ; of those , 93 suspects were arrested for criminal violations — such as murder , robbery , and drug possession and trafficking — and 121 were arrested for administrative immigration violations ( eg , unlawful presence ) . it was formed in the 1980s by refugees who were fleeing civil conflict in el salvador . when these salvadoran nationals moved into the los angeles area , some youth coalesced to form ms - 13 , in part for protection from existing latino gangs , such as the 18 th street gang , as well as for a way to connect with other salvadorans .