the nominal gain is 9.14% . without indexing , the gain if the asset were sold would be $9.14 . with indexing , the basis would be increased from $100 to $102 , and the gain would be $7.14 , which is a 7% return on $102 . for assets such as common stock , the basis is the purchase price . for assets that depreciate , such as machines and buildings , the basis is the purchase price minus cumulative depreciation plus improvements . in addition , unlike some other tax cuts ( such as expensing or corporate rate cuts ) that occur at the firm level and have the potential to draw capital from abroad as well as potentially increase saving , capital gains are on the savers side , which means their effects operate solely through saving with some of that saving leaking into investments in other countries . capital gain effects are also limited because of evidence that savings is not very responsive to changes in rates of return . additionally , the increase in debt from crowding out would lead , in the absence of other changes , to an offsetting effect that would eventually be expected to reduce the capital stock . although the effects would still be small , larger effects might be retained per dollar of revenue loss by applying indexation to newly acquired assets , thus avoiding a windfall gain from lowering taxes on existing assets . if enacted as a stand - alone policy , inflation indexation would favor higher - income individuals . according to the tax policy center , 60.4% of capital gains taxes are paid by the top 0.1% of taxpayers , 80.1% by the top 1% , and 90.2% by the top 5% . the penn wharton budget model estimate for the effect of indexing shows 63.1% of the tax cut is received by the top 0.1% , 86.1% by the top 1% , and 95.0% by the top 5% of taxpayers . a measure of how a tax change affects the relative distribution is to consider the percentage change in after - tax income . penn wharton has a relatively low estimate of the revenue cost and found that for the top 0.1% after - tax income increases by approximately 1% . for the remainder of the top 1% , the increase is 0.3% , whereas the bottom 95% has virtually no change . chairman of the house ways and means committee kevin brady has indicated that some discussion of this issue is ongoing . under the current system , taxable income from investments is not adjusted for inflation , a treatment applying not only to capital gains , but to dividends , interest , and returns from depreciating assets ( because depreciation is based on original cost ) . although there is general agreement that measuring real income from capital assets requires an adjustment for inflation , all of these types of income receive other tax benefits that tend to offset the lack of inflation indexing and , in some cases , were explicitly adopted for that purpose . indexing would increase the basis of the asset ( i.e.