, reregistration ) . pria 1 also authorized the collection and use of registration service fees to defray costs associated with epa review of applications for registering new pesticide active ingredients and products , adding new uses to existing pesticide registrations , establishing and amending tolerances , and amending pesticide labels . additional annual appropriations fund the majority of the costs . enacted as part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2004 , the pesticide registration improvement act of 2003 ( pria 1 ) established the current pesticide fee framework . pria 1 modified provisions originally enacted in 1988 that authorized the collection and use of maintenance fees to enhance and accelerate a one - time epa review of pesticide registrations that the agency issued prior to november 1 , 1984 ( i.e. pria 1 established a schedule that provided the fee amounts associated with various review activities and required epa to complete its review of submitted applications within specific timeframes depending on the category of application if the agency collected the fee . in 2007 , the pesticide registration improvement renewal act ( pria 2 ) reauthorized and amended the pesticide fee framework . pria 2 added new categories of applications for which registration service fees may be assessed , revised the schedule of timeframes in which epa is required to make a decision on an application , and adjusted the fee amounts for both maintenance and registration service fees . with the enactment of pria 3 in 2012 , congress reauthorized and further amended the pesticide fee framework . the current pesticide fee framework , as amended by pria 3 and extended by the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 , is summarized in the following sections . in accordance with the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 , the authority to collect pesticide maintenance fees expires on september 30 , 2018 . fifra section 4 , as amended by pria 3 , sets annual maximum maintenance fees per registrant generally based on the number of registrations held . in floor statements , members have recognized a coalition of organizations that represent the pesticide industry , state agricultural departments , and environmental and farmworker interests for developing pria in the early 2000s and assisting with reauthorizing legislation . pria 3 authorized the collection of maintenance fees until the end of fy2017 . registration service fees , which applicants must pay when seeking epa review of various applications related to pesticide registrations , help to partially defray the costs of evaluating such applications . at the end of fy2017 , pria 3 would have reduced the rate in which epa may collect registration service fees annually over two years . collected maintenance fees are deposited as receipts in the "reregistration and expedited processing fund" in the u.s. treasury . these receipts are made available to epa as mandatory appropriations for offsetting costs associated with ( 1 ) evaluating inert ingredients and expedited processing of certain applications within specified statutory time frames , and ( 2 ) reevaluating registered pesticides ( including setting tolerances ) . additionally , section 4 requires epa to use up to $800,000 per year from fy2013 through fy2018 to enhance information systems capabilities to improve tracking of pesticide registration decisions .