§§1501 et seq . 96-365 ) created the public - private partnership with aips , which brought aips into product delivery and risk - sharing with fcic . fcic started paying subsidies to aips for delivering policies . aips also started sharing in underwriting gains and losses with fcic . fcic subsidizes aips' delivery costs for the two main levels of insurance coverage — catastrophic ( cat ) and buy - up coverage: 1 . catastrophic loss adjustment expense subsidy ( cat lae ) is for policies with cat coverage ( higher deductible ) ; and 2 . administrative and operating subsidy ( a&o ) is for policies with buy - up coverage ( lower deductible ) . fcic does not reimburse aips for their actual delivery expenses . a&o and cat lae are calculated as a percentage of premium but are not taken from total premium . they are paid as a separate government subsidy to aips . the sra sets their amounts as follows: a&o: for delivery of buy - up coverage ( lower deductibles ) , equals between 12% and 21.9% of premium , depending on policy type . cat lae: for delivery of catastrophic level coverage ( higher deductibles ) , is fixed at 6% of premium . rma sets premium rates for federal crop insurance policies and does not allow aips to compete on price ( premium ) . all aips are directed to charge the same amount of premium for the same policy to the same farmer . lack of price competition generated concerns among some observers around two issues in particular: ( 1 ) aips potentially paying excessive compensation to agents to grow their portfolios and ( 2 ) aips and agents potentially engaging in rebating mechanisms and other devices to indirectly compete on price . although rma has addressed both issues through regulations and guidance , some observers assert that these issues seem to be ongoing challenges . the largest single delivery expense reported by aips is compensation to crop insurance agents . crop insurance agents are largely independent agents who sell policies for multiple aips . because rma determines premium rates , aips cannot compete for business based on the price of a policy . instead they tend to compete by establishing relationships with agents and by providing superior customer service . thus , it is generally in an aip's interest to hire successful agents . this has made for a competitive market for federal crop insurance agents . since 2011 , the sra has set limits on the amount aips are allowed to pay agents . specifically , aips may not pay more than 80% of a&o and cat lae by state as base commission to agents . however , an aip may pay compensation up to 100% of a&o and cat lae by state if certain conditions are met . there is no limitation on how much any given agent may receive so long as it is within the maximum amount allowable per state . conceivably , an aip could pay one agent 80% of the a&o it received in a particular state so long as it did not pay commissions to any other agent . limited data is available on the actual expenses of aips .