congress could also address other personnel issues through legislation . the civil service reform act of 1978 ( p.l . 95-454 ) , as amended , provides the modern statutory framework for the civil service . the 115 th congress is currently considering competing versions of an authorization bill for fy2018 ( s. 1631 in the senate and h.r . 5592 in the house of representatives ) that , if enacted , would weigh in on additional personnel matters . department of state officials offered a different assertion , attributing the broader decline in the number of senior foreign service personnel largely to senate inaction in approving career senior foreign service promotions transmitted for advice and consent . see table 5 for more information comparing the department's personnel levels in 2008 and 2017 . congress has long maintained an interest in personnel matters at the department of state . issues concerning state department personnel , including but not limited to those discussed below , are frequently highlighted in reports and analyses concerning broader potential efforts to reorganize or reform the department . given the priority the trump administration has placed on implementing changes affecting department of state personnel , some members of congress with varying degrees of support for the administration's efforts have demonstrated renewed interest in applying congressional prerogatives to ensure that any changes enhance american capabilities to project and protect its interests overseas . factoring in the administration's existing priorities and the fact that the administration's policies could expand in scope , this report provides a comprehensive background summary of department of state personnel infrastructure and practices , including those areas where policies were established or could be adjusted through congressional action . it begins with an overview of the foreign service , including a summary of legislative efforts to codify a professional foreign service and its key personnel policies . it then explores the department's foreign service and civil service personnel categories in some detail , specifying key statutes and authorities that remain relevant to current department workforce issues . the report concludes by identifying selected issues for congress , which comprise areas where the trump administration is seeking to implement changes , and where congress may seek to weigh in directly or indirectly . congress established the department of state in 1789 and pr e scribed an initial salary for the secretary of state , the department's chief clerk , and other clerks employed by the department . the department's domestic staff was initially extremely small , consisting of only three clerks and translators when thomas jefferson became secretary of state i n 1790 and expanding to 10 such individuals by the conclusion of the 18 th century . similarly , u.s. diplomatic representation abroad was fair ly limited during this period — only two commissioned american diplomats were present in europe when president washington was inaugurated in 1789 . by 1797 , the united states maintained diplomatic relations with france , great britain , the netherlands , portugal , and spain , yet had only limited diplomatic ties with other countries , including austria , prussia , russia , and sweden .