the board of governors of the u.s . in the 115 th congress , president trump sent four nominations for governors of the usps to the senate on october 30 , 2017 . the three nominees are robert m. duncan of kentucky ( who is the subject of two nominations to two separate terms ) , calvin r. tucker of pennsylvania , and david williams of illinois . of the four nominations , three were placed on the senate executive calendar on may 7 , 2018 . the fourth nomination , of calvin r. tucker , received a hearing on april 18 , 2018 . table 1 provides details on each nomination . although many authorities and responsibilities are given to the board , certain matters are reserved for decision by the governors alone . table 2 lists selected matters that are reserved for decision by the governors alone or by the full board . it is unclear whether decisions that are reserved to the governors alone ( eg , appointment and removal of the postmaster general ) could be made when no governors remain on the board . the postal service's day - to - day operations are largely the responsibility of usps senior leadership and may not be affected by the absence of governors . as shown in table 2 , however , certain actions may only be authorized or approved by the board or the governors . however , under 39 u.s.c . ยง 205 , vacancies may not prevent the board from conducting its business as long as there is a quorum of members . to have a quorum , generally at least six members of the board must be present . for example , if the postmaster general , deputy postmaster general , and four governors are present , then the board would have a quorum for the transaction of business . the quorum requirement applies to the business of the board , but not to the conduct of business related to those matters that are reserved for decision by the governors alone . the board lost its quorum when the term of former governor mickey d. barnett expired on december 8 , 2014 , and the board's makeup dropped to five members . just prior to the loss of its quorum , the board adopted a resolution delegating its authority to a temporary emergency committee ( tec ) , in order to "provide for continuity of [postal] operations" in light of the loss of a board quorum . while the board has the authority ( with certain restrictions ) to create such a committee , it is unknown to what extent the tec may act on matters that are explicitly reserved to the board . further , unlike the loss of quorum , the loss of the final governor leaves the usps without legal authority for several actions that must be authorized by the governors . select usps appointment authority is provided to the governors rather than to the board . for example , the appointment of , removal of , and setting compensation for the postmaster general requires an absolute majority of the governors currently in office .