appendix a . amendments to and past uses of section 232 ( 19 u.s.c . on june 19 , 1980 , the president formally rescinded proclamation 4744 "in its entirety , effective march 15 , 1980. . appendix b . section 232 investigations appendix c. proposals concerning section 232 appendix d. 2018 u.s. steel and aluminum import . others have proposed or pursued retaliation with their own tariffs . some companies have pursued litigation , and may also seek alternative markets for their own products to avoid u.s. tariffs . as congress debates the administration's section 232 actions it may consider the following issues , many of which include potential legislative responses . in enacting section 232 of the trade expansion act , congress delegated aspects of its authority to regulate international commerce to the executive branch . use of the statute to restrict imports does not require any formal approval by congress or an affirmative finding by an independent agency , such as the usitc , granting the president broad discretion in applying this authority . should congress disapprove of the president's use of the statute , its current recourse is limited to passing new legislation or using informal tools to pressure the administration ( eg , putting holds on presidential nominee confirmations in the senate ) . some members and observers have suggested that congress should require additional steps in the section 232 process . in the 116 th congress , a variety of proposals have been introduced to amend section 232 , in various ways , such as by requiring an economic impact study by the usitc , congressional consultation , or approval of any new tariffs , allowing for a resolution of disapproval of trade actions , or revisiting the delegation of its constitutional authority more broadly , such as by requiring congressional approval of executive branch trade actions more generally . some members , including senate finance chair grassley , seek to draft a consensus bill to restore congressional authority that would gain sufficient bipartisan support to withstand a possible presidential veto . issues under debate include whether any changes would be retroactive , potentially affecting the steel and aluminum tariffs , or whether they would only apply to future actions , and whether congress's role should be consultative or decisive ( eg , requiring congressional approval ) . for a list of proposals in the 116th congress , see appendix c . several major u.s. trading partners have proposed or are currently imposing retaliatory tariffs in response to the u.s. actions . in the 115 th congress , some members of congress proposed legislation to respond to the potential economic impact of these foreign retaliatory tariffs . some proposals expand programs like trade adjustment assistance to include assistance for workers , firms , and farmers harmed by foreign retaliation . other measures propose increased funding and programming for certain agricultural export programs to help farmers find new markets for their exports . for a list of proposals from the 115 th congress , see appendix c . it is relatively easy for a stakeholder to prompt the section 232 investigation process .