however , to date , no implementing regulations have been promulgated . additionally , although the litigation initially stemmed from the detention of unaccompanied alien minors , the flores settlement defines a "minor," subject to certain exceptions , as any person under age 18 who is detained by immigration authorities . accordingly , the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit ( ninth circuit ) later held that the flores settlement applies to both accompanied and unaccompanied minors in immigration custody . any district court holding to this effect — which would implicate unsettled issues noted above about the constitutionality of prolonged immigration detention — would be subject to de novo review on appeal . there is no fixed amount of time for what amounts to "expeditious" placement during an influx , but the district court that has continued to oversee the settlement has provided some guidance . for instance , time extensions must be "de minimis" ( i.e., minimal ) and made based on individualized circumstances . in other words , during an influx the government likely cannot announce a blanket extension of time for placements of particular groups . the litigation ultimately made its way to the supreme court . the court opined that "if 20 days is as fast as [the government] , in good faith and in the exercise of due diligence , can possibly go in screening family members for reasonable or credible fear," then a 20-day extension "may" be expeditious under the terms of the settlement , "especially if the brief extension of time will permit the dhs to keep the family unit together. but the court did not place its imprimatur on 20 days for all families seeking asylum . further , when class members attested to being detained for periods ranging from 5 weeks to 13 months , the court concluded that the government was in substantial noncompliance with the flores settlement . the requirement for expeditious release remains the law of the land because the district court rejected the government's motion to amend the flores settlement . in sum , the reason alien minors and their parents generally cannot remain together for more than brief periods while in immigration detention is because the flores settlement requires minors to be placed in non - secure , state - licensed facilities within days or ( in individualized circumstances during an influx ) weeks of their apprehension , yet there do not appear to be any facilities that both comply with the flores - required conditions and authorize adults to be housed in the facility . exactly how long dhs may detain alien minors in a temporary , nonqualifying facility during an influx remains unclear . but the overseeing district court has opined that 20 days may be reasonable under certain individualized circumstances . having said that , an exception exists if an alien parent affirmatively waives a child's right under the flores settlement to be detained in a non - secure , state - licensed facility . the government has unsuccessfully argued in the flores litigation that it has been absolved of its obligation to house alien minors in non - secure , state - licensed facilities as a consequence of the preliminary injunction entered in the ms. l. litigation .