this report describes the provisions of the colmery act , as amended . the post - 9 / 11 veterans educational assistance act of 2008 ( "post - 9 / 11 gi bill" ) — originally established by title v of the supplemental appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l . 110-252 ) and enacted on june 30 , 2008 — is the newest and most widely used gi bill . in fy2017 , the post - 9 / 11 gi bill provided over $11 billion in payments to or on behalf of over 750,000 participants . the following sections describe changes to the post - 9 / 11 gi bill , as enacted by the colmery act . the following sections describe colmery act provisions that affect benefits under multiple gi bills and under gi bills other than the post - 9 / 11 gi bill . the first section describes changes to participant eligibility criteria . the second section explains changes to eligible benefit payments and their administration . prior to and following the enactment of the colmery act , the va is accountable for administrative functions in addition to administering gi bill benefit payments to eligible individuals . these include approving and reviewing programs of education in accordance with statutory and regulatory requirements , providing outreach and disclosures to gi bill - eligible individuals , and training personnel at educational institutions and training establishments . the following sections provide a description of colmery act provisions that affect the general administration of the gi bills . the first three sections relate to the funding , functions , and oversight of state approving agencies ( saas ) . the fourth and fifth sections describe changes that directly impact educational institutions and training establishments approved for gi bill purposes by establishing new requirements and providing additional resources . second , the act authorizes the administratively created vetsuccess on campus program . third , the act authorizes a new pilot program to promote veterans education . finally , the act modifies eligibility under the existing vocational rehabilitation & employment ( vr&e ) program . during world war ii , thousands of american servicemembers were exposed to nitrogen mustard gas , sulfur mustard gas , and lewisite as part of weapons testing programs . prior to the enactment of the colmery act , these veterans ma y have been eligible for disability compensation if it were determined that they had disabilities caused or aggravated by their exposure to mustard gas or lewisite during service . prior to and following the colmery act , pursuant to va regulations , there is a presumption that certain medical conditions are caused or aggravated by a veteran's exposure to mustard gas or lewisite and thus are service - connected for the purposes of eligibility for disability compensation . prior to the enactment of the colmery act and despite this presumptive eligibility regulation , there have been concerns that many veterans who should be eligible for disability compensation on the basis of mustard gas or lewisite exposure may have been denied compensation by the va due to inaccurate service records and information on the chemical weapons testing programs , including incomplete information on sites where testing occurred .