chapter 329 . 3251 to s. 2012 ( 114 th ) would have modified the calculation of fuel economy for gaseous fuel dual fueled automobiles under 49 u.s.c . chapter 329 . other differences between nhtsa's cafe and epa's ghg standards stem from the agencies' regulatory interpretations . these differences could potentially be addressed through new rulemaking . in june of 2016 , the alliance of automobile manufacturers and the association of global automakers submitted to epa and nhtsa a petition for a direct final rule . the petition asked the agencies to address some of the regulatory differences between the two programs , such as the calculations and applicability of off - cycle credits , air - conditioning efficiency credits , fuel savings adjustment factors , vehicle miles traveled ( vmt ) estimates , and alternative - fueled vehicle multipliers . nhtsa partially granted the petition for rulemaking on december 21 , 2016 , agreeing "to address the changes requested in the petition in the course of the rulemaking proceeding , in accordance with statutory criteria. under the trump administration , both nhtsa and epa have reportedly engaged with stakeholders in discussions of regulatory alignment . most of these discussions have reportedly focused on loosening the stringency of nhtsa's statutory and regulatory requirements so that they more closely match the flexibilities under epa's standards . in the near term , this could serve the purpose of allowing many auto manufacturers to avoid paying compliance penalties under nhtsa's cafe program , as they would be allowed to account for more credits in a revised system . greater alignment , however , could also be achieved through tightening some of epa's flexibilities so that they more closely adhere to nhtsa's requirements . below is a selected list of broader policy issues regarding the cafe and ghg emission standards , their design , purpose , and potential revision . the issues are organized according to the specific factors listed in the requirements for the midterm evaluation . the cafe and ghg emissions standards are technology - forcing standards ( i.e. , they are standards that congress authorized to set performance levels that , while not achievable immediately , are demonstrated to be achievable in the future based on information available today ) . such policies date to the 1970s in environmental law and are now commonplace among health , safety , and environmental statutes . in the case of automotive controls , congress enacted the motor vehicle air pollution control act ( p.l . 89-272 ) in 1965 , authorizing the secretary of health , education , and welfare to establish motor vehicle standards to reduce tailpipe emissions . dissatisfied with the agency's lack of progress in the years following the law's enactment , congress amended the statute to specify not only emission limits , but also deadlines for meeting the standards , and an enforcement program to ensure compliance . these changes became a major part of the clean air act of 1970 ( p.l . 91-604 ) and its subsequent amendments .