circuit . circuit considers far fewer cases each year than other federal appellate courts . but in part because of the d.c . cases adjudicated by the d.c . circuit are more likely to concern the review of federal agency action or civil suits involving the federal government than cases adjudicated in other circuits , while the d.c . circuit docket has a lower percentage of cases involving criminal matters , prisoner petitions , or civil suits between private parties . unlike the supreme court , which enjoys "almost complete discretion" in selecting its cases , the federal courts of appeals are required to adjudicate many cases as a matter of law and , as a result , tend to hear "many routine cases in which the legal rules are uncontroverted. arguably indicative of the nature of federal appellate work , the vast majority of cases decided by three - judge panels of federal courts of appeals are issued without a dissenting opinion . however , while the vast majority of cases adjudicated by the d.c . circuit are decided without a dissenting opinion , perhaps because of the nature of the d.c . circuit's docket , a greater percentage of the court's decisions draw a dissenting opinion relative to its sister circuits . this report provides tabular listings of 306 cases in which judge kavanaugh authored a majority , concurring , or dissenting opinion . arguably , these written opinions provide the greatest insight into judge kavanaugh's judicial approach , as a judge's vote or decision to join an opinion authored by a colleague may not necessarily represent full agreement with a colleague's views . accordingly , this report does not include cases in which judge kavanaugh sat on a reviewing judicial panel , but is not credited as the author of an opinion . for example , instances where judge kavanaugh was part of a panel that issued a per curiam opinion , in which no particular judge was credited as an author , are omitted from this report . this report also does not attempt to identify the various rulings made by circuit panels on procedural issues in the midst of the appeal ( eg , granting a litigator's request for an extension of time to file a brief ) . finally , the report does not address subsequent legal proceedings that may have occurred after a cited decision was issued , except to note where westlaw or lexis editors have indicated that a decision was subsequently abrogated , affirmed , reversed , or vacated by the supreme court or the d.c . circuit . the opinions discussed in this report are categorized into three tables: table 1 identifies 148 opinions authored by judge kavanaugh on behalf of a unanimous panel ; table 2 contains 47 controlling opinions authored by judge kavanaugh in which one or more panelists wrote a separate opinion ; and table 3 lists 111 cases where judge kavanaugh wrote a concurring or dissenting opinion , including cases where judge kavanaugh wrote both the majority opinion and a separate concurrence .