appendix a . appendix b . comparison of chains of comman . 3004 , does not include socom . the fy2016 ndaa ( p.l . 114-92 ) granted limited acquisition authority to the u.s. cyber command , making cybercom the second command to have current independent acquisition authority . however , socom's acquisition authority is more expansive . the method socom uses for acquisitions is similar to the acquisition processes used by the military services: they share the same general statutory and regulatory framework ; training and education opportunities ( i.e. , access to defense acquisition university and national defense university ) ; and dod oversight regime . however , there are also significant differences , many of which relate to the size and scope of socom and its authorities . table 1 summarizes select similarities and differences . socom benefits from being a smaller organization with a more focused mission set and limited scope of acquisition authorities . as a result , socom may not receive new acquisition authorities provided by congress and must work through the secretary of defense to obtain these authorities or seek a legislative change , potentially resulting in lost opportunities for socom in its acquisition efforts . potential associated issues for congress may include the following: based on the dod report on acquisition authorities required in the 2018 ndaa , should additional acquisition authorities should be granted to socom ? should the definition of military departments as they relate to acquisitions be modified to include socom ? other socom attributes , such as delegating more decisionmaking to lower levels and promoting a more risk - taking culture , may be transferable to the services . a number of current senior acquisition officials in the military services recently served in socom and appear to be promoting more delegation of authority and cultural risk - taking in the services , including general paul ostrowksi , formerly a socom peo and currently the principal military deputy to the assistant secretary of the army ( acquisition , logistics and technology ) , and james guerts , formerly the socom acquisition executive and currently the assistant secretary of the navy ( research , development and acquisition ) . one potential issue for congress may include the following: to what extent do current acquisition - related laws and regulations promote or inhibit a more efficient , less bureaucratic , and more balanced approach to risk in acquisitions ? in some instances socom has fewer acquisition authorities than the military departments . this occurs where legislation grants acquisition authorities or flexibilities to the military departments . the definition of military departments , codified in 50 u.s.c . there are 10 combatant commands: 6 geographic and 4 functional commands . socom possesses unique acquisition authorities when compared with other combatant commands . socom was established and granted its own acquisition responsibilities in the fiscal year ( fy ) 1987 national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) ( p.l . socom was the first combatant command endowed with acquisition authority and its own budget line for training and equipping its forces . the goldwater - nichols department of defense reorganization act of 1986 ( p.l .