this is not a comprehensive review of the literature . congress has required several agencies to evaluate the effects of dst . dot provided an interim evaluation and final report on the operation and effects of dst in 1974 and 1975 . the interim report's findings were inconclusive , stating that the observed effects were "so small that they could not in general be reliably separated from effects of other changes occurring at the time. the report concluded that , "there is no unambiguous direct evidence that [the measurable effects of year - round daylight saving time] were either beneficial or harmful. dot reported that "modest overall benefits might be realized by a shift from the historic six - month dst ( may through october ) [to year - round dst] in areas of energy conservation , overall traffic safety , and reduced violent crime. dot also reported that these potential benefits would be minimal and difficult to distinguish from seasonal variations and fluctuations in energy prices . although states may exempt themselves , in whole or in part , from dst , they cannot independently change time zone or alter the length of dst ( i.e. , dst begins and ends on statutorily mandated dates ) . there are two ways in which an area can be moved from one time zone to another: by regulation or by statute . under the standard time act of 1918 , as amended by the uniform time act of 1966 , moving a state or an area within a state from one time zone to another requires dot regulation . such a request can be made only by certain political authorities in an area . for example , if the request for change is for one or more counties , the board ( or boards ) of county commissioners would make the request . if the request is for a state , the governor or the legislature would make the request . the principles for deciding whether to change the time zone are the area's "convenience of commerce and the existing junction points and division points of common carriers engaged in interstate or foreign commerce. the convenience of commerce is defined broadly to consider such circumstances as the shipment of goods within the community ; the origin of television and radio broadcasts ; the areas where most residents work , attend school , worship , or receive health care ; the location of airports , railways , and bus stations ; and the major elements of the community's economy . after receiving a request , dot determines whether it meets the minimum statutory criteria before issuing a notice of proposed rulemaking , under which it would solicit public comment and schedule a public hearing . usually the hearing is held in the area requesting the change so that affected parties can be represented . after the comment period closes , comments are reviewed and appropriate final action is taken . if the secretary agrees that the statutory requirement has been met , the change would be instituted , usually at the next changeover to or from dst . even though a state cannot unilaterally go on year - round dst , several states have initiated efforts to change the summer observance of dst .