these include h.r . 883 / s. 271 , the families belong together act , which would grant humanitarian parole and / or lpr status to separated parents and children upon request . likewise , h.r . 541 / s. 292 , the keep families together act ( similar to h.r . 6135 / s. 3036 introduced in the 115 th congress ) contains provisions to keep families together during all stages of processing following apprehension at a u.s. border , plus protections against the prosecution for illegal border crossing of asylum seekers and grantees . 1012 , the reunite act , includes provisions that would facilitate the expeditious reunification of separated families . 31 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2019 , included additional funding to increase the number of participants in alternatives to detention ( atd ) programs ; additional ice staffing dedicated to the management of atd immigration cases , particularly those of asylum applicants ; and the family case management program ( fcmp ) , an alternative to family detention . the legislation directs ice to prioritize both the use of atd programs for families and the adjudication timeline for cases of individuals enrolled in atd , particularly those of families and asylum seekers . a number of bills were introduced in the 115 th congress in response to family separation resulting from the administration's zero tolerance policy regarding the prosecution of illegal border crossing . with the exception of h.r . 6136 , which failed to pass in the house by a vote of 121-301 , none of the bills introduced saw congressional action . bills that emphasized immigration enforcement included h.r . 6182 , the codifying president trump's affording congress an opportunity to address family separation executive order act , which would have provided statutory authority for president trump's executive order within the ina ; h.r . 6173 , which would have clarified standards for family detention ; and section 3102 of h.r . 6136 , the border security and immigration reform act of 2018 , which would have permitted children accompanied by parents to remain in dhs custody during the pendency of a parent's criminal prosecution , rather than being referred to orr and treated as uac . on july 11 , 2018 , similar amendment language was included in an appropriations bill to fund the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , that was approved by the house appropriations committee . 6204 , the families first act of 2018 , included similar provisions , asylum reforms , and provided increased funding for family unit facilities , personnel , and judges , among other provisions . bills that intended to prevent or limit family separation included h.r . 6135 / s. 3036 , the keep families together act , and h.r . 6236 , the family unity rights and protection act , both of which contained provisions to keep families together during all stages of processing following apprehension at a u.s. border ; h.r . 6232 , the preventing family separation for immigrants with disabilities act , which would have prohibited family separation for individuals with developmental disabilities ; and h.r .