part 1037 . the engine certificate requires compliance with the ghg engine standards of 40 c.f.r . part 1036 , plus the criteria pollutant ( i.e. , no x and pm ) standards of 40 c.f.r . part 86 . under the phase 2 rule , used or rebuilt engines may be installed in glider vehicles , provided that they meet all standards applicable to the year in which the assembly of the glider vehicle is completed , or they meet all standards applicable to the year in which the engine was originally manufactured and also meet one of the following criteria: the engine is still within its original useful life in terms of both miles and years , the engine has less than 100,000 miles of engine operation , or the engine is less than three years old . thus , the standards allow for installation of relatively newer engines in glider kits for purposes epa deemed consistent with their original intended use — the salvaging of relatively new powertrains from vehicle chassis that have been damaged or have otherwise failed prematurely . the phase 2 rule has a transitional program for glider manufacturers . for calendar year 2017 , each manufacturer's combined production of glider kits and glider vehicles is capped at the manufacturer's highest annual production of glider kits and glider vehicles for any year from 2010 to 2014 . any glider kits or glider vehicles produced beyond this allowance are subject to all requirements applicable to new engines and new vehicles for my 2017 . effective january 1 , 2018 , the permissible number of glider vehicles that may be produced without meeting the phase 2 long - term requirements is limited as follows: small businesses may produce a limited number of glider vehicles without meeting the long - term engine or vehicle requirements ( or larger vehicle manufacturers may provide glider kits to these small businesses without the assembled vehicles meeting the long - term vehicle requirements ) capped at the small vehicle manufacturer's highest annual production volume in 2010 through 2014 or 300 , whichever is less . the 2018 allowances mostly continue after 2020 , but effective january 1 , 2021 , all glider vehicles are required to meet the phase 2 ghg vehicle standards . following promulgation of the phase 2 rule , epa received from representatives of the glider vehicle assembler industry a joint petition requesting that the agency reconsider the application of the phase 2 rule to glider vehicles , glider engines , and glider kits . the petitioners made three principal arguments . first , they argued that epa is not authorized by caa section 202 ( a ) ( 1 ) to regulate glider kits , glider vehicles , or glider engines . second , they contended that in the phase 2 rule epa "relied upon unsupported assumptions to arrive at the conclusion that immediate regulation of glider vehicles was warranted and necessary. third , they asserted that reconsideration was warranted under executive order 13783 of march 28 , 2017 , "promoting energy independence and economic growth. in addition , the petitioners took particular issue with what they characterized as epa's assumption that the no x and pm emissions of glider vehicles would be increased significantly .