the other half is covered by general funds . over the last five years , the trajectory of cargo volume through the locks under consideration has changed significantly . these recent changes often post - date the initial analyses that were conducted to calculate the expected economic benefits of the individual lock improvement projects . a portion of this increase could be shipped through these seven locks . however , corn and soybean exports also enter the river below these locks , move by rail to gulf coast ports , or move by rail to west coast ports . if china's recent announcement concerning possible tariffs on u.s. soybeans or other crops leads to the imposition of import restraints , future traffic volumes could be adversely affected . although the opening of new locks in the panama canal in 2016 allows larger ships to carry grain and soybeans between new orleans and asia , potentially reducing transport costs , freight rates for dry bulk ships are notoriously volatile , and rate increases could make the rail option to the west coast more attractive . these are just some of the variables that could influence future traffic through these locks . agricultural products also account for the bulk of the tonnage passing through the last two locks on the illinois waterway , although the commodity mix is more diverse than that through the five mississippi river locks discussed above . although not indicated in figure 3 , the tonnage through lagrange lock , which is the southernmost lock on the illinois waterway , is about a third larger than through peoria and is more heavily concentrated in corn and soybeans . although one might expect that seasonal volumes on these two rivers might be heavily concentrated in the fall , after harvest , in actuality tonnages can be more distributed throughout the year . shipment timing is influenced by corn and soybean prices , and volumes may peak right before the harvest season , as elevators need to make room for the next crop . during their busiest months , these seven locks each average about 10 tows per day . in comparison , lock 27 , farther south on the mississippi river , averages about 23 tows per day during its busiest months . section 8003 of wrda 2007 called on the army corps to develop and test an appointment system to help barge operators avoid bunching their arrivals at the same lock . barge operators insist that scheduling or a lock appointment system is not practical for river travel , but whether it is even necessary for a lock handling 10 tows per day is unclear . debate continues over whether more efficient use of the infrastructure already in place would make lock extensions unnecessary . as important as corn and soybeans are for the mississippi and illinois waterways , coal is the dominant commodity on most of the ohio river system . the ohio valley is dotted with riverfront coal - fired power plants that are supplied largely from mines within the region .