as a result , the trust fund accumulated debt . the gao projects that if 2018 coal excise tax rates are extended , the trust fund will have a debt of $4.5 billion in 2050 ( see "gao options for improving trust fund finances" below ) . gao projections suggest that increasing 2018 tax rates by 25% would eliminate the trust fund's debt , leaving the trust fund with a surplus of $0.6 billion in 2050 . an alternative way to raise revenue from the coal industry is to scale back or eliminate various tax expenditures , or tax preferences , from which the coal industry benefits . for example , coal producers benefit from being able to expense exploration and development costs and are able to recover costs using percentage depletion ( depletion based on revenue from the sale of the mineral asset ) instead of cost depletion ( depletion based on the amount of the mineral asset exhausted and the amount invested in the asset ) . the obama administration regularly proposed repealing these tax incentives as part of the administration's annual budget . it could be difficult to assign the revenues raised via the repeal of tax benefits to the trust fund . with an excise tax , it is straightforward to identify the revenue generated by the tax and earmark the revenue for a trust fund . it is not as straightforward to determine the amount of revenue that is raised through the repeal of an income tax expenditure , or direct the additional revenue raised because a certain preference is no longer in the code to a trust fund . repeal of coal - industry tax benefits could , however , be used to offset the cost of a one - time transfer from the general fund to the trust fund . revenue from various sources , including the general fund , could be used to supplement trust fund revenue generated from current sources . general fund revenues are not earmarked for a specific purpose , and there is generally no direct link between the source of general fund revenue and the government good or service provided . black lung benefits were paid out of general revenue before the trust fund was established in 1977 . trust funds are generally established when there is a link between the government benefits or services being provided and the revenue source funding those benefits or services . the black lung disability trust fund was established because congress believed that the costs of the part c black lung program should be borne by the coal industry . financing black lung benefits with general fund revenue would weaken the link between the industry and black lung benefits , while reducing the burden on the industry associated with paying for black lung benefits . in the past the black lung disability trust fund's fiscal outlook has been improved through interest and debt forgiveness . as discussed above , in the late 1990s , there was a five - year forgiveness of interest on debt owed to the treasury's general fund . more recently , debt was forgiven as part of the 2008 restructuring of the trust fund's debt .