aphis is not the only issuer of export health certificates . for example , the department of commerce has jurisdiction over the administration of health certificates for fish and seafood . a listing of agencies and their commodity responsibilities is provided in table 1 . depending on a trade agreement's sps chapter , more than one type of certificate could accompany a particular agricultural product . for example , an importing country may require two certificates from a u.s. exporter of hatching eggs , including one requiring the exporter to participate in the agricultural marketing service's "export verification program" and a second requiring the exporter to obtain an aphis export health certificate . an exporter must collaborate with aphis to obtain a plant or animal export health certificate . aphis's plant production quarantine ( ppq ) and veterinary services ( vs ) oversee the health certificate endorsement process for a "plant health certificate" or "animal health certificate," respectively ( figure 4 ) . aphis cooperates with many federal agencies , including ams , centers for disease control and prevention , customs and border protection , fish and wildlife service , fda , and fsis to facilitate the verification process ( figure 5 ) . export health certificates facilitate trade by verifying that u.s. agricultural exports meet importers' health and safety standards . aphis , in collaboration with the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) , is primarily responsible for resolving disputes that arise between u.s. exporters and importing countries over health - certificate - related issues . in particular , export health certificate discussions among scientific authorities contributed to opening markets for beef to china , poultry to korea , and potatoes to japan in fy2017 . export health certificates and the process underlying them may help facilitate trade in certain animal health situations . for example , following an outbreak of particular cases of highly pathogenic avian influenza ( hpai ) , or "bird flu," member countries of the world organization for animal health ( oie ) are obligated to report particular such incidents to oie . the hpai - affected country is expected to alert the international community and follow the oie's disease control guidelines . in addition , they would likely have an altered relationship with their trading partners concerning poultry and poultry product exports ( including certain eggs ) following notification of the outbreak . typically , importers would either ban poultry imports from the affected country or ban poultry from certain regions from the country — a negotiated "regionalization agreement. in this situation , regionalization protocols in the agreement may facilitate exports by limiting the ban to a particular region . export health certificates may facilitate market - opening opportunities for u.s. exports , as in the case of u.s. pork exports to argentina . until 2017 , the united states had for over 25 years neither access to export pork to argentina nor a pork health certificate for argentina because of animal health concerns argentina cited in u.s. pork production . after argentine food safety officials conducted an on - site verification of the u.s. meat inspection system in late 2017 , the united states finalized a pork sps agreement and export health certificate with argentina .