figure 1 . forest landownership in the conterminous united statessource: crs . data from jaketon h. hewes , brett j. butler , and greg c. liknes , forest ownership in the conterminous united states circa 2014 - geospatial data set , forest service research data archive , 2017 , https: / / doi.og / 10.2737 / rds - 2017-0007 . providing federal assistance for nonfederal forest landowners has been a component of usda's programs for more than a century . initial forestry assistance efforts began with the creation of the usda division of forestry in 1881 ( to complement forestry research , which began in 1876 ) . forestry assistance and research programs grew slowly , and in 1901 the division was upgraded to the usda bureau of forestry . in 1905 , the bureau merged with the interior department's division of forestry ( which administered the forest reserves , later renamed national forests ) and became the usda forest service ( fs ) . the fs has three primary mission areas: managing the national forest system , conducting forestry research , and providing forestry assistance . the senate and house agriculture committees have jurisdiction over forestry in general , forestry assistance , and forestry research programs . congress authorized specific forestry assistance programs in the clarke - mcnary act of 1924 . this law guided those programs for more than half a century , until it was revised in the cooperative forestry assistance act of 1978 ( cfaa ) . the house and senate agriculture committees often examine these programs in the periodic omnibus legislation to reauthorize agriculture and food policy programs , commonly known as farm bills . the 2008 farm bill established national funding priorities ( conserve working forests , protect and restore forests , and enhance public benefits from private forests ) ; enacted a standardized process for states to assess forest resource conditions and strategize about funding needs ; and established , modified , and repealed specific assistance programs , among other provisions . the 2014 farm bill repealed several programs , mostly programs whose authorizations had expired or programs that had never received appropriations . the 2014 farm bill also reauthorized and modified the requirement for statewide assessments and the office of international forestry . many of the agricultural programs — including two forestry programs — authorized by the 2014 farm bill are scheduled to expire at the end of fy2018 unless congress provides for an extension or reauthorizes them . most forestry assistance programs are administered by the fs , but the programs are typically implemented by state partners ( eg , state forestry or natural resource agencies ) . in these cases , the fs provides technical and financial aid to the states , which then provides information and assistance to private landowners or specified eligible entities . however , the 2008 farm bill expanded the definition of authorized conservation practices for agricultural conservation programs generally to include forestry practices , and thus direct federal financial assistance to private forest landowners may be feasible through the conservation programs . see table 1 for a brief summary of the fs programs addressed in this report ; more information on each program is available in the " forest service assistance programs " section of this report .