the requirements vary by each program . for example , policymakers may decide to distribute the emission allowances to covered entities at no cost ( based on , for example , previous years' emissions ) , sell the allowances ( eg , through an auction ) , or use some combination of these strategies . in addition , some programs may permit covered entities to "bank" or save surplus allowances for future use while others may not . the remainder of this section presents a brief history of the interstate transport programs implemented prior to 2015 , given their cumulative impact on regional emission reductions . the " cross state air pollution rule " section then provides more detail about csapr , the current emissions trading program intended to limit interstate transport of power sector so 2 and no x emissions . figure 1 summarizes the timeline of the regional programs for ozone and particulate matter control . as previously noted , revisions to the naaqs trigger the sips review process , through which epa determines whether states have met their good neighbor obligations . epa has not yet finalized its good neighbor determinations for either the 2008 revision or the 2015 revision to the ozone standards . the remainder of this section summarizes the status of epa's good neighbor determinations under each standard . so 2 and no x emissions have declined in recent decades , with so 2 , annual no x , and ozone season no x emissions well below the 2016 csapr budgets ( see figure 3 and figure 4 ) . epa's analysis suggests that its regional so 2 and no x programs have reduced interstate transport of pm 2.5 and ozone in the eastern united states . eia's national - scale analysis also points to a combination of broader market and regulatory factors contributing to emission reductions , in particular for so 2 . going forward , it is not clear whether emissions will remain well below csapr budgets given recent low allowance prices for ozone season no x and the supply of banked allowances that can be used in future years . in addition , epa has not yet issued a determination about whether ozone transport contributes to air quality problems with respect to the 2015 ozone standard . the agency has , therefore , not yet determined whether and how it will update the csapr budgets with respect to the 2015 ozone standard . stakeholder views on interstate air pollution transport vary , generally reflecting disagreements about the level of emissions that should be reduced and which sources — and states — bear responsibility for doing so . some stakeholders have expressed concern that interstate transport continues to harm air quality . for example , some stakeholders have expressed concern about transport of ozone and ozone precursor emissions to downwind states — and the health impacts associated with ozone exposure — and stated that some coal - fired power plants do not make full use of "already - installed pollution controls" to reduce ozone precursor emissions .