, contributions , investments , or withdrawals ) . , and any associated earnings can accumulate tax free . these amounts do not count as gross income in determining income tax liability . individuals may keep their hsas and withdraw funds if they become ineligible but cannot make contributions until they become eligible once again . in addition , the employer's contributions are excluded from social security and medicare taxes for both employers and employees and are excluded from federal unemployment insurance taxes . if an employee contributes to his or her hsa through a pretax salary reduction agreement , the contributions are considered to be made by the employer and are excluded from the employee's gross income in determining his or her income tax liability and are exempt from the three employment taxes ( social security , medicare , and unemployment insurance taxes ) . an employee cannot deduct amounts contributed to an hsa through a pretax salary reduction agreement . hsa balances can be invested similar to iras ( eg , annuities , stocks , mutual funds , bonds , etc .

 ) state income taxes generally follow federal rules with respect to deductions and exclusions . however , some states may choose to provide different treatment . for example , california does not recognize hsas as tax - advantaged accounts . therefore , a california taxpayer who contributed to an hsa is required to increase his or her california adjusted gross income by an amount equal to the sum of the taxpayer's hsa deduction on his or her federal return , the interest earned on the hsa , and the contributions made by the taxpayer's employer . this increase results in a larger state tax burden ( or a smaller state tax refund ) for the taxpayer . although it would be beneficial to study the entire hsa population , which is the population that is eligible to establish and contribute to an hsa ( i.e. , enrolled in an hsa - eligible hdhp ) and the population that has an hsa , few available data sources provide a comprehensive understanding of the entire hsa population . the lack of available data stems in part from the fact that hsas and hsa - qualified hdhps are two separate products . although these two product populations overlap , they are not entirely identical , since not all hsa - qualified hdhp enrollees have established an hsa and not all hsa holders currently are enrolled in an hsa - qualified hdhp . furthermore , these products often can be administered by two separate institutions . some individuals have their hsa established with their insurer , whereas others have their hsa administered by another type of institution , such as a bank . in the latter case , the insurer would not have any information regarding the individuals' hsas ( i.e. inversely , the hsa holding institution likely would not be aware of the individuals' enrollment in or disenrollment from an hsa - qualified hdhp . as a result , hsa research tends to focus on one of two populations , hsa - qualified hdhp enrollees or hsa holders .