, coal ) . ยง717f ( c ) ) . therefore , companies seeking to build interstate natural gas pipelines must first obtain certificates of public convenience and necessity from ferc . the commission's regulatory process for the review of certificate applications consists of several principal steps , explained below , which may vary somewhat depending upon whether or not a pipeline developer opts to enter into a voluntary pre - filing process before formally applying for a pipeline certificate . over the last decade , proposals for new interstate natural gas pipelines have become increasingly controversial . many certificate applications have been subjected to heavy public scrutiny , and some have faced significant delays in review , as well as protracted litigation . a may 2018 report by the department of energy inspector general stated that "nothing came to our attention to indicate that ferc had not generally performed the natural gas certification process in accordance with applicable laws , regulations , policies , and procedures. as the table shows , bills which were not enacted sought to increase ferc public hearings , limit eminent domain authority , require regional review of multiple projects , or impose specific deadlines on ferc and cooperating agencies . title 41 of the fixing america's surface transportation act ( p.l . 114-94 ; fast - 41 ) , which became law on december 4 , 2015 , revises the process for federal approval of a range of major infrastructure projects by establishing best practices , requiring coordination of federal agency review of projects , and shortening the period for challenges to final decisions for issuing project permits . infrastructure projects covered by the act are those requiring environmental review under nepa and requiring investment exceeding $200 million ( ยง41001 ) . nonetheless , aspects of ferc's current practices remain a focus of attention among policymakers because they have been the subject of ferc dissent , debate in congress , or litigation in federal court . it may also identify issues of focus for future congressional oversight and legislation . the bush , obama , and trump administrations issued a series of executive orders intended to facilitate or expedite the federal permitting of infrastructure projects , specifically including energy infrastructure . exactly how all of these orders have affected , or may affect , federal review of interstate natural gas pipeline siting under ferc's jurisdiction is not entirely clear , however , due to the complexity of the certification process and permit obligations under related statutory requirements ( eg , nepa ) . over the last 20 years , congress has acted frequently to oversee ferc's certification of interstate natural gas pipelines through hearings and correspondence with the commission . members of congress also have proposed legislation to change ferc's review of gas pipeline certificate applications , specifically , or as one category among a broader range of infrastructure projects . table 1 summarizes the key provisions of legislative proposals affecting ferc's pipeline certification in the 111 th - 114 th congresses . given that the united states is the world's largest producer of natural gas , policy changes by ferc affecting natural gas infrastructure could have significant implications for u.s. natural gas resource development , prices , and associated environmental impacts .