figure 1 . composition of hud's budget , fy2018gross budget authoritysource: prepared by crs , based on data in table 1.notes: primary rental assistance programs include tenant - based rental assistance ( housing choice voucher program ) , public housing capital fund , public housing operating fund , choice neighborhoods , family self sufficiency program , and project - based rental assistance . formula grants include cdbg , home , homeless assistance grants , housing for persons with aids ( hopwa ) , and native american housing block grants . other programs and activities encompass the remainder of hud accounts . the fy2019 appropriations process spanned two congresses , both of which took action , as summarized below . the cost of renewing existing section 8 housing choice vouchers is generally one of the most high - profile hud funding issues each year . it is the largest single expense in the largest account ( the tenant - based rental assistance account ) in hud's budget . all of the roughly 2 million portable rental vouchers that are currently authorized and in use are funded annually , so for the low - income families currently renting housing with their vouchers to continue to receive assistance ( i.e. , renew their leases at the end of the year ) , new funding is needed each year . if the amount ultimately provided proves to be less than the amount needed to fund all vouchers currently in use , then several things may happen . the public housing authorities ( phas ) — the state - chartered entities that administer the program at the local level — with reserve funding from prior years , may spend some of those reserves to maintain current services . phas without reserve funding may apply to hud for a share of the set - aside funding that is generally provided in the annual appropriations acts to the department and allowed to be used to prevent termination of assistance . and phas may undertake cost - saving measures , such as not reissuing vouchers to families on their waiting lists when currently assisted families leave the program . conversely , if the amount is greater than the amount needed to renew existing vouchers , phas may be able to serve additional families from their waiting lists . although the president's budget request , the house committee - reported hud appropriations bill , and the senate bill all included different funding levels for voucher renewals for fy2019 , each purported to provide enough to fund all vouchers currently in use . the final fy2019 enacted funding level was $22.598 billion , an amount between the house committee - reported and senate - passed levels . advocacy groups have estimated that the amount provided will be enough at least to renew all existing voucher holders' leases , as well as potentially serve some additional families . the low - rent public housing program houses approximately 1 million families in properties owned by local phas but subsidized by the federal government . phas' budgets for public housing are made up of rent paid by tenants and formula grant funding from the federal government to make up the difference between the rents collected from tenants and the cost of maintaining the properties .