§ 16 ( b ) . given the circuit split over the constitutionality of the second prong of the cov definition , the supreme court granted the government's petition to review the ninth circuit's decision in dimaya . citing johnson as "a straightforward decision , with equally straightforward application here," the court determined that 18 u.s.c . § 16 ( b ) suffers from the same "constitutionally problematic" features that infected the acca's residual clause struck down in johnson . § 16 ( b ) remain . in striking down the second prong of the federal cov definition , the supreme court has potentially narrowed the scope of criminal offenses that would render an alien subject to removal . courts have previously interpreted 18 u.s.c . given these concerns , the court concluded that 18 u.s.c . § 16 ( b ) is unconstitutionally vague . the court also rejected the government's contention that 18 u.s.c . § 16 ( b ) 's "distinctive textual features" rendered it less susceptible to vagueness concerns than its acca counterpart found unconstitutional in johnson . the court determined that , although 18 u.s.c . § 16 ( b ) temporally limits its analysis to the risk of force arising "in the course of committing any offense," this language made no meaningful difference because analyzing a crime's inherent risk is already limited to what usually happens during its commission . the court also recognized that 18 u.s.c . § 16 ( b ) focuses on the risk of "physical force" rather than "physical injury" as is the case with the acca's violent felony definition , but the court found no significant distinction because both standards require a court to gauge a crime's potential consequences . finally , the court noted , although 18 u.s.c . § 16 ( b ) is not preceded by a list of enumerated crimes like the acca's residual clause , the absence of such a list is immaterial because the textually indeterminate features of 18 u.s.c . § 16 ( b ) to cover a wide range of offenses such as first - degree manslaughter , kidnapping , lewd and lascivious acts upon a child , sexual assault , burglary , aggravated fleeing , and assault on a police officer . while many of these offenses may still constitute removable offenses under the ina , there may be some types of criminal conduct that would only fall within the second prong of the cov definition . beyond the immigration context , the dimaya court's ruling potentially impacts many other criminal and civil statutes that expressly incorporate the cov definition . to make major comprehensive improvements to the federal criminal laws. in an effort to achieve that goal , the ccca established new bail procedures , imposed mandatory minimum sentences for many criminal offenses , increased the penalties for drug offenses and violent crimes , and created additional federal criminal offenses . various provisions of the ccca employ the term "crime of violence" in reference to the elements of certain offenses , the conditions for the issuance of bail , and the circumstances where enhanced prison sentences are required .