that will be done in the permanent work phase . puerto rico's governor rosselló initially proposed privatizing and selling prepa's assets in january 2018 . this was followed in march 2018 with a plan submitted to puerto rico's legislative assembly with details of how the privatization of the utility would proceed . one of the goals of the plan was to use public - private partnerships to stabilize the electric system and lessen prices for electricity customers . details of how the privatization effort could accomplish these goals are unclear at this time . there have been two previous efforts at privatization of a public utility in puerto rico . efforts were made in the 1990s and early 2000s to privatize the puerto rico aqueduct and sewer authority ( prasa ) , but "service quality deteriorated and prices for consumers increased , as did the agency's operational deficit. power recovery efforts in puerto rico have focused primarily on restoring power to electricity customers . however , according to reports in the media , the speed of emergency restoration has taken precedent over "basic quality standards" for the work . puerto rico is taking steps to adopt guidelines for electric systems maintenance used on the mainland . doe has recommended that puerto rico follow guidelines for electric industry standards suggested by the rural utilities service of the u.s. department of agriculture . however , the extent to which the restored infrastructure in puerto rico is rebuilt to current electrical standards will be important to the modernization efforts that would follow , and much of this work may have to be redone . among the recommendations by doe for improving electric reliability in puerto rico was the recommendation for an effective mutual assistance agreement to be in place . mutual aid agreements help utilities recover from power outage situations often caused by severe weather events , and are typically negotiated in anticipation of a future need . under mutual assistance agreements for electric utilities , the utility receiving aid generally pays for the costs incurred by the utility providing aid in accordance with the assistance agreement . congress gave the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) authority to oversee the reliability of the bulk - power system under the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l . reliability standards were added as section 215 of the federal power act to help ensure the reliable operation of the bulk power system so that "instability , uncontrolled separation , or cascading failures" will not occur as a result of a sudden disturbance . ferc - approved reliability standards address programs ranging from vegetation clearances in electric transmission line rights - of - way , to policies and procedures for critical infrastructure protection of power plants and supporting facilities . however , ferc - approved reliability standards are only applicable to the continental united states , and not to u.s. territories such as puerto rico . to date , no legislation has been proposed to change this . puerto rico's reliance on fossil fuels for power generation raises cost , reliability , and potential health issues going forward . before the 2017 hurricane season , coal and diesel fuel represented approximately 64% of fuel used for power generation .