appendix a . percentages of good , fair , and poor ride quality appendix b . structurally deficient rural bridges by stat . only one addition has been completed . should congress decide to create a separate program specifically to finance new interstate highways , it could distribute funds based on cost - to - complete estimates , as was the case with the original interstate program . even this would be an expensive program and would be as much an urban program as a rural one . the fhwa's road classification system is in part an attempt to come to grips with the question of the extent to which federal road spending should serve a national purpose . major roads , such as interstate system highways , are deemed to have a national purpose because they facilitate the interstate movement of goods and people . congress has implicitly determined that local roads , neighborhood streets , and rural local collectors do not serve a national purpose and should not receive federal funding . the major exceptions to this are grants for off - system bridges and safety improvements . congress could address rural road conditions by allowing states to designate rural local connectors or certain other local rural roads as part of the federal - aid highway system or simply by allowing states to spend their federal funds on any public - access roads . there are , however , potential drawbacks to expanding the scope of federal - aid highway system roads and bridges . without a net increase in federal spending , expanding the system to include lightly traveled rural collector and local roads would cause the states to spread their federal funds more thinly across the expanded network . this could make it harder for states to concentrate federal funds on their more expensive or higher - priority road projects . adding local roads and rural collectors to the federal - aid highway system could raise the costs of road improvements if local governments were required to comply with the same federal regulations and engineering standards that now apply to projects using federal funds . in states with declining rural populations there may be more roads and bridges in some areas than can be sustained financially . closing lightly used roads and bridges or pulverizing their pavement back to gravel could save maintenance and resurfacing costs , allowing states and counties to devote their funds to maintaining a smaller , more heavily used network of local roads . while all of the roads and bridges that would be downgraded or abandoned would likely be off the federal - aid system , spending less money on them could have indirect effects on federal - aid spending in that the savings might make it more likely that counties could accumulate sufficient funds to , for example , provide the local match to federal aid for off - system bridge repairs . congress could consider providing an incentive for pulverizing underused paved rural roads or permanently closing underused rural bridges that have nearby alternatives .