appendix a . distribution of fy2018 pssf funding the promoting safe and stable families ( pssf ) program receives some capped mandatory funding and is also authorized to receive funding on a discretionary basis . the bulk of this combined pssf funding is provided for formula grants to states ( including dc ) , territories , and tribes for provision of four categories of child and family services: family support , family preservation , family reunification , and adoption promotion and support . however , in each year a portion of the funding ( mandatory , discretionary , or both ) is reserved for the state court improvement program ( cip ) ; tribal court improvement ; monthly caseworker visit grants ; regional partnership grants ( rpgs ) to improve outcomes for children affected by parental substance abuse ; and program - related research , evaluation , and technical assistance . for fy2018 , additional pssf funding was provided to support kinship navigator programs and to increase funding reserved for rpgs and technical assistance . separately , existing pssf funds were tapped to support development of increased electronic interstate case processing capacity . table a - 1 shows fy2018 pssf funding by activity ( including whether the funding was provided on a mandatory or discretionary basis , or both ) . for fy2018 , the total pssf appropriation was $445 million , including $345 million in mandatory funds and just under $100 million in discretionary funding . however , pssf mandatory funding is subject to sequestration applied to nonexempt , nondefense accounts ( 6.6% for fy2018 ) . this reduced mandatory funding available to about $322 million and overall pssf funding to about $422 million . appendix b . awards by state for fy2016 performance in numerous recent years , not enough funding was available for hhs to make full payment to states at the time the initial award was announced . accordingly , hhs prorated an initial award amount and used appropriations in a subsequent year to make states whole . for example , in september 2017 hhs had $5.3 million in program funds to award . accordingly , it provided this amount on a prorated basis to each state that earned an award ( for fy2016 performance ) and in april 2018 , following the appropriation of full - year program funding , it awarded the remaining funds . table c - 2 shows incentive payments awarded for state performance in fy2016 ( the most recent year available ) by category of awards earned . those categories , and the measure used to determine whether an increase is achieved , have varied over the years . for more information on the current categories and the categories previously used , see crs report r43025 , child welfare: the adoption incentive program and its reauthorization . the incentive structure described in this report ( as included in h.r . 4980 ( 113 th congress ) ) was subsequently enacted in the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( p.l . 113-183 ) and is currently in use . currently funded regional partnership grants ( rpgs ) hhs expects to award the additional $19 million in rpg funding provided in the fy2018 omnibus ( p.l .