appendix a . budget sequestration sequestration is a process to reduce federal spending through automatic , largely across - the - board reductions that permanently cancel mandatory and / or discretionary budget authority . sequestration is triggered as a budget enforcement mechanism when federal spending would exceed statutory budget goals . sequestration is currently authorized by the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l . table a - 1 shows the rates of sequestration that have been announced and the total amounts of budget authority that have been cancelled from accounts in agriculture appropriations . table a - 2 provides additional detail at the account level for mandatory accounts . discretionary spending for discretionary spending , sequestration is authorized through fy2021 if discretionary defense and nondefense spending exceed caps that are specified in statute ( 2 u.s.c . 901 ( c ) ) . in fy2013 , the timing of the appropriations acts and the first year of sequestration resulted in triggering sequestration on discretionary spending . in fy2014-fy2018 , bipartisan budget acts in 2013 , 2015 , and 2018 ( bbas ; p.l . 115-123 , respectively ) have avoided sequestration on discretionary spending . these bbas raised the discretionary budget caps that were placed in statute by the bca and allowed congress to enact larger appropriations than would have been allowed . for fy2019 , the bba in 2018 similarly provides a higher discretionary cap that may avoid sequestration ( see " discretionary budget caps and subcommittee allocations " ) . mandatory spending authorization of sequestration for mandatory spending , sequestration is presently authorized through fy2027 , having been amended and extended by acts that were subsequent to the bca ( 2 u.s.c . that is , sequestration continues to apply annually to certain accounts of mandatory spending and is not avoided by the bbas ( table a - 1 ) . the original fy2021 sunset on the sequestration of mandatory accounts has been extended four times as an offset to pay for avoiding sequestration on discretionary spending in the near term or as a general budgetary offset for other authorization acts: 1 . congress extended the duration of mandatory sequestration by two years ( until fy2023 ) as an offset in bba 2013 . congress extended it by another year ( until fy2024 ) to maintain retirement benefits for certain military personnel ( p.l . congress extended sequestration on nonexempt mandatory accounts another year ( until fy2025 ) as an offset in bba 2015 . congress extended sequestration on nonexempt mandatory accounts by another two years ( until fy2027 ) as an offset in bba 2018 ( p.l . 115-123 division c , ยง30101 ( c ) ) . exemptions from sequestration some farm bill mandatory programs are exempt from sequestration . those expressly exempt by statute are the nutrition programs ( snap , the child nutrition programs , and the commodity supplemental food program ) and the conservation reserve program . some prior legal obligations in the federal crop insurance corporation and the farm commodity programs may be exempt as determined by omb .