appendix a . summary of report methodology historical and regional analysis the historical and regional data used in this report was derived from dod comptroller budget documents generally regarded as the most authoritative open source available for analyzing milcon expenditures in detail . since fy2001 , the comptroller has posted this data in excel format for public use , however , the style , spelling , format , and content have varied from year to year . accelerated cleanup. — the agreement includes additional funding to accelerate environmental remediation at installations closed during previous base realignment and closure ( brac ) rounds . priority should be given to those sites with newly identified radiological cleanup cost . there are many factors hindering the cleanup of brac sites . however , strategic investments can lead to quicker clean - ups and faster turnover of dod property to the local community . therefore , the department is directed to submit to the congressional defense committees a spend plan for the additional brac funds not later than 30 days after enactment of this act . legislative language prohibiting the use of funds for the purpose of a new brac round was included in final authorizing and appropriating legislation . fy2018 ndaa ( h.r . 2810 ) : the ndaa conference agreement reflected identical provisions in the house and senate versions of the bill that stated , "nothing in this act shall be construed to authorize an additional base realignment and closure ( brac ) round. fy2018 defense appropriations ( h.r . 1625 , division j , section 8120 ) : "none of the funds made available by this act may be used to propose , plan for , or execute a new or additional base realignment and closure ( brac ) round. the administration strongly objected to such prohibitions , arguing a new brac round was necessary "so that dod can ensure it is not wasting resources on unneeded infrastructure. congressional advocates of the process made several unsuccessful attempts to initiate a new round . on january 31 , 2017 , representative adam smith submitted h.r . 753 , the "military infrastructure consolidation and efficiency act of 2017," which would have reauthorized a brac process to begin in fy2019 that closely adhered to the established template of earlier rounds . that bill was last referred to the subcommittee on readiness in february , 2017 . a second proposal , drafted by senator john mccain and proposed as an amendment to the annual national defense authorization act for fy2018 ( h.r . 2810 ) , would have taken a different approach . by omitting the appointment of a brac commission charged with reviewing recommendations made by the secretary of defense , senator mccain's amendment would have effectively omitted what long - time observers have considered the basic tenets of the brac process: third party appraisal by an independent commission and expansive opportunities for public comment by affected communities and other stakeholders . the graphic below illustrates a selected list of ( simplified ) fields the comptroller has either included or omitted from year to year . data elements contained in publicly - available comptroller spreadsheets frequently contain labeling omissions , discrepancies , and other variations or errors , particularly in years prior to fy2008 .