his decisive role on the court , particularly during the roberts court era , cannot be overstated . table a - 1 identifies cases primarily centering on questions of constitutional interpretation in which justice kennedy cast a deciding vote . table a - 2 includes cases mainly addressing questions of statutory interpretation — including the interpretation of administrative regulations , procedural rules , and other legal rules promulgated in accordance with statutory authority — in which justice kennedy cast a deciding vote . table a - 3 compiles closely divided cases that do not fall neatly into either of the prior tables ( eg , cases centering on issues of federal common law or principles of equity ) . table a - 1 , table a - 2 , and table a - 3 also identify ( 1 ) the statute , constitutional provision , or other source of law primarily at issue in the case ; and ( 2 ) justice kennedy's position on the key issue in the case . the cases in these three tables are listed alphabetically by year , and are categorized under the following subject areas: abortion law , administrative law , business law ( including issues arising in antitrust , banking , bankruptcy and debt collection , consumer law , contract law , intellectual property law , and securities law ) , civil rights law ( including issues arising under the fourteenth amendment and civil actions brought under 42 u.s.c . §1983 ) , civil liability ( including torts ) , communications law , criminal law and procedure , education law , election law , environmental law , family law , food and drug law , freedom of association , freedom of religion , freedom of speech , habeas corpus , immigration law , indian law , international law , judicial system ( including issues involving federal and state courts generally , civil procedure , standing and justiciability , class actions , equitable remedies , arbitration , and judicial ethics ) , labor and employment law , maritime law , military law , national security , privacy law , public benefits , second amendment , separation of powers , takings , tax law , and territorial law . for purposes of brevity , no more than two subject areas are identified as relevant to a particular case . while these categorizations are intended to provide a helpful guide to readers in identifying the subject matters of decisions , they do not necessarily reflect the full range of legal issues a judicial opinion may involve . table a - 1 , table a - 2 , and table a - 3 also identify the composition of justices hearing a listed case , dividing the members of the court who participated in the case into two categories: ( 1 ) justices making up the majority or controlling plurality , including those who concurred with the court's judgment ; and ( 2 ) those justices who dissented in whole or in part from the key ruling of the case . the author of the primary opinion is designated with an asterisk ( * ) . authors of concurring and dissenting opinions are identified with plus signs ( + ) .