system. recognizing these concerns , in 1984 congress required the state department to submit an annual report to congress , voting practices in the united nations , which tracks member voting records on u.n. resolutions important to the united states . over the years , some members of congress have also periodically introduced , but not enacted , legislation requiring reductions in foreign aid to countries that do not consistently vote with the united states . opponents of these efforts contend that reducing funding to countries based on u.n. voting records could undermine the overall effectiveness of u.s. foreign assistance and , depending on the issue being considered in u.n. bodies , ultimately have little impact on how countries vote . some have also questioned the criteria the state department would use to eliminate or decrease aid , noting that many u.s. foreign aid priorities are based on a combination of need and political considerations that may not always align with how countries vote in the united nations . they further contend that withholding aid in this manner might punish the citizens of countries who often have the greatest need and no control over the foreign policy decisions of their leaders . in the past year , president trump and ambassador haley have expressed support for linking u.s. foreign aid to u.n. votes ; prospects for implementation , however , are unclear . congress is ultimately responsible for appropriating foreign assistance to specific countries , and the trump administration's fy2019 budget did not propose foreign aid reductions based on u.n. votes . many congressional debates regarding u.n. funding occur against the backdrop of competing foreign and domestic funding priorities and broad questions about the role of the united nations in u.s. national security and foreign policy . appendix e. timeline of u.s. peacekeeping assessment cap the following table outlines changes to the u.s. peacekeeping assessment and enacted u.s. peacekeeping cap since fy1994 , including related legislation . appendix f. global humanitarian accounts by u.n . entity table f - 1 provides an overview of top u.s. voluntary contributions to u.n. humanitarian - related activities through the global humanitarian accounts since fy2015 . contributions for each account are appropriated by congress , with the executive branch allocating funding to specific u.n. entities and activities based on humanitarian needs and u.s. foreign policy priorities . the emergence of president trump's "america first" position raises questions about the future of u.s. participation in and funding of the united nations . in the near term , members of the 115 th congress might consider the following issues: how , if at all , the president's fy2019 budget proposal aligns with congressional perspectives on u.n. funding . what role and actions , if any , congress might take in the absence of administration support for some u.n. activities . the possible impacts of current and potential u.s. financial withholding on ( 1 ) u.s. influence in u.n. bodies , and ( 2 ) the operations and effectiveness of u.n. activities — particularly in light of continued accumulation of u.s. peacekeeping arrears and the administration's proposed funding reductions for certain u.n. bodies . in the longer term , some members might consider the following u.n. funding issues in the context of the changing multilateral and global landscape .