reg . 48385 , oct. 17 , 2017 ) , directed the secretaries of the treasury , labor , and health and human services to consider revising guidance , to the extent permitted by law and supported by sound policy , to increase the usability of health reimbursement arrangements ( hras ) , expand employers' ability to offer hras to their employees , and to allow hras to be used in conjunction with non - group coverage . the guidance provided in this notice addresses each of those objectives . the treasury department ( treasury ) and the internal revenue service ( irs ) anticipate that the departments will issue additional guidance in the future in response to executive order 13813 . the environment in which e.o . 13813was announced is dynamic . that is , an employer could offer an hra without having to offer a group health plan and without ensuring that employees had coverage under a group health plan . because hra funds can be used to pay premiums , employees could use stand - alone hras to purchase health insurance coverage ( which was not offered by their employers ) , such as coverage offered in the individual market . the integration requirement effectively prohibits employers from offering stand - alone hras . the integration requirement was established in guidance issued jointly by the departments of hhs , labor , and the treasury in september 2013 . the guidance determined that , in general , an hra must be integrated with another group health plan ( that is not an hra ) to comply with two requirements that apply to group health plans . the two requirements were established under the aca and are described below . prohibition on a nnual l imits : group health plans are prohibited from having dollar limits on the amount the plan will spend for covered health benefits during a plan year . preventive s ervices r equirement : group health plans must provide coverage for certain preventive health services without imposing cost sharing . employers that offer group health plans that do not comply with one or both of these requirements — including an hra that is not integrated with a non - hra group health plan — could be subject to an excise tax of $100 per day per employee covered under the noncompliant arrangement . the guidance ( and subsequent follow - up guidance ) specifically addresses hras that pay or reimburse employees for health insurance coverage purchased in the individual market . in general , the guidance provides that an hra that can be used for such purposes may not be integrated with a non - hra group health plan and therefore is not in compliance with the prohibition on annual limits and the preventive service requirement . the guidance issued in september 2013 was effective for plan years beginning january 1 , 2014 , for large employers , those with 50 more full - time - equivalent employees . small employers , those with fewer than 50 full - time - equivalent employees , had to comply with the requirements for plan years beginning after june 30 , 2015 . qsehras were established under the 21 st century cures act ( p.l .