the sponsor is generally the only witness at such a hearing . the subcommittee makes available to member offices information on what documentation it requires and the kinds of bills on which it is likely to take favorable action . it usually declines to report a bill if its records show few precedents for favorable house action in similar cases . panels that handle other kinds of private legislation have no similarly institutionalized procedures . house rule xv , clause 5 , establishes special procedures for the consideration of private bills . when reported , private bills go on a dedicated calendar , the private calendar ( house rule xiii , clause 1 ) . on the first tuesday of each month , the speaker is to direct the clerk to call the bills and resolutions that are pending on the private calendar . each bill is called up automatically in the order in which it was reported and placed on the calendar . the bills are considered under a hybrid set of procedures known as "the house as in committee of the whole," meaning that there is no period of general debate , but debate and amendment may occur under the five - minute rule . usually , however , no debate occurs , and private measures are disposed of by voice vote . at his or her discretion , the speaker may also , on any other day of the month , call up for consideration a bill or resolution that has been pending on the private calendar for at least seven days , providing he or she has given two legislative days' notice of his or her intention to do so . during the call of the private calendar , if two members object to the consideration of any bill , it is automatically recommitted . during a congress , each party is to appoint official "objectors" who are responsible for examining bills on the private calendar and objecting to those they deem inappropriate . sometimes , a member of a subcommittee dealing with immigration or claims has served simultaneously as an official objector . in practice , instead of objecting , objectors may ask that a bill be passed "over , without prejudice," which gives sponsors an opportunity to discuss concerns with them informally before the next calendar call . if a private bill is recommitted , the committee may re - report it as a paragraph of an omnibus private bill , which has priority for consideration under rule xv . at this stage , the substance of each original private bill may be defeated by majority vote by means of a motion to strike the paragraph out of the omnibus bill . otherwise , each paragraph may be amended only by reducing amounts of money or providing limitations . after an omnibus private bill is passed , it is broken up again into separate bills for further action . in recent practice , committees seldom re - report private measures once they are recommitted , and the house does not appear to have considered an omnibus private bill in decades . the house has sometimes considered private bills using other parliamentary mechanisms , such as the suspension of the rules procedure or by unanimous consent .