fda has authority to monitor drugs that are on the market . for instance , fda may require postmarket labeling changes if the agency becomes aware of certain information about a drug , and postapproval studies or clinical trials under certain circumstances . according to the fda commissioner , despite widespread use of opioid analgesics to treat chronic pain , limited data exists on the long - term efficacy and impacts of these products , and further research is warranted . [b]ut . we are often loathe to give liberal amounts of narcotics because the drug addiction itself may become a hideous spectacle. as a result of these difficulties , for nearly a century , opioid pain medications were used in the united states primarily to treat acute and cancer - related pain . however , studies from the 1970s revealing inadequate management of chronic pain , followed by influential articles published in the 1980s reporting a low incidence of addictive behavior in small groups of cancer and noncancer patients , led to a trend toward more liberal prescribing of opioids within the medical community . the shifting views on the safety and efficacy of opioids culminated in fda's 1995 approval of purdue pharma's controlled - release opioid pain medication , oxycontin , the product some point to as the catalyst for the current opioid epidemic . between 2000 and 2009 , the medical community established new standards for pain management , which included pain as a new vital sign , and prescriptions for opioids increased . by 2016 , an estimated 11.5 million americans were abusing prescription painkillers . fda's legal authorities and recent actions taken in response to the opioid epidemic may be considered against the backdrop of challenging legal and policy questions about the role fda can or should play with respect to regulation of products that have public health consequences . as part of these questions , fda officials have discussed the importance of striking the right balance between taking aggressive action to fight opioid misuse and addiction , while simultaneously protecting patients who experience severe pain . additionally , given that the agency's approach to evaluating and approving drugs is based on "the conditions prescribed , recommended , or suggested" in fda - approved labeling , questions may arise about the extent to which the agency has legal authority to consider drug misuse in carrying out its regulatory actions . under a number of fd&c act provisions , fda has considerable discretion in determining the information that is relevant to its regulatory decisions . the following sections of this report illustrate how fda has exercised its discretion , particularly in its response to prescription opioid abuse and addiction . fda is taking a multifaceted approach in its response to the opioid epidemic . fda officials have indicated that the agency focuses its efforts in four areas: 1. decreasing exposure and preventing new addiction ; 2. supporting the treatment of those with opioid use disorder ; 3. fostering the development of novel pain treatment therapies ; and 4. improving enforcement and assessing benefit risk . using these four categories as a framework , the following sections highlight some of fda's recent strategies for addressing the opioid epidemic and the agency's existing authority to pursue such strategies .