this report focuses on multiemployer plans . pension plans may also be classified according to whether they are defined benefit ( db ) or defined contribution ( dc ) plans . with db plans , participants receive regular monthly benefit payments in retirement ( which some refer to as a "traditional" pension ) . once its assets are exhausted , pbgc would be able to provide financial assistance to plans equal only to the amount of its premium revenue . pbgc indicated that most participants would receive less than $2,000 per year . further , some policy analysts have raised concerns about possible contagion effects that may exacerbate an already large problem: the insolvency of a multiemployer plan could cause large withdrawal liability assessments for the employers in that plan . if these increased withdrawal liability assessments cause financial distress for some of these employers , it could affect their contributions to other multiemployer plans in which they participate . broadly speaking , some actuaries recommend that pension plans discount future benefits using the expected rate of return on plan investments ( which is the current practice for multiemployer db pension plans ) . some financial economists , by contrast , recommend that plans discount the liabilities using a discount rate that reflects the likelihood that the benefit obligation will be paid ; in general , this would be a lower rate than currently used . some members of congress have also suggested that the rate that multiemployer plans use to discount their benefits may be too high . as an alternative to stricter funding requirements , plans would not become underfunded if participants' benefits fluctuated with the plan's investment performance . in addition , withdrawal liability amounts might need to be disclosed in employers' financial statements , which some have suggested could limit these employers' access to credit . some policymakers have noted that a solution to the issues created by the projected insolvencies of multiemployer plans likely will present challenges to stakeholders . for example , senator orrin hatch indicated that , "there are no magic bullets , and any solutions we come up with are bound to make at least some people unhappy. others , for example representative marcy kaptur , have called for a "shared sacrifice" approach . the considerable size and nature of the problem likely requires some concession from all stakeholders: employers , plans , participants , and u.s. taxpayers . finding the balance needed to gain the buy - in from each group of stakeholders is likely to be a complex process , but critical to the success of the joint select committee . some stakeholders argue against providing loans or financial assistance to multiemployer plans . their concerns include the following: a loan program for multiemployer plans could be viewed as a bailout , particularly if there are provisions that provide for forgiveness of part or all of a loan ; loans and financial assistance to multiemployer plans would be too costly for u.s. taxpayers ; and there is no precedent for the u.s. government providing financial assistance to private - sector pension plans , which could lead to proposals for financial assistance to underfunded state and local government pension plans .