cpp . this scenario , which epa refers to as its baseline scenario , assumes states use their mass - based targets to comply with the 2015 cpp . in particular , epa assumes intrastate trading between covered sources but no incremental demand - side energy efficiency investments . cpp with demand - side energy efficiency . 152 this scenario is the same as the above cpp scenario , except that it assumes that demand - side energy efficiency measures are undertaken as a compliance option under the cpp framework . ace ( 2% hri at $50 / kilowatt ) . this scenario models "modest improvements" in hri in the absence of the nsr revisions also proposed in ace . the model required each affected coal - fired egu to improve its heat rate by 2% at a capital cost of $50 per kilowatt . the model allowed a source to either adopt the improvement or retire , depending on the economics of either option . ace ( 4.5% hri at $50 / kilowatt ) . it assumes that none of the affected sources adopt hri . this scenario assumes implementation of the proposed nsr revisions and , at each source , models a 4.5% hri at a capital cost of $50 per kilowatt . the model allowed a source to either adopt the improvement or retire , depending on the economics of either option . ace ( 4.5% hri at $100 / kilowatt ) . this scenario assumes implementation of the proposed nsr revisions and , at each source , models a 4.5% hri at a capital cost of $100 per kilowatt . the model allowed a source to either adopt the improvement or retire , depending on the economics of either option . epa's co 2 projections show that , compared to a world without the cpp , ace would generally reduce co 2 emissions , but the reductions are lower than those projected for the cpp . see figure 3 , which indicates that epa's projected co 2 emissions are generally lower than recent historical emissions . figure 3 also presents a magnified view of epa's scenario projections in the subset box , which shows that co 2 emissions do not vary much under the different ace scenarios . while uncertainty is inherent in any projection , the emission estimates for the ace scenarios may contain more uncertainty than the estimates for the cpp . the cpp would establish unit - specific , federally enforceable performance standards underpinning the state - specific emission rate and emission reduction targets . in contrast , the ace proposal would not establish a numeric performance standard for coal - fired egus . the proposed rule authorizes states to determine performance standards at individual egus based on the technology options identified in epa's proposed rule ( i.e. , bser ) and other considerations , such as the remaining useful life of the unit . epa states that "affected sources may not be able to apply the technology options because they have already adopted these technologies , they are not applicable to the source , or for other reasons. for these reasons , epa states that hri outcomes of the proposed rule contain "considerable uncertainty.