931 et seq. ) to provide that cybersecurity and grid security improvements are eligible for electric loans and guarantees under that act . in 2016 , ferc issued order no . 829 directing nerc to develop a critical infrastructure protection reliability standard that would require affected entities to develop and implement a plan that includes security controls for supply chain management for industrial control system hardware , software , and services associated with bulk electric system operations . the potential for a similar attack on the u.s. grid was seen as a possibility . some recent reports about foreign hackers targeting the u.s. electric power system and other critical infrastructure are summarized below . electricity generation is vital to the commerce and daily functioning of the united states . the intrusions , which have been directed at the ics networks of energy , manufacturing , communications and nuclear entities , include the following: cyber intrusions on the scada systems of the bowman dam in rye , new york resulted in federal indictments against a group of hackers linked to iran's islamic revolutionary guard corps . cyber intrusions in october 2017 were reported to have targeted electric company ics networks in a reconnaissance and information gathering campaign attributed to north korea . in march 2018 , the united states computer emergency readiness team ( us - cert ) issued an alert concerning cyber intrusions at critical energy and manufacturing infrastructure companies . the department of homeland security and the federal bureau of investigation concluded that russian government hackers conducted a multi - stage intrusion campaign to access files on ics networks . the malware conducted network reconnaissance , collecting information on ics and scada systems before being found . further attacks on u.s. critical energy infrastructure are expected , as nation states view disruption of the u.s. economy as a potential target . the electric power grid in the united states comprises all of the power plants generating electricity , together with the transmission and distribution lines and systems which bring power to end - use customers . the grid also connects the many publicly and privately owned electric utility and other wholesale power companies in different states and regions of the united states . the u.s. electric grid has historically operated with a high level of reliability ; however , the various parts of the electric power system are all vulnerable to failure due to natural , operational , or manmade events . while natural and operational failures can be mitigated somewhat by planning and prudent investments , cybersecurity is a growing concern for both electric utilities and other critical infrastructure entities . adoption of digital technologies has improved the efficiency and speed of operations and processes , and allowed for an almost instantaneous exchange of information between connected devices . often , these digital devices are also connected to the internet to increase the ability to share information with a multitude of users and devices . while the benefits of internet - connected digital technologies are many , so too are the risks of a cybersecurity breach from exposure to a globally internet - connected environment .