or agree to do so . that decision or action may include using his official position to exert pressure on another official to perform an "official act," or to advise another official , knowing or intending that such advice will form the basis for an "official act" by another official . setting up a meeting , talking to another official , or organizing an event ( or agreeing to do so ) — without more — does not fit the definition of "official act. as is true of hobbs act robbery , section 1951 proscribes obstructing commerce by means of extortion , and attempting or conspiring to do so . section 2 of the federal criminal code treats those who aid or abet the commission of a felony by another as if they had committed the underlying crime themselves . here as elsewhere , "[t]he crime of attempt consists of two elements . first , the government must prove culpable intent . in other words , the defendant must have been acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the commission of the crime that he is charged with attempting . the second element is conduct constituting a substantial step toward commission of the crime that strongly corroborates that intent. factual impossibility is not a defense . nor is abandonment after a substantial step has been taken . the crime of conspiring to commit hobbs act extortion is a bit of an enigma . the word "extortion" connotes a predator and a victim . yet , a predator and a "victim" may be guilty of conspiracy to commit hobbs act extortion under color of official right without the participation of anyone else . conspiracy requires that all conspirators embrace a common purpose , the commission of the underlying offense . hobbs act extortion requires the victim's "consent" to the surrender of his property to the extortionist , but "the minimal 'consent' required to trigger § 1951 is insufficient to form a conspiratorial agreement. it helps to think of hobbs act extortion as akin to bribery . as the supreme court explained in united states v. o casio , ["t]he 'consent' required to pay a bribe does not necessarily create a conspiratorial agreement . in cases where the bribe payor is merely complying with an official demand , the payor lacks the mens rea necessary for a conspiracy. imagine , for example , "that a health inspector demands a bribe from a restaurant owner , threatening to close down the restaurant if the owner does not pay . if the owner reluctantly pays the bribe in order to keep the business open , the owner has 'consented' to the inspector's demand , but this mere acquiescence in the demand does not form a conspiracy. a unity of intent is also a component of aiding or abetting another to commit hobbs act extortion , which is complete when someone else commits the underlying offense . hobbs act extortion , attempts , and conspiracies are all punishable by imprisonment for not more than 20 years . unlike hobbs act robbery , the government appears to have rarely prosecuted hobbs act extortion as a crime of violence under 18 u.s.c .