not included in h.r . 21 as passed by the house , h.r . 21 as passed by the house , h.r . 648 as passed by the house , and p.l . a pay adjustment of 1.9% for 2019 was authorized for federal civilian employees paid under the general schedule , allocated as 1.4% base pay adjustment and 0.5% locality pay adjustment . requirements for notification about the transfer apply . amounts transferred to an agency's it fund would remain available for three fiscal years . ( section 737 of the fy2019 budget proposal . none of the funds made available by this act could be used to implement , administer , or enforce a rule issued pursuant to section 13 ( p ) of the securities exchange act of 1934 , which requires the sec to promulgate rules requiring issuers with conflict minerals that are necessary to the functionality or production of a product manufactured by such person to disclose annually whether any of those minerals originated in the democratic republic of the congo or an adjoining country . ( section 747 of h.r . 6147 as passed by the house . not included in h.r . 648 as passed by the house , and p.l . ( section 749 of h.r . 6147 as passed by the senate , section 749 of h.r . 21 as passed by the house , section 748 of h.r . 648 as passed by the house , section748 of p.l . the treasury department's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) administers the main body of cuba embargo regulations , the cuban assets control regulations , which were first issued in 1963 , and have been amended many times over the years to reflect changes in u.s. policy toward cuba . in the 115 th congress , h.r . 6147 as passed by the house included two fsgg provisions in division b that would have tightened u.s. economic sanctions on cuba . section 128 provided that no funds made available by the act could have been used to approve , license , facilitate , authorize , or otherwise allow the use , purchase , trafficking , or import of property confiscated by the cuban government . the provision appears to have been aimed at prohibiting the importation of rum and tobacco products by authorized u.s. travelers as accompanied baggage . section 129 , which relates to trade sanctions on cuba , provided that no funds made available by the act could have been used to authorize a general license or approve a specific license with respect to a mark , trade name , or commercial name that is substantially similar to one that was used in connection with a business or assets that were confiscated by the cuban government unless the original owner expressly consented . the provision , which would have prohibited ofac from licensing the payment of trademark registration fees , relates to a long - standing dispute between a cuban company and the bermuda - based bacardi limited over the havana club trademark .