appendix a . background information on democracy indexes background on freedom house's freedom in the world report freedom house's freedom in the world report has measured the level of civil liberties and political rights in each country annually since 1972 . freedom house reporting has also rated a varying number of territories each year ; the ratings for these are not included in the data discussions in this report . according to freedom house , its methodology is derived largely from the united nations ( u.n. ) universal declaration of human rights and "operates from the assumption that freedom for all people is best achieved in liberal democratic societies. freedom house uses both in - house and external analysts and advisers to determine country ratings . these thematic trends are summarized below . congress plays a key role in influencing and shaping many aspects of u.s. policy and programs relating to democracy promotion . as it carries out its legislative and oversight responsibilities , congress may consider a number of questions in the current period and beyond . looking forward , the trends analyzed and described in this report likely portend continued near - term constraints on democratic expansion around the world , and in some cases have the potential to pose a range of persistent challenges for policymakers . congress may continue to grapple with policy considerations within and in light of this difficult context in the near future . as the above discussion illustrates , some of these considerations may relate to the overarching strategic orientation of u.s. foreign policy and democracy promotion's place within that , while others concern second order questions about particular means , resources , and resource allocation . to the extent that there are differences in interest in democracy promotion between members of congress and the executive branch , these considerations may also entail questions about the institutional role of congress in democracy promotion and in u.s. foreign policy generally . scores in each category , which are tabulated to determine overall political rights and civil liberties ratings , are guided by a set of methodological questions . for instance , under civil liberty's rule of law category , one of the questions is "is there an independent judiciary ? along with associated sub - questions , such as "do executive , legislative , and other governmental authorities comply with judicial decisions , and are these decisions effectively enforced ? analysts use a range of sources including news articles , scholarly analysis , ngo reports , and in - country research . background on the economist intelligence unit's democracy index the economist intelligence unit's ( eiu's ) democracy index began coverage in 2006 ; new reports were issued biannually until the report covering 2010 , and have been issued on an annual basis since then . eiu's index is based on an array of 60 indicators , some of which are may be at the outer bounds of democracy's core definition . for instance , its political participation category includes indicators that measure rates of participation in political parties or political nongovernmental organizations , the rate at which adults follow politics in the news , and public confidence in the government and political parties , among other measures .