the task is to make the most of what the amendment encompasses . success depends on the good judgment and good sense of our leaders and the citizenry. it did not , however , provide any mechanism or procedure for determining presidential inability . a decade of congressional investigation of the issue of presidential disability , combined with the shock president kennedy's assassination , provided a galvanizing impetus to congressional action on issues — presidential succession and disability — that had been discussed and debated for decades . a final element was the committed approval and active leadership support from senior members of both chambers , including house judiciary committee chairman emanuel celler and senator birch bayh , chairman of the senate judiciary committee's subcommittee on constitutional amendments . of the amendment's two sections concerned with presidential disability , section 3 has been explicitly implemented twice since ratification , during the george w. bush presidency , and implicitly once , during the ronald reagan presidency . on all three occasions , the president implemented and rescinded declarations of disability in connection with routine medical procedures that presented no complications and generated little comment . to date , it has arguably met its framers' expectations with little controversy or criticism . section 4's comparative complexity , particularly its potential for declaring a president to be disabled without his or her concurrence , has troubled some observers . the section , they have argued , provides opportunities for political mischief and the potential usurpation of the president's authority . it might be further suggested that section 4 , like the impeachment process , is a procedure so powerful and fraught with constitutional and political implications that it would likely be used only in the most compelling circumstances , since its invocation might arguably precipitate a constitutional crisis . in response to these concerns , however , it may be noted from the record that senator bayh and the framers of the twenty - fifth amendment gave these issues serious consideration and included powerful checks to deter abuse . these include the president's ability to challenge a section 4 declaration of disability ; the requirement of a timely decision by congress ; and , ultimately , the need for a two - thirds vote in both houses to sustain a contested section 4 finding of disability by the vice president and the cabinet or disability review body . as one commentator quoted earlier in this report concluded , "[b]ecause the amendment deals with unpredictable human frailties , it is not a perfect solution , but few exist in constitutional history . most successful constitutional amendments have emerged as responses to the stimulus of sudden transformative events , or have benefited from the "ripeness" of an idea that has been before the public for many years . both factors contributed to the successful proposal and ratification of the twenty - fifth amendment .