for example , h.r . 2568 and s. 1075 propose to have a feasibility study conducted to determine suitable locations in the areas of the marcellus and utica shale formations for ethane storage facilities and to then determine potential economic costs and benefits of such projects . s. 1340 , the appalachian energy and manufacturing infrastructure revitalization act , is designed to help speed up the permitting process for projects deemed as a "critical energy infrastructure project. 5988 relates to the safety of delivering or retrieving propane containers . ( see figure 1 . ) these regions , mostly located on the gulf coast , can take advantage of already existing pipelines , refineries , processing plants , and petrochemical processing sites . other areas of the country , like the appalachian region , kansas , and north dakota , have had difficulty adding infrastructure to match their growing output of ngls . in areas of the country , like pennsylvania , where the construction of pipelines is lagging behind the increasing production of ngls , the use of more expensive methods of transportation ( eg , rail cars ) has become necessary , driving up costs . a department of energy ( doe ) report on ngls in the appalachian region also pointed out that states like pennsylvania are strongly reliant on storage outside of their region . infrastructure , production , safety , the environment , and economics are all critical to the ngl market and are of interest to congress . about 30 ngl - related bills have been introduced in the 115 th congress . the energy information administration's ( eia's ) data on ngls are limited , especially compared to oil and natural gas . some stakeholders argue that this contributes to a lack of transparency in the market and hinders analysis , which may affect policymaking related to ngls . as ngls play a bigger role in the u.s. energy mix , this may become a larger concern . s. 1972 would require eia to collect additional data on propane , specifically exports . other bills that have been introduced in the 115 th congress address infrastructure , taxes , safety , and other energy topics , and are not specifically targeting ngls . as u.s. production of natural gas and oil continues to grow , so will u.s. consumption of ngls . the rise in production of each ngl — ethane , propane , butane , isobutane , and pentanes — since 2008 has been large . both commodities are also being exported in growing quantities . in between natural gas and crude oil is a group of hydrocarbons referred to as natural gas liquids ( ngls ) . ngls , which make up about 4% of the u.s. energy mix , include ethane , propane , butane , isobutane , and pentanes ( which includes natural gasoline ) . the united states is the largest producer of ngls in the world . ngls are differentiated from one another by the number of carbon atoms in their molecular chain . natural gas liquids are extracted as a mixture of hydrocarbons and other gases and are produced and separated from one of two sources: natural gas processing or crude oil refining .