the senator stated that he did not believe this was true . the report concludes with some takeaways for members . the federal judiciary , state courts , state legislatures , and various bar associations have all developed codes of ethical standards intended to guide the conduct of judges and judicial candidates . as explained below , many of these codes contain provisions that could discourage nominees for federal judgeships from answering certain types of questions during their confirmation hearings . each of the ethical rules discussed below purport to constrain what a federal judicial nominee may permissibly say during the confirmation process ; none of the ethical rules , however , affirmatively obligate nominees to respond to particular questions . moreover , the applicable ethical rules purport only to prohibit the nominee from answering certain questions ; they do not explicitly purport to prohibit members from asking those questions . as the following sections explain , however , canons of judicial ethics are generally self - enforcing , with the result that there is virtually no case law and only minimal commentary analyzing how these codes of judicial conduct apply in the specific context of confirmation hearings for appointed federal judges . although it is possible to draw analogies from other contexts — especially statements and promises that candidates for elected judgeships at the state level make during their campaigns — neither the canons nor the advisory opinions interpreting them definitively address how the various ethical rules apply in the specific context of a confirmation hearing before the u.s. senate . a judge sworn to decide impartially can offer no forecasts , no hints , for that would show not only disregard for the specifics of the particular case , it would display disdain for the entire judicial process . although the refusal to stake out a position on matters that are likely to come before the court has become known as the ginsburg rule , the principle precedes justice ginsburg's hearing . indeed , according to one recent study , the three supreme court nominees who most frequently "refuse[d] to answer a question on the ground that answering would create the reality or appear of bias , would interfere with judicial independence , or would be inappropriate for some other , similar reason," all predate justice ginsburg's hearing . this section of the report examines nominations to the supreme court and describes the norms that have developed surrounding senatorial questioning and nominees' responses . further complicating matters is the fact that not all of the canons discussed below apply equally to all nominees . perhaps for these reasons , neither judicial nominees nor members of congress nor commentators have reached a consensus regarding the precise range of responses that are permissible under the relevant canons of judicial conduct . some nominees have suggested that ethical considerations prohibit judicial candidates from making virtually any statement about any legal issue that could conceivably come before the federal judiciary . some scholars , by contrast , take the opposite position — that the applicable canons "impose[] surprisingly few restraints on the scope of a nominee's responses.