it is not comprehensive . for example , congress has designated many sites with unique titles ( such as "national park for the performing arts" or "national tallgrass prairie" ) that are not reflected in the table . crs report r41658 , commemorative works in the district of columbia: background and practice , by jacob r. straus . who has authority to confer each designation ? which agency or nonfederal entity is responsible for managing the land under each designation , and which statutes would govern management decisions ? what types of uses would be allowed on the land under each designation , and what uses would be prohibited ? the report compares a variety of federal land designations with respect to these factors . it is beyond the scope of this report to assess the benefits or drawbacks of conferring federal designations on lands , although such questions often arise when federal designations are contemplated . for any given area , some stakeholders might favor a federal designation ( for example , to bring federal funding to an area , to promote visitation , or to bring new resource protections ) and others might oppose one ( for example , to forestall the federal government's becoming a stakeholder in regional land use decisions or to preserve federal funds that might be spent on area management for allocation to other priorities ) . additional crs products , cited at the end of this report , explore such questions in greater detail for specific land designations . this report begins by briefly discussing some general factors that congress may consider when determining which , if any , federal land designations might be suitable for a given area . it then compares selected designations across multiple attributes ( table 1 ) . table 1 , below , compares selected designations used by congress and the executive branch for federal lands and other areas . the table begins with designations that are common to multiple agencies and then lists designations exclusively or primarily related to an individual agency . the four agencies appear in order of the overall amount of land each agency manages ( blm , then fs , fws , and nps ) . the table provides information on the entity that confers each designation ( eg , congress , the president , the interior or agriculture secretary ) ; statutory authorities for the designation ; the agency or agencies that administer each type of area ( also noting designations for which the area typically remains in nonfederal management ) ; selected characteristics of the areas ; and examples of each type of area . designations for nonfederally owned and managed sites are listed according to the agency with administrative responsibility for the designation ( eg , responsibility for evaluating site qualifications and providing technical and / or financial assistance to designated sites ) . the table reflects a selection of titles that have been used repeatedly for multiple areas . crs report r41285 , congressionally designated special management areas in the national forest system , by katie hoover . crs in focus if10585 , the federal land management agencies , by katie hoover .