below is a brief description of the changes . prescription drugs were added to the adult risk adjustment model starting in the 2018 benefit year . cms created prescription drug categories ( rxcs ) to group drugs to be included in the risk adjustment model . some rxcs are used to impute ( i.e. , ascribe ) diagnoses , and some are used to indicate the severity of a diagnosis that is included through medical coding . cms worked with clinician consultants and staff clinicians to determine rxcs both for ascribing diagnoses and for indicating a more severe case of the related diagnosis ( making it likely that the enrollee will incur greater medical expenses than an enrollee who has the diagnosis but not a prescription drug ) . cms included prescription drug classes where there is a low risk of unintended impacts on provider prescribing behavior . the agency intends to monitor prescription drug utilization for any unintended impacts and may make changes to the rxcs in the future if it finds evidence of such impacts . the american academy of actuaries suggested including prescription drugs in the risk adjustment model in its report on risk adjustment . during the rulemaking process for the 2018 benefit year , the academy commented that including prescription drugs would improve the model's accuracy , enhance the prediction of costs for partial - year enrollees , and improve payments for conditions that are treated with high - cost drugs . starting in the 2018 benefit year , cms created a national - level , high - cost risk pool for the individual market and the small group market to remove any potential incentive for insurers to avoid extremely high - cost enrollees and to better capture the risk associated with these enrollees in risk adjustment payments and charges . while an enrollee who is considered high - risk is expected to have higher overall claims cost , other enrollees who are not high - risk may have ( one time ) expensive claims and thus be considered high - cost in a given year . for high - cost enrollees ( whether high risk or not ) an insurer will receive an adjustment to their transfer amounts equal to 60% of the costs above a defined threshold ( the threshold for high - cost enrollee is defined as enrollees with total claims costs above $1 million in a benefit year ) . to maintain budget neutrality , cms first will calculate the total amount of paid claims costs above the threshold to determine the amount to be transferred . then , cms will calculate an adjustment as a percentage of an insurer's total premiums in each market . once determined , this amount will be added to or subtracted from an insurer's transfer amount calculated by excluding costs above the threshold the high - cost enrollees . cms indicated that it expects this adjustment to be a very small percentage of premiums , estimating less than 0.5% of premiums for either market .