currently , youtube is owned by google . youtube describes its mission as an opportunity to "give everyone a voice and show them the world," based on four essential freedoms: freedom of expression , freedom of information , freedom of opportunity , and freedom to belong . congressional communications continues to evolve . as members of congress adopt new online social networking services , more information is potentially available faster than ever before . many members now use email , official websites , youtube channels , twitter , facebook , instagram , flickr , google+ , medium , and other networking platforms to share information with and collect information from their followers . many of these technologies were either nonexistent or not widely available several years ago . around 2009 , members of congress began adopting social media as an additional way to share information . , smart phone or tablet ) application . snapchat's premise is to allow users to send and receive pictures and messages that are short - lived . snapchat's emphasis is on allowing users to share their point of view , and the application features a camera when it is opened to encourage the user to share what he or she is seeing at that moment . medium launched in 2012 by twitter cofounder evan williams as a supplement to twitter's then - 140-character limit , medium combines an open publishing blogging platform with social media features to create a product that has led to what has been referred to as social journalism . medium bills itself as a platform that allows users to interact with other users' articles and to create their own content . linkedin founded in 2003 , linkedin is a professional networking platform that allows users to connect with other individuals and potential employers . linkedin users can create a professional network , exchange ideas , and potentially find new employment opportunities that match their interests and network connections . pinterest started in 2010 , pinterest states that it "began as a tool to help people collect things they were passionate about online. currently , more than 200 million people use pinterest every month . each user can share visual information by posting "pins" on "boards" that are used as filters for the user . other users can then browse the boards to find others who share similar interests and inspirations . periscope founded in 2014 , periscope is a live video streaming platform used on mobile devices that enables users to broadcast their activities as a live video . currently owned by twitter , periscope's live video features have largely been incorporated into twitter's platform . tumblr founded in 2007 , tumblr is a blogging platform specializing in social network microblogging . users can create their own blogs , post their own material , and reshare content written by other tumblr users . in addition to providing a microblogging platform , tumblr also has a feature that allows users to ask posters anonymous questions about the written subject material . at that time , members who had adopted twitter — the first platform widely adopted by representatives and senators — most often used it as a tool to send out information .