another dhs component , u.s . implementation and expansion of expedited removal: 1997-2017 the following discussion is a more comprehensive overview of the executive's implementation and expansion of expedited removal following the passage of iirira in 1996 . arriving aliens initially , the former ins limited the application of its expedited removal authority to aliens arriving in the united states . in order to clarify the scope of the term "arriving alien," the ins issued regulations that defined the term to include aliens seeking admission into the united states at a port of entry , aliens seeking transit through the united states at a port of entry , and aliens who have been interdicted at sea and brought into the united states "by any means , whether or not to a designated port - of - entry , and regardless of the means of transport. in response to opposition to the inclusion of aliens interdicted at sea in the definition of "arriving alien," the ins pointed to bia precedent holding that "the mere crossing into the territorial waters of the united states has never satisfied the test of having entered the united states," and reasoned that "[a]liens who have not yet established physical presence on land in the united states cannot be considered as anything other than arriving aliens. furthermore , the ins declared , "[t]he inclusion of aliens interdicted at sea in the definition of arriving alien will support the department's mandate to protect the nation's borders against illegal immigration. the ins further determined that "[a]n arriving alien remains an arriving alien even if paroled pursuant to ina section 212 ( d ) ( 5 ) , and even after any such parole is terminated or revoked. the ins explained that the inclusion of paroled aliens was based on the language of ina section 212 ( d ) ( 5 ) , which indicated that the parole of an alien did not constitute an admission into the united states , and that the alien would be considered an applicant for admission once the purpose of the parole had been served . looking ahead , the ins "reserve[d] the right to apply expedited removal procedures to additional classes of aliens within the limits set by the statute , if , in the commissioner's discretion , such action is operationally warranted. this expanded category of aliens , the ins explained , "may be localized , in response to specific needs within a particular region , or nationwide , as appropriate. the agency declared that "a proposed expansion of the expedited removal procedures may occur at any time and may be driven either by specific situations such as a sudden influx of illegal aliens motivated by political or economic unrest or other events or by a general need to increase the effectiveness of enforcement operations at one or more locations. the ins , however , recognized that expanding the reach of expedited removal would "involve more complex determinations of fact and will be more difficult to manage," and indicated that , for the time being , it would apply the new procedures "on a more limited and controlled basis.