the senate - passed bill does not have such a provision . critics of lowering the federal share provided for new starts projects note that the federal share for highway projects is typically 80% , and in some cases is higher . they contend that the higher federal share makes highway projects relatively more attractive than public transportation projects for communities considering how to address transportation problems . advocates of this provision note that the demand for new starts funding greatly exceeds the amount available , so requiring a higher local match allows fta to support more projects with the available funding . they also assert that requiring a higher local match likely encourages communities to estimate the costs and benefits of proposed transit projects more carefully , reducing the risk of subsequent cost overruns and of project ridership falling short of expectations . among the challenges to funding transportation infrastructure is that most federal transportation funding is distributed by mode , and most of the funding is distributed to states by formula . there are grant programs reserved for highways , for public transportation , for rail , and for airport development , but sponsors of projects involving multiple modes may have difficulty amassing significant amounts of federal funding . this pattern appears to be playing out again in the fy2019 appropriations bills . the essential air service ( eas ) program is funded through a combination of mandatory and discretionary budget authority . in addition to the annual discretionary appropriation , there is a mandatory annual authorization , estimated at $140 million for fy2019 , financed by overflight fees collected from commercial airlines by faa . these overflight fees apply to international flights that fly through u.s. airspace , but do not land in or take off from the united states . the fees are to be reasonably related to the costs of providing air traffic services to such flights . an investigation that found numerous instances of mismanagement of federal funding led fta to restrict wmata's use of federal funds . an fta audit of wmata's safety practices in 2015 produced many recommendations for change , and in october 2015 fta assumed oversight of wmata's safety compliance practices from the tri - state oversight committee , the agency created by the governments of the district of columbia , maryland , and virginia to oversee wmata safety performance . fta continues to exercise safety oversight of wmata , conducting inspections , leading accident investigations , and directing that federal funds received by wmata are used to improve safety . in february 2017 , fta notified leaders of the three jurisdictions that it would withhold 5% of their fy2017 transit urbanized area formula funds until they meet the requirements to create a new state safety oversight program to replace the tri - state oversight committee . the jurisdictions passed legislation establishing a new safety oversight agency ( the metrorail safety commission ) soon after , but the agency must be in operation before fta will release the funding . on september 6 , 2018 , fta outlined the steps the new metrorail safety commission must take in order to complete the transition of oversight responsibility from fta to the commission .