they are not expected to be completed in the near future . as u.s. lawmakers consider policy options for agriculture , other countries will likely be evaluating not only whether , in their view , these options will comply with the u.s. commitments under the aoa but also how they reflect on the u.s. negotiating position in wto multilateral talks . the u.s. objective , in the past , has been for the negotiations to result in substantial reductions in trade - distorting support and for stronger rules that ensure that all production - related support is subject to discipline ( to avoid costly and time - consuming challenges via the wto dispute settlement process ) while still preserving criteria - based "green box" policies that can support agriculture in ways that minimize trade distortions . at the same time , congress might seek domestic farm policy measures that it can justify as aoa - and scm - compliant . the commodity programs of the 2014 farm bill became operational with the 2014 crop year . they are scheduled to expire on september 30 , 2018 , or with the 2018 crop year . if it is a potentially trade - distorting "amber box" policy , can support still be excluded from the ams calculation under the so - called 5% de minimis exemption ( explained later in more detail ) because total support is no more than 5% of either: the value of total annual production if the support is non - product specific , or the value of annual production of a particular commodity if the support is specific to that commodity ? if such support exceeds the de minimis 5% threshold ( and thus cannot be exempted ) , when it is added to all other forms of non - exempt amber box support is total u.s. ams still beneath the $19.1 billion limit ? if a program is fully compliant with the aoa rules and limits , does its support result in price or trade distortion in international markets that , in turn , cause adverse effects upon another wto member ? if so , then it may be subject to challenge under scm rules . the aoa's structure of varying spending limits across the amber , blue , and green boxes is intentional . by leaving no constraint on spending in the green box while imposing limits on amber box spending , the wto implicitly encourages countries to design their domestic farm support programs to be green box compliant . negotiations to further reform agricultural trade within the context of the wto — referred to as the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations — began in 2001 . each successive farm bill usually involves some modification or replacement of existing farm programs . the current omnibus farm bill , the agricultural act of 2014 ( p.l . 113-79 ; the 2014 farm bill ) , which was signed into law on february 7 , 2014 , made several substantial changes to the previous farm safety net of the 2008 farm bill . with respect to disciplines governing domestic agricultural support , two wto agreements are paramount — the agreement on agriculture ( aoa ) and the agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures ( scm ) .