yes . dod policy is that live animals will not be used for training and education except where , after exhaustive analysis , no alternatives are available . currently approved uses include pre - deployment training for medical personnel and include infant intubation ( ferrets ) , microsurgery ( rodents ) , and combat trauma training ( goats and swine ) . this is known as the uniform formulary . how does the patient protection and affordable care act affect tricare ? in general , eligible beneficiaries may enroll in a tricare health plan during the annual open enrollment season ( november 12-december 12 ) , or within 90 days after a qualifying life event ( qle ) . table 3 identifies military or family - related life changes that are deemed a qle . section 701 of the ndaa for fy2000 ( p.l . 106-65 ) directed the creation of an "effective , efficient , integrated pharmacy benefits program," also known as the dod pharmacy benefits program . features of the program include: availability of pharmaceutical agents for all therapeutic classes ; establishing a uniform formulary based on clinical effectiveness and cost - effectiveness ; and assuring the availability of clinically appropriate pharmaceutical agents to uniformed services members , retirees , and family members . the program dispenses pharmaceuticals to eligible beneficiaries through three venues: mtf pharmacies , tricare retail pharmacies , and the tricare mail order program . currently , mtf pharmacies are administered and managed by each military service medical department ( i.e. , medcom , bumed , and afms ) , while the tricare retail and mail order pharmacy programs are managed by the dha . since 2003 , dod has contracted a pharmacy benefits manager , express scripts , inc . ( esi ) , to administer the tricare pharmacy programs . esi maintains a national network of retail pharmacies and a home - delivery program and it processes pharmacy claims on behalf of beneficiaries . there are no additional costs to participate in the dod pharmacy benefits program . the program is required to maintain a formulary of pharmaceutical agents ( hereinafter also referred to as drugs or medications ) in the complete range of therapeutic classes . selection of drugs for inclusion on the formulary is based on the relative clinical and cost effectiveness of the agents in each class . the law further specifies that the formulary is to be maintained and updated by a pharmacy and therapeutics committee whose membership is composed of representatives of both mtf pharmacies and health care providers . a beneficiary advisory panel ( bap ) is required to review and comment on formulary recommendations presented by the pharmacy and therapeutics committee prior to those recommendations going to the dha director for approval . the bap is composed of representatives of non - governmental organizations and associations that represent the views and interests of a large number of eligible covered beneficiaries , contractors responsible for the tricare retail pharmacy program , contractors responsible for the national mail - order pharmacy program , and tricare network providers . prescriptions filled through military treatment facilities at an mtf , tricare beneficiaries may fill prescriptions from a civilian or military provider without a copayment .