feca sets forth both disclaimer and disclosure requirements . the term disclaimer generally refers to statements of attribution that appear directly on a campaign - related communication , and the term disclosure generally refers to requirements for periodic reporting to the fec , which are made available for public inspection . the following sections of the report provide an overview of feca disclaimer and disclosure requirements , relevant supreme court rulings , and a discussion of constitutional considerations for legislation , should congress decide to enact legislation to enhance or modify such requirements . in addition to a series of civil penalties , feca sets forth criminal penalties for knowing and willful violations of the act . this section of the report outlines the criminal penalties applicable to persons who violate the act . generally , feca provides that any person who knowingly and willfully commits a violation of any provision of the act that involves the making , receiving , or reporting of any contribution , donation , or expenditure of $25,000 or more per calendar year shall be fined under title 18 of the u.s. code , or imprisoned for not more than five years , or both . if the amount involved is $2,000 or more per calendar year , but is less than $25,000 , the act provides for a fine under title 18 , or imprisonment for not more than one year , or both . limits that are too low could significantly impede a candidate or political committee from amassing the necessary resources for effective communication . the court concluded , however , that the feca contribution limit at issue in buckley would not negatively affect campaign funding . on the other hand , the buckley court determined that because they impose a substantial restraint on speech and association , expenditure limits are subject to strict scrutiny , requiring that they be narrowly tailored to serve a compelling governmental interest . specifically , under the first amendment , the court determined , expenditure limits impose a restriction on the amount of money that a candidate can spend on communications , thereby reducing the number and depth of issues discussed and the size of the audience reached . such restrictions , the court determined , are not justified by an overriding governmental interest . that is , because expenditures do not involve money flowing directly to the benefit of a candidate's campaign fund , the risk of quid pro quo corruption does not exist . essentially , quid pro quo corruption captures the notion of "a direct exchange of an official act for money. further , the court in buckley rejected the government's asserted interest in equalizing the relative resources of candidates , and in reducing the overall costs of campaigns . upon a similar premise , the court rejected the government's interest in limiting a wealthy candidate's ability to draw upon personal wealth to finance his or her campaign , and struck down a law limiting expenditures from personal funds . when a candidate self - finances , the court pointed out , his or her dependence on outside contributions is reduced , thereby lessening the risk of corruption .