circuit ( d.c . circuit ) , relying on the final observation in freytag , ruled that sec aljs were not officers , but were instead mere employees . specifically , the lower court concluded sec aljs were not officers because they did not render final decisions , as the alj's decisions are not final until either after de novo review by the commission or an order by the commission "declining to grant or order review. before the supreme court , lucia argued that , under freytag , the sec aljs were officers because they "perform all of the same discretionary functions that [the] court found 'significant' in freytag . in a change from the position taken by the sec at the d.c . circuit , the solicitor general agreed that sec aljs are officers . in contrast , the amicus appointed by the supreme court to defend the d.c . circuit's decision argued that significant authority is wielded only by one who "has been delegated ( i ) the power to bind the government or private parties ( ii ) in her own name rather than in the name of a superior officer. a rule that considered sec aljs to wield significant authority , the amicus argued , would "have significant adverse practical consequences," as it "could cast doubt on the constitutionality of the method of appointment of many thousands of civil servants. the supreme court , in a decision with four separate opinions , held that sec aljs qualified as officers who must be appointed according to the requirements of the appointments clause . in the majority opinion for the court , justice kagan reasoned that because the duties of sec aljs essentially mirrored those of the special trial judges in freytag , the sec aljs also constituted officers . as an initial matter , both "hold a continuing position established by law. further , special trial judges and sec aljs "exercise the same 'significant discretion' when carrying out the same 'important functions.' both positions ( 1 ) "take testimony," ( 2 ) "conduct trials," ( 3 ) "rule on the admissibility of evidence," and ( 4 ) are entrusted with "the power to enforce compliance with discovery orders. moreover , justice kagan observed , sec aljs actually had somewhat more independent authority to render decisions than did the special trial judges in freytag — while a major decision made by the special trial judges had no force unless a tax court judge adopted it as his own , the sec can decline to review an alj's decision , in which case the decision becomes final and "is deemed the action of the commission. accordingly , because sec aljs were "near carbon - copies" of the special trial judges in freytag , they constituted officers and must be appointed pursuant to the appointments clause . the court ordered that lucia receive a new hearing before a properly appointed alj ( or the commission ) , and that the presiding judge could not be the one who originally presided over the hearing , even if he was subsequently appointed correctly .