compared to h.r . 3387 , title ii of awia would generally authorize or reauthorize appropriations for sdwa programs for shorter periods . for dwsrf capitalization grants , for example , title ii would authorize to be appropriated $4.4 billion over three years ( compared to a five - year reauthorization in h.r . grants for states and tribes to oversee water systems and enforce sdwa regulations would be reauthorized at a level of $125 million for each of fy2020 and fy2021 rather than $150 million annually for five years . among many similarities to h.r . 3387 , title ii of awia would increase the amount of dwsrf funding that states could use to assist disadvantaged communities and would authorize states to extend the loan repayment period . it would specify that dwsrf funds could be used for replacing or rehabilitating aging treatment , storage , or distribution facilities ; require future needs surveys to include an assessment of costs to replace lead service lines ; extend through fy2022 the requirement that projects receiving dwsrf assistance use american iron and steel ; and apply davis - bacon prevailing wage requirements to projects receiving dwsrf assistance ( currently required through appropriations acts ) . title ii of awia would also allow greater use of dwsrf funds for source water protection activities . it would authorize states to require system owners or operators , in certain circumstances , to assess options for consolidation , transfer of ownership , or other actions to achieve compliance and would encourage systems to develop asset management plans . title ii would rewrite and broaden sdwa antiterrorism provisions to require community water systems serving more than 3,300 persons to assess risks and resiliency to malevolent acts and natural hazards and to prepare emergency response plans and authorize $25 million for fy2020 and fy2021 for grants to support these activities . title ii would require large systems to provide consumer confidence reports to customers biannually ( rather than annually as currently required ) and direct epa to develop a strategic plan to improve accuracy and availability of compliance monitoring data . to reduce exposure to lead in school drinking water , title ii of awia would ( 1 ) authorize increased appropriations ( $25 million annually for fy2020 and fy2021 ) to assist states and local educational agencies in testing for lead in drinking water at schools and child care programs and direct epa to provide technical assistance and ( 2 ) authorize $5 million annually for fy2019 through fy2021 for grants to replace pre - 1988 school water fountains . for disaster recovery , awia title ii would authorize $100 million to be appropriated for dwsrf capitalization grants to states to assist community water systems in areas covered by a federal disaster declaration issued after january 1 , 2017 . funds may be used to help eligible systems restore or increase sdwa compliance in underserved areas . awia also includes drinking water provisions comparable to those in s. 2800 , as reported . among other provisions , awia title ii would authorize $20 million for each of fy2019 through fy2022 for epa to provide grants for drinking water and wastewater infrastructure projects at indian reservations located in the upper mississippi river and upper rio grande basins .