appendix a . food purchases in the trade aid package appendix b . trade loss versus opportunity cost usda has elected to base mfp payments strictly on estimated trade loss . however , the retaliatory tariffs are only one of a number of factors that influence market prices . in particular , the outlook for record u.s. soybean and near - record corn harvests in 2018 has likely had an important effect on pressuring market prices lower during the may to september period . this production effect should be excluded from any estimate of trade - based market loss . changes in usda's monthly price forecasts from may to september may provide an upper - bound estimate of the trade impacts ( table a - 4 ) , since this period coincides with the escalating trade conflicts when the retaliatory tariffs were applied . however , they include the production effect and thus likely overstate any trade impact . according to usda , during the may - september period , farm prices for mfp commodities declined 18% for soybeans , 8% for sorghum , and 8% for corn but rose 2% for wheat and 15% for cotton . at first glance , these price changes seem out of sync with the mfp payment rates . sorghum could receive a payment rate that is nearly three times as large as its estimated price decline from may to september . in contrast , corn — which has experienced a price decline identical to sorghum — could receive a payment rate that amounts to 3% of the price decline that corn prices experienced over this same period . however , given the number of factors influencing market prices over this period , it may not be possible to establish with confidence what market prices would have been in the absence of the retaliatory tariffs . any viable estimate would have to be generated from a global economic model featuring all major agricultural commodities that compete for land and other inputs in production ; may substitute for each other in alternative uses ; and captures the interactions of all relevant market factors such as policy , technology , and expected prices , production , and demand . for example , wheat and cotton are to receive per - unit mfp payment rates while experiencing an increase in farm prices during the may - september period . however , 2018 has been a year of poor international wheat harvests , and it could be that wheat prices might have moved to much higher levels in the absence of retaliatory tariffs . in contrast , several commodity groups have calculated the "lost market value" and view it as a better measure of the economic damage from the retaliatory tariffs ( see " industry response to mfp payment allocation " ) . these two "loss" measures are described here . trade loss trade loss is the value of lost export sales due to a change in foreign demand ( table a - 3 ) . with respect to retaliatory tariffs , it is the difference in u.s. agricultural exports with and without the tariffs . it also appears in usda export forecasts .