dhs's u.s . citizenship and immigration and services ( uscis ) may make a public charge determination when an alien applies to adjust to lpr status . abroad , dos consular officers may make a public charge determination when an alien applies for a visa . because the ina does not define the term "public charge," the determination of whether an alien seeking an immigrant visa or adjustment of status is inadmissible on public charge grounds turns largely on standards set forth in agency guidance materials . currently , that guidance defines a "public charge" as a person who becomes or is likely to become primarily dependent on either of two types of public benefits: ( 1 ) public cash assistance for income maintenance , or ( 2 ) government - funded institutionalization for long - term care . the ina's public charge provisions have drawn heightened attention recently in light of indications that the trump administration intends to establish new rules for their interpretation and application . specifically , dhs has informed the office of management and budget ( omb ) that it "will propose regulatory provisions guiding the inadmissibility determination on whether an alien is likely at any time to become a public charge. the new rules have not been published yet . as a result , agency guidance supplies the working definition . uscis , the agency within dhs that adjudicates applications for adjustment to lpr status of certain aliens in the united states , defines "public charge" for inadmissibility purposes as covering "an individual who is likely to become 'primarily dependent on the government for subsistence , as demonstrated by either the receipt of public cash assistance for income maintenance , or institutionalization for long - term care at government expense.' dos's foreign affairs manual ( fam ) , which provides guidance to consular officers who adjudicate visas abroad , defines "public charge" in substantially the same way as uscis . however , as discussed further below , the fam diverges from the uscis guidance in instructing consular officers to consider an alien's past receipt of any type of public assistance ( not just cash assistance for income maintenance ) when determining whether an alien is likely to become dependent in the future on cash assistance for income maintenance or government - funded long - term care . as for deportability , section 237 of the ina states that "any alien who , within five years after the date of entry , has become a public charge from causes not affirmatively shown to have arisen since entry is deportable. however , under long - standing case law of the board of immigration appeals , an alien can only be deported under this provision if the elements of a three - part test are satisfied: ( 1 ) a "[s]tate or other governing body must … impose a charge for [] services rendered to the alien," ( 2 ) "authorities must make demand for payment of the charges" within five years of the alien's entry into the united states , and ( 3 ) the alien must fail to pay . deportations on public charge grounds under this test have rarely occurred .