this amount was equal to the fy2018-enacted amount . selectusa was created in 2011 and is now part of ita's global markets unit . it coordinates investment - related resources across more than 20 federal agencies to ( 1 ) promote the united states as an investment market and ( 2 ) address investor climate concerns that may impede investment in the united states . the program serves as an information resource for international investors and advocates for u.s. cities , states , and regions as investment destinations . itec was established by executive order in 2012 to take a "whole - of - government" approach to monitoring and enforcing u.s. trade rights by using expertise from across the federal government . in 2016 , the itec was succeeded by ictime , which congress established through the trade facilitation and trade enforcement act of 2015 ( p.l . the executive - established itec received its funding through ita ; funding for ictime is now appropriated through ustr . ictime's purpose is to advance u.s. trade policy through strengthened and coordinated enforcement of u.s. trade rights . ictime investigates potential disputes under the auspices of the world trade organization ; inspects potential disputes pursuant to bilateral and regional trade agreements to which the united states is a party ; and carries out the functions of ustr with respect to the monitoring and enforcement of trade agreements to which the united states is a party . ustr and ita work closely within the ictime to identify issues and develop information in areas of economic importance to u.s. industries . the ustr's budget justification did not provide a breakdown for requested funding for ictime . the house and senate committee - reported bills did not include a specific funding amount for ictime . ( see table 1 . ) the house committee on appropriations reported h.r . 5952 on may 17 , 2018 . the house committee bill included a total of $647.6 million for the three trade - related agencies , which was $56.8 million more ( 9.6% ) than the administration's request and $0.7 million less ( - 0.1% ) than the fy2018-enacted amount . the house committee recommended $480.0 million in direct funding for ita , $95.0 million for ustic , and a total of $72.6 million for ustr . the senate committee on appropriations reported s. 3072 on june 14 , 2018 . these statistics are used across federal agencies , for a variety of purposes , such as to estimate the contribution of international travel to the economy , develop public policy on the travel industry , and forecast staffing needs at consulates and ports of entry . the administration requested $5.0 million for fy2019 for siat to expand the survey and data collection . the administration proposed that "$5 million in fee revenues collected from the surcharge on international travelers utilizing the electronic system for travel authorization ( esta ) be redirected to fully fund the siat. the house committee - reported bill did not include a specific recommendation for siat . according to the senate committee report , the senate committee on appropriations did not adopt the administration's proposal to seek alternative funding sources for siat and "direct[ed] ita to continue funding siat out of its base budget .