several of the provisions in h.r . 10 that were not included in p.l . 115-174 , many of which are related to capital markets , are included in s. 488 . because public offerings are already accessible by all investors , the discussions of expanding investor access often revolve around private offerings . for purposes of investor protection , private offerings are often limited in the kinds of investors to which they can be offered . two common approaches to expanding capital access are to expand the investor pool or enhance investor communication for private offerings . some of the s. 488 provisions propose to expand ( 1 ) the type of eligible investors by widening the accredited investor definition , as seen in titles iv and x ; and ( 2 ) the communication to eligible investors by allowing broader outreach , as seen in title i . the number of publicly listed u.s. companies has declined by half over the past two decades , and small - to medium - sized companies are said to have more difficulty accessing capital relative to larger companies . numerous factors contributed to this trend , but one of the most debated factors is the compliance costs for companies to go and stay public . some believe the compliance costs associated with capital markets regulation could potentially outweigh the benefits of being a public company and are disproportionately burdensome for small and medium - sized businesses . the compliance costs include external auditing , legal fees , and financial reporting fees . according to the ipo task force , public companies in 2011 faced a onetime initial regulatory compliance cost of around $2.5 million and annual ongoing compliance costs of $1.5 million . the expansion of investor access is one method to increase funding for issuers ( companies looking to raise money ) and generate additional investment opportunities for investors . there are two types of securities offerings . one type is called public offerings , which are available to all types of investors and have more rigorous disclosure requirements . by contrast , securities offerings that are exempt from sec registration are referred to as private offerings and are mainly available to more sophisticated investors . the key benefits of compliance often include investor protection and risk mitigation . for example , title xx aims to facilitate trading activities , but it would also direct the sec to issue disclosure requirements . these requirements could help investors understand the distinct features and risks of certain investment products and activities . there are also s. 488 provisions that center on investor protection . for example , titles xxvii and xxix would provide protection to general investors against corporate insiders and title xxx would provide targeted protection to senior investors who are victims of financial exploitation . title xxvii would direct the sec to study whether rule 10b5-1 , a rule that allows corporate insiders to trade for legitimate reasons without running afoul of insider trading inquiries , should be amended . the sec would issue the report no later than a year following the enactment of the act . it would also carry out related rulemaking consistent with the study results .