these goals are not addressed in this report . the current nuclear weapons complex , which nnsa refers to as the nuclear security enterprise , includes "nnsa headquarters ( located in washington , dc ; germantown , maryland ; and albuquerque , new mexico ) , the nnsa field offices , the three national security laboratories ( two of which also have production missions ) , the four nuclear weapons production facilities , and the nevada national security site. two other facilities are essential for maintaining the stockpile: ( 1 ) the tva's watts barr nuclear power reactor in tennessee , which produces tritium , a relatively short - lived nuclear material vital to modern nuclear warheads , and ( 2 ) the wipp site in new mexico , which is used to manage , isolate , and store plutonium - bearing wastes from the warhead operations at other sites . the site descriptions that follow do not describe the headquarters or field offices , but focus instead on the laboratories , testing , production , and support facilities more commonly known as the nuclear weapons infrastructure . the sites are largely government - owned , contractor - operated facilities . according to nnsa , the primary mission of national security laboratories "is to develop and sustain nuclear weapons design , simulation , modeling , and experimental capabilities and competencies to ensure confidence in the stockpile without nuclear explosive testing. the laboratories also "engage in long - term research , development , test , and evaluation ( rdt&e ) activities" for the nuclear weapon mission , as well as "apply science , engineering , and technology to solve other national challenges. five production facilities produce and assemble materials and components for nuclear weapons . some weapon components must be replaced on a regular basis ( eg , tritium produced by tva reactors and processes at savannah river site ) , while others are produced on an as - needed basis , as part of the program to extend the life of the nuclear arsenal . two of the facilities — the pantex plant near amarillo , tx , and y - 12 in oak ridge , tn — are also responsible for dismantling retired weapons and storing most of the plutonium and highly enriched uranium that exists outside of weapons . the nevada national security site near las vegas , formerly a test site , no longer conducts nuclear explosive tests , but it still maintains several facilities needed for other types of testing critical to the stockpile stewardship program . the site also maintains the capability to resume nuclear explosive testing in a two - to three - year time frame , if ordered to do so by the president . the waste isolation pilot plan ( wipp ) in new mexico manages plutonium - contaminated ( transuranic ) waste produced by nuclear weapons facilities , such as los alamos national laboratory , savannah river site , and pantex . without wipp , nuclear warhead operations generating plutonium - contaminated waste would be restricted because of the limited quantity of such waste that can be stored onsite . wipp's strategic plan prioritizes the management of newly generated wastes from ongoing nuclear warhead missions .