these bills are not discussed here . in the 112 th congress during consideration of the 2012 farm bill , a senate amendment was submitted , but not actually introduced on the floor , to replace the suspension of permanent law with the repeal of those provisions ( s.amdt . 2 by a vote of 86-11 . conference proceedings officially began on september 5 , 2018 , but have not reached agreement . the last year for the 2014 farm bill's commodity programs is the 2018 crop year — that is , crops harvested during 2018 and marketed during the twelve months following harvest . the dairy margin protection program is the first such program that would expire , on december 31 , 2018 . the farm commodity income support programs raise farm income by making payments and reducing financial risks from uncertain weather and market conditions . government - set reference prices offer payments when market prices fall below support levels . these programs collectively are known as "title i" programs , based on where they have been placed in recent farm bills . usda administers close to 20 agricultural conservation programs that are directly or indirectly available to assist producers and landowners who wish to practice conservation on agricultural lands . these programs address natural resource concerns on private agricultural and forested lands through technical and financial assistance . many conservation programs have different expiration dates for program and funding authority . therefore , they may be affected differently by expiration or extension of the 2014 farm bill . table 2 separates the conservation programs by type of funding authority — mandatory and discretionary . for many conservation programs , program authority is permanent under the food security act of 1985 , as amended , but the authority to receive mandatory funding expires . an extension of the 2014 farm bill would allow programs with expired mandatory funding authority to continue , if the program has baseline beyond fy2018 . for example , the conservation reserve program's ( crp's ) funding and program authority expired at the end of fy2018 . because crp has baseline beyond fy2018 , an extension would allow the program to continue for a period of time at the authorized rate of enrollment — up to 24 million acres at any one time . without reauthorization or a further extension of mandatory funding and program authority , crp is unable to sign new contracts or enroll additional acres after september 30 , 2018 . all existing contracts and agreements stay in force for the contract period , and payments continue to be made . some mandatory conservation programs have no baseline beyond fy2018 and therefore would require offsets from other funding in order to continue ( eg , voluntary public access and habitat incentives program and wetlands mitigation banking ) . in some cases , provisions within a program do not have baseline , while the parent program does ( eg , transition incentives program within crp ) . in these cases , the individual provisions would require offset funding in order to continue . one mandatory conservation program — the environmental quality incentives program ( eqip ) — was extended in the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( p.l .