national ownership rule histor . table 4 describes the six measures . similar to the reinstated definition of eligible entities , these measures are the same as those previously adopted in the fcc's 2008 diversity order . to justify this decision , the fcc reasoned that "we continue to believe that enabling more small businesses to participate in the broadcast industry will encourage innovation and promote competition and viewpoint diversity. it added that whether or not such measures would specifically lead to increased broadcast ownership by women and minorities has no bearing on whether the measures will promote small business participation in the broadcast industry . interested parties have appealed the 2016 diversity order to the third circuit . as part of its reconsideration of the quadrennial media ownership order in 2017 , the fcc established a new incubator that provides a broadcast radio ownership rule waiver to a broadcaster that establishes a program to help facilitate station ownership for a certain class of owners . in addition , the fcc launched a new rulemaking proceeding seeking comment on how to implement the program . the fcc issued rules governing the incubator program in august 2018 . most of the rules became effective on september 27 , 2018 . information collection requirements are subject to review by the omb , pursuant to section 3507 ( d ) of the paperwork reduction act of 1995 ( p.l . under the incubator program , an established radio broadcaster will provide financial and operational support , including training and mentoring , to a new or small radio broadcaster . at the end of a successful incubation relationship , the new or small broadcaster will either own and operate a new station independently , or be on a firmer financial footing . once an incubation relationship is completed successfully , the established broadcaster will be eligible to receive a waiver of the fcc's local radio ownership rule , subject to certain requirements . in the order , the fcc did not foreclose the possibility of eliminating or further relaxing its local radio ownership rule in the 2018 quadrennial review . figure 1 illustrates these general trends . based on surveys conducted by pew research center , the percentage of adults citing local broadcast television as a news source declined from 65% in 1996 to 37% in 2017 . the percentage of respondents who stated that they "got news yesterday" from online sources grew from 2% in 1996 to 43% in 2017 , marking the first time that online sources outranked local broadcast television . in contrast , those citing printed newspapers as a source they "read yesterday" or use regularly declined from 50% in 1996 to 18% in 2016 . broadcast radio also has declined in importance as a source of news . these trends raise questions as to whether common ownership of multiple media outlets in the same market might limit diversity of viewpoints as much today as two decades ago . as broadcast stations face competition for viewers' attention from other media outlets , and thereby financial pressures , some have sought to strengthen their bargaining relative to program suppliers ( i.e. , broadcast networks ) , advertisers , and / or programming distributors ( i.e. , cable and satellite operators ) by consolidating .