successive u.s . administrations have viewed morocco as an important regional partner on security , trade , and development . historically warm ties expanded after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , when president george w. bush sought the cooperation of moderate arab governments in countering terrorism . his administration designated morocco a major non - nato ally in 2004 and concluded a bilateral free trade agreement the same year ( authorized by congress under p.l . the united states has continued to build strong relations with the kingdom under presidents obama and trump , notwithstanding occasional friction over u.s. human rights criticism and the issue of western sahara , a disputed territory that morocco claims and largely administers . high - level visits regularly occur , and the two countries recently agreed to restart a u.s. - morocco bilateral strategic dialogue ( see " u.s. relations " ) . morocco's stability has taken on greater prominence amid conflicts in libya and the sahel region of west africa . it is the only country in north africa not to have experienced a terrorist attack since 2012 ; authorities regularly report the disruption of internal and transnational threats . king mohammed vi weathered large urban protests during the 2011 regional wave of unrest known as the "arab spring," to which he responded with a new constitution devolving some executive powers to elected officials . the moderate islamist party for justice and development ( pjd ) has led the government since then , although the palace has increasingly moved to check its influence over policymaking in recent years . amazigh ( berber ) cultural rights , women's rights , administrative decentralization , and judicial independence have expanded under the 2011 constitution , even as these stated objectives remain works in progress . some observers question whether morocco can remain stable absent deeper changes . since 2016 , protests have surged in the historically marginalized north and east , apparently reflecting grievances over the economy , governance , and police brutality . anger at perceived high - level cronyism and corruption has also fueled a boycott movement in 2018 targeting , in part , firms led by individuals seen as close to the palace and influential in both business and politics . economic growth has been strong in recent years but has not always outpaced population growth . unemployment and regional economic disparities remain salient challenges and drive high rates of emigration . morocco's role in enforcing european efforts to curtail illicit migration across the mediterranean has also sparked some domestic controversy . the king has undertaken several human rights initiatives that have drawn international praise in recent years , for example ending military trials for civilian suspects and affording legal registration to a handful of critical civil society organizations in western sahara . at the same time , activists and journalists probing sensitive issues such as transparency , human rights abuses , and protests in the restive northern rif region have faced harassment and criminal prosecution . the ongoing crackdown on protests in the north and east has reportedly featured serious abuses , including excessive use of force and torture of detainees .