this is not a mathematical formula . it would be a lot easier for everybody if it were . the supreme court has said that this is a question that calls for the exercise of judgment . they have said there has to be a special justification for overruling a precedent . there is a presumption that precedents will be followed . but it is not — the rule of stare decisis is not an inexorable command , and i don't think anybody would want a rule in the area of constitutional law that ... said that a constitutional decision , once handed down , can never be overruled . thus , if the court is unable to distinguish a precedent from the case before it , the justices , to preserve the court's legitimacy , generally attempt to strike a delicate balance between maintaining a stable jurisprudence on which parties can rely while preserving sufficient flexibility to correct errors . the table below lists supreme court decisions on substantive questions of federal constitutional law that the court subsequently overruled . the table was compiled by searching the lexis database for all supreme court decisions that use the word "overrule" in the headnotes , syllabus , or text of the court's opinion . decisions supported by a majority of the court that expressly overruled an earlier decision were listed in the table . the listed cases include decisions identified by the search terms in which the court partially overruled or otherwise qualified a prior case . these findings were also cross - checked with other sources to ensure that the search had captured any relevant results . for a decision to be listed as overruled , a majority of the court must have explicitly stated , in a subsequent decision , that the case has been overruled . consequently , the table does not include cases that the court distinguished or limited or cases identified by concurring or dissenting justices or commentators as overruled , unless such cases have also been expressly overruled by a majority of the court . the list also does not include cases whose legal foundations have merely been eroded by subsequent decision without explicitly being overruled or that the court treats as discredited . it also does not include cases in which the court issued a ruling on the merits after having split evenly on the issue previously . the list does not necessarily reflect the current state of the law . the table is arranged in chronological order by the date of the overruling decision . for each overruling decision listed , the table gives ( 1 ) the name of the overruling decision ; ( 2 ) the date of the overruling decision ; ( 3 ) the name of the overruled decision ; ( 4 ) the date of the overruled decision ; and ( 5 ) the exact words used by the overruling court in overturning the earlier decision . the doctrine of stare decisis has "horizontal" and "vertical" aspects . a court adhering to the principle of horizontal stare decisis will follow its prior decisions absent exceptional circumstances ( eg , the supreme court following its decisions unless they have become too difficult for lower courts to apply ) .