throughout the united states. the constitution further prohibits the federal government from granting any "preference . to the ports of one state over those of another. however , no provision of the constitution explicitly requires congress to treat each state equally as a general matter . nonetheless , the court has , at times , recognized an implied principle requiring some measure of equal treatment since the 19th century , especially with respect to the terms governing the admission of new states . for example , in the 1845 case lessee of pollard v. hagan , which concerned the limits congress could place over the sovereignty of the newly admitted state of alabama , the court held that alabama was admitted into the union "on an equal footing with the original states. cruel and unusual punishment. because south dakota "would not violate the constitutional rights of anyone" were it to "succumb to the blandishments offered by congress and raise its drinking age to 21," the court explained , conditioning federal funding on south dakota's decision to raise its drinking age did not exceed the scope of congress's spending clause authority . finally , the supreme court has explained that just as congress may not require states to adopt or enforce federal policy under the anti - commandeering doctrine , congress may not attach conditions to the receipt of federal funding when "the financial inducement" offered by such funding is "so coercive as to pass the point at which pressure turns into compulsion. the court acknowledged this limitation on congress's spending clause authority in dole , where it rejected the argument that withholding the relevant federal highway funds from states that refused to adopt a federally favored drinking age qualified as overly "coercive. in rejecting this argument , the court concluded that because the challenged statute threatened non - compliant states with the loss of only five percent of their federal highway funds , it offered only "relatively mild encouragement" to states to adopt federal policy and accordingly represented a valid use of congress's spending clause authority . in the years following dole , lower courts applying that decision rejected a number of "coerciveness" challenges to statutes attaching conditions to the receipt of federal funds . commentators therefore generally assumed that the court's identification of an "anti - coercion" limitation on congress's spending clause authority did not in practice amount to a meaningful constraint on federal power . however , the court upended this consensus in the nfib case discussed above , where it held for the first ( and to date only ) time that a federal statute crossed the line separating permissible "pressure" from impermissible "coercion. in addition to rejecting a constitutional challenge to the aca's "individual mandate," the court also considered whether an aca provision allowing the secretary of health and human services to withhold all medicaid grants from states that refused to accept expanded medicaid funding and comply with the conditions attached to it unconstitutionally coerced states into accepting federal policy . the court ultimately concluded that this provision in the aca violated the tenth amendment .