it is unclear if the president did so . surveys indicate that prime minister modi remains fairly popular across india , especially in the country's western and some southern regions . a pew research center poll conducted in 2017 found 88% of indians holding a favorable view of their prime minister , and modi enjoyed a favorable rating 30 points higher than that of congress party leader rahul gandhi , his key rival on the national political stage . yet skepticism about modi / bjp performance in office may be growing: a large - scale 2018 survey found that — while the bjp remains well - placed to win another narrow lok sabha majority in 2019 — nearly half ( 47% ) of respondents believed the modi government did not deserve reelection . india — the world's largest democracy — is south asia's dominant actor with about 1.3 billion citizens and the world's third - largest economy in purchasing power terms . the country is often characterized by top u.s. officials as a nascent great power and "indispensable partner" of the united states . many analysts view india as a potential counterweight to china and its growing clout . for more than a decade , washington and new delhi have been pursuing a "strategic partnership. in 2005 , the united states and india signed a 10-year defense framework agreement to expand bilateral security cooperation ; in 2015 , the agreement was renewed for another decade . bilateral trade in goods and services has grown significantly , valued at over $126 billion in 2017 , nearly triple the 2006 total of $45 billion . indians receive about two - thirds of all h1-b ( nonimmigrant work ) u.s. visas , and more than 100,000 indian students are attending u.s. universities . the influence of a relatively wealthy and outspoken indian - american community of roughly 3 million is reflected in senate and house india caucuses , congress's largest country - specific caucuses . the united states views india as an important economic and strategic partner in advancing common interests . india's rising middle - class population , infrastructure and energy needs , and digital connectivity present u.s. commercial opportunities , but challenges are significant . for 2018 , india ranked 100 th out of 190 countries in world bank index on ease of doing business . the earlier optimism of many u.s. policymakers and stakeholders about the likelihood of expanding u.s. - india commercial ties under the modi government has given way to intensifying concerns over existing trade and investment barriers . india continues to be the site of numerous reported human rights violations , some of them seen to be undertaken or facilitated by state actors . according to the state department's country reports on human rights practices 2017 , many of india's citizens suffer abuses , the most significant of which include police and security force abuses , such as extrajudicial killings , disappearances , torture , arbitrary arrest and detention , rape , harsh and life - threatening prison conditions , and lengthy pretrial detention . widespread corruption ; reports of political prisoners in certain states ; and instances of censorship and harassment of media outlets , including some critical of the government continued .