different goals . the goals of the evaluated pre - 1996 experiments involved moving nonworking afdc recipients into work . programs such as snap , housing assistance , and medicaid have some recipients who do not work and are disconnected from the labor force , similar to afdc recipients . however , as noted above , these programs also have recipients who are already working . thus , the goals of work requirements and work programs for working recipients would differ from those of the evaluated programs that focused on nonworking recipients . what does the research evidence indicate about the impact of work requirements in meeting these policy goals ? most of the research that addresses this issue comes from a set of experiments , conducted prior to the 1996 welfare reform , on alternative approaches to the work and education provisions in tanf's predecessor program , afdc . this report summarizes the findings from the pre - 1996 welfare - to - work experiments as well as the limits of applying those findings to the current policy debate around work requirements . before the enactment of the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( prwora , p.l . 104-193 ) , a large number of experiments were fielded to inform the welfare reform debates that spanned four decades , from the 1960s to the mid - 1990s . the experiments were demonstrations of alternative policies and were evaluated using the randomized controlled trial ( rct ) method , which is used to isolate the effect of differing policies from other factors that can influence outcomes . the era of experimentation on alternative welfare policies began with the negative income tax ( nit ) experiments initiated in the 1960s and 1970s . they were conducted because the welfare reforms offered ( but never enacted ) by presidents nixon and carter were based on the nit model , which was an income guarantee and a gradual "taxing back" of benefits as incomes increased . in the 1980s , the focus of the experimental research shifted to examining programs that required work and / or provided employment services with the goal of moving recipients from nonwork on the afdc assistance rolls to work and being off the rolls . this research culminated in evaluations fielded in the early 1990s in the federally sponsored national evaluation of welfare to work strategies ( newws ) study ; evaluations required of states that obtained "waivers" of afdc requirements related to work ; and the minnesota family investment program ( mfip ) , which required special legislative authorization . after the 1996 welfare reform law , mandatory welfare - to - work programs were no longer considered experiments , they were considered to be the policy . thus , tanf was never evaluated . much of the current focus of the discussions on work requirements is on the snap , medicaid , and housing assistance programs . existing snap law has participation requirements and includes an employment and training ( e&t ) program . it also time limits nondisabled adult recipients without children who are aged 18 to 49 and not working or participating in training to 3 months in a 36-month period .