this report does not track legislation . the report addresses those areas of law and public policy that most directly and routinely affect federal campaigns and elections . it does not attempt to cover every instance of federal involvement in this policy area . other agencies or provisions in law or regulation that are not addressed here might be relevant in specific cases . for example , a campaign finance investigation might involve banking law , but because banking law typically is not a campaign finance policy or election administration matter in the united states , the report does not address it . the report also excludes agencies that congress generally has prohibited from elections involvement , or in which involvement has merely been proposed . the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) , for example , meets both criteria . as another crs report explains , "evaluating the authority of congress to establish standardized election procedures would appear to require a consideration of a variety of different proposals and scenarios. this report does not provide such a legal or constitutional analysis . in practice , the federal and state governments share responsibility for administering , regulating , or supporting campaigns and elections in the united states . finally , in some cases , the federal government's activities and authorities change over time , or new information becomes available . this report will be updated in the future to reflect major developments or new information . c ampaigns and elections are distinct concepts . this distinction affects the federal government's role in both . practically and simply , campaigns are about persuading voters in an effort to win elections . voters express their campaign preferences by casting ballots in elections . except for campaign finance policy , u.s. campaigns are subject to relatively little regulation . elections in the united states are highly regulated and primarily a state - level responsibility . the constitution and federal statutes establish the federal role in u.s. campaigns and elections . the following discussion addresses constitutional provisions ; statutes that primarily regulate campaigns and elections ; and , finally , statutes that can affect campaigns and elections but primarily address other policy issues . the appendix at the end of this report provides citations to other areas of law that may be relevant in specific cases but are not otherwise addressed in the report . the federal presence in campaigns and elections does not necessarily mean federal power . the preceding pages confirm that the federal government does relatively little to actually administer elections . where the federal government is involved , however , its presence can be extensive . historically , the federal government has emphasized domestic campaigns and elections concerns . these include topics such as transparent campaign financing , protecting voting rights , and providing states funding to upgrade election equipment . new challenges , such as threats from foreign actors and through cyberattacks , suggest that the federal government's role in campaigns and elections is increasingly complex and interdisciplinary . currently , no single agency or statute provides overarching coordination for the federal presence in campaigns and elections .