app. ) shall not apply to the commission. some commission statutes exempt a commission from faca , but still mandate faca - like requirements , such as holding public hearings or making available a public version of the final report . for instance , p.l . 104-275 established a 12-member commission on servicemembers and veterans transition assistance , and specified that "[n]ot more than seven of the members of the commission may be members of the same political party. a variety of options are available for each of these decisions . the following sections of the report discuss the above - listed components of commission legislation , along with subissues relevant to each . legislators can tailor the composition , organization , and working arrangements of a commission based on particular congressional goals . the following sections provide illustrative examples of statutory language , discuss potential alternative approaches , and analyze possible advantages or disadvantages of different choices in commission design . a commission's establishment is generally prescribed in a brief introductory paragraph , often with a single sentence . for instance , the western hemisphere drug policy commission was established according to the following statutory language: there is established an independent commission to be known as the "western hemisphere drug policy commission" ( in this title referred to as the "commission" ) . in some instances , this section will further specify that the commission is "established in the legislative branch. this can potentially resolve confusion on the commission's administrative location , especially if members are appointed by both legislative and executive branch officials . for commissions not specifically established in the legislative or executive branch , the manner in which the members of the commission are appointed may determine the commission's legal status . a commission with a majority of appointments made by the president may be treated as an executive branch entity for certain purposes . if a majority of appointments are made by members of congress , it may be treated as a legislative branch entity . a bill creating a commission will sometimes provide congressional "findings" that demonstrate congressional intent and provide a justification for creating the panel . for example , the commission on protecting and reducing government secrecy statute included eight specific findings related to the scope and cost of cold war - era secrecy programs that prompted the commission's creation . in other cases , legislation creating commissions may simply include a short "purpose" section describing the justification for the commission , in lieu of a longer "findings" section . the united states commission on north american energy freedom , for example , was provided the following brief statutory purpose: the purpose of this subtitle is to establish a united states commission to make recommendations for a coordinated and comprehensive north american energy policy that will achieve energy self - sufficiency by 2025 within the three contiguous north american nation area of canada , mexico , and the united states . advisory commissions can have a variety of membership structures . legislation creating commissions frequently specifies that individuals appointed to the commission should possess certain substantive qualifications , such as experience in a particular field or expertise in a relevant policy matter .