an increase in reserves is an expense that reduces the profitability of the bank . reduced profitability for banks or limited credit availability could negatively affect businesses and consumers alike . on the other hand , setting aside sufficient credit loss reserves may enhance a bank's ability to absorb future loan losses and thus continue to lend at a higher rate than if it had not done so . if cecl better matches actual credit losses , then banks might be less likely to become distressed and ultimately fail . as a consequence of cecl's changes , the banking regulators are proposing to replace alll with a newly defined term in the capital rules — allowance for credit losses ( acl ) . if the proposed rules are adopted , acl would be eligible for inclusion in a bank's tier 2 capital ; subject to the current limits that include alll in tier 2 capital . both entities are still publicly listed and subject to gaap as promulgated by fasb . similar to banks , fannie mae and freddie mac are required to implement cecl . as a consequence of implementing cecl , their earnings and asset valuations are likely to be affected . by one estimate , fannie mae and freddie mac may each need an additional $7.5 billion and $5 billion credit loss reserves , respectively . currently , they each have $3 billion in capital reserves . to facilitate the additional reserves both entities might need to borrow from the u.s. treasury . similar to certain banks being allowed to phase in the increased credit reserves over three years , congress and fhfa can choose to allow fannie mae and freddie mac to accumulate the additional reserves over three years , potentially avoiding additional draws from the treasury . currently , federal government entities that lend or provide loan guarantees are not subject to cecl . the federal accounting standards advisory board ( fasab ) promulgates the accounting standards for federal government agencies . if fasab adopts cecl , the credit loss reserves on certain assets held by the federal government , including outstanding loans of $1.3 trillion and loan guarantees of $3.9 trillion , could potentially increase . currently , state and local governments that lend or provide loan guarantees are not subject to cecl . the government accounting standards board ( gasb ) promulgates the accounting standards for state and local governments . if gasb adopts cecl , the credit loss reserves on certain assets held by state and local governments could potentially increase . each state and local government can choose to follow accounting standards promulgated by gasb . some states have enacted laws that require the state and the local government to follow accounting standards issued by gasb . fasb created cecl and issued an accounting standards update 326 ( asu 326 ) for financial instruments — credit losses . iasb independently issued ifrs 9 , the international version of cecl . fasb and iasb jointly established a financial crisis advisory group to advise each respective board about the global regulatory environment after the financial crisis . they also jointly deliberated revisions to credit loss models through 2012 .