if so , will it stay there ? , by marc labonte . one measure that has shown less improvement recently is the labor force participation rate ( lfpr ) , which experienced an unprecedented drop in the 2000s and only a relatively small recovery in the current expansion ( figure 2 ) . one study found that from 1980 to 2011 , almost 80% of workers aged 25-44 who exit the labor force reenter it within four years , but only 40% of workers aged 45-54 and 20% of workers aged 55-59 reenter . it fell from about 67% in the 1990s expansion to 66% in the 2001-2007 expansion , and then dropped to 63% from 2008 to 2014 , its lowest level since the 1970s . the great recession led to greater employment loss in certain industries and occupations than others , but those effects have receded as the economy returns to full employment . it has remained around 63% since . historically , the lfpr was not a highly cyclical measurement , but in this case some have wondered if its low level is indicating latent slack in labor markets ; that is , there could be a source of more available workers than the unemployment rate would currently suggest . looking forward , the labor market will continue to evolve in response to cyclical and structural developments , creating future opportunities and challenges for u.s. workers . some of the key trends highlighted in this report could potentially continue to play out in future years , and new , unexpected developments will emerge . cyclical factors are rarely static — for example , the unemployment rate is usually trending upward or downward , and is rarely steady . the unemployment rate briefly hit its lowest level since 1969 in may 2018 . with a historically low unemployment rate , the economy can only continue adding jobs at the recent pace if proportionately more new or former workers can be brought into the labor force . the fact that the lfpr is still low suggests that this is possible , but conceivably challenging . there are few examples of the u.s. economy sustaining a very low unemployment rate for a significant period of time without a return to recession . without the assumption that the lfpr of older workers will rise , the social security trustees' projected growth rate would be lower . in the long run , structural changes continue to alter the labor market in profound ways . for example , as farming became less labor intensive , the share of rural farm households fell from an estimated 35% of total households in 1900 to 1.7% in 2010 . it remains to be seen whether current innovations , such as artificial intelligence ( ai ) and automation , will have an equally profound impact on labor markets . that possibility depends on the likelihood that workers who have left the labor force will reenter . when it does , the ensuing rise in unemployment will likely disproportionately affect certain industries , occupations , and demographic groups . in the past , construction and manufacturing employment has been more sensitive to the business cycle , and labor market recovery has been slower for certain minorities .