it is a democracy . it is a nation that can bookend and anchor the free and open order in the indo - pacific region , and it's our policy to ensure that india does play that role , does become over time a more influential player in the region . strategic dynamics in the indo - pacific region are undergoing significant change . to what extent does the foip initiative subsume other administration initiatives ? for example does the administration consider potential effects of trade policies on attitudes of friends and allies towards the foip initiative or are administration policies towards iran viewed independently , in tandem with or subordinate to indo - pacific objectives ? what is the process for determining the administration's priorities toward the region ? time and attention devoted to issue . given the need for the united states to monitor and respond to events in other regions , is the trump administration devoting adequate time and resources to tracking and responding to developments in the indo - pacific ? how are new initiatives to be funded ? geographic scope . have the strategic implications of defining the western edge of the indo - pacific region as the west coast of india — rather than farther west — been fully considered ? what effect does this have on india's involvement in the strategy ? does this delineation ignore trade , energy , and strategic linkages between the persian gulf and the western indian ocean and east asia and the broader indo - pacific region ? state department staffing . what impact , if any , does the current staffing situation at the state department — where many positions are unfilled — have on the u.s. ability to develop and implement a whole - of - government strategy for the indo - pacific ? economic elements of the initiative . following the u.s. withdrawal from the tpp , and given the administration's more recent trade actions , what are the economic elements of the foip strategy ? do potential indo - pacific partners view the foip as an overly militarized policy approach ? what actions could the united states consider to convince regional partners that the foip has tangible economic benefits for them ? u.s. r elations with o ther countries . what implications does the indo - pacific strategy have for u.s. relations with china and other countries in the region ? does it change administration conceptions of "asean centrality" in asian regional diplomacy ? are initiatives such as the quad , which have emerged from particular leaders in countries like japan and india , sustainable beyond the tenure of those leaders ? u.s. defense programs and spending levels . what implications does the indo - pacific strategy have for u.s. defense programs and spending levels ? how might it affect requirements for maintaining forward - deployed u.s. military forces in the region , or for modernizing u.s. military forces , particularly naval and air forces ? to what degree can or should the united states rely on u.s. allies or partner countries to counter china's military presence in the region ? u.s. arms sales . what implications does the indo - pacific strategy have for u.s. arms sales in the region ?