some of these concerns are described below . the financial stability board notes that for nontraditional etfs , "liquidity is typically thinner and transparency lower. it suggests closer regulatory surveillance given the increased complexity and opacity of the products outside the standardized market . product complexity generates additional financial risks , while opacity can lead to information asymmetry and distortion of investor understanding of certain products and their risks . the bank for international settlements ( bis ) has issued comments on etfs' systemic risk and discussed similar concerns . bis has emphasized more complex etfs that lengthen the "financial intermediation chain" ( for example , through the use of derivatives and counterparties ) . specifically , bis notes that the complex products' risk exposures are less transparent and more difficult to assess . the growth of such complex etf products could lead to systemic risk build - up . the bank of england states that certain nontraditional etfs , including cash redemption etfs and leveraged etfs , could behave procyclically and amplify market stress . the top three etf sponsors ( also known as asset managers or issuers ) — blackrock ( 40% ) , vanguard ( 25% ) , and state street ( 18% ) — account for around 83% of u.s. etf market share . this has led to multifaceted discussions of concentration risk . one way to analyze issuer concentration is to understand scenarios of issuer default and other implications of such concentration for markets and consumers , some of which are discussed below . arbitrage mechanism malfunction under illiquid conditions . real market events illustrate that etfs are not guaranteed active trading by aps and other market participants under illiquid conditions . as noted previously , if aps withdraw , etfs would function as closed - end funds . but that does not foreclose the possibility of the instrument creating market disruption . in prior times of real market stress , when arbitrage mechanisms broke down even for traditional plain - vanilla products , price disconnection between etf shares and underlying assets was significant ( see the " behavior under real market stress " section below for more detail ) . the sec acknowledges that during market stress , the arbitrage mechanism may work less efficiently for a period of time . it also recognizes that secondary market investors could be harmed by trading etf shares during such time because of the different liquidity and pricing between the primary and secondary markets . but the sec believes that investors could weigh an etf's harm against its benefits ( eg , low cost and intraday trading ) when making investment decisions . it also states that it has taken a number of steps to address the disruptions in the arbitrage mechanisms . many industry practitioners assert that liquidity mismatch is among the most widely misunderstood aspects of etf structure and mechanics . some argue that certain etf design features work to mitigate systemic risk , such as the fact that investors do not engage in cash redemptions , which was a major liquidity concern for other funds . the main arguments countering the financial stability concerns include the following: etfs are l argely no t subject to cash redemption . fire sale and negative feedback loop .