some delay is necessary for reasoned decisionmaking . however , excessive delay by agencies can raise serious policy concerns . delays in rulemaking may violate statutory directives when congress has ordered an agency to regulate in a particular area . if the regulatory area concerns the environment or public health , for instance , delays can endanger the public by leaving known harms unaddressed . for regulated industries , excessive delay can create uncertainty , inhibit long - term planning , and cause economic harm . habitual delays can undermine public trust in agency process . in addition , not all delays are justified by deliberative process . agency delays may be the result of capture by special interests , administrative error , misplaced priorities , or simple mismanagement . excessive agency delay can therefore undermine the effectiveness of the statutory regime created by congress . congress has a number of tools that it can use to combat agency delay . to encourage agencies to act in a timely fashion , congress may set nonbinding time frames or statutory deadlines for particular agency actions , or impose penalties on agencies should they fail to meet those deadlines . even if congress does not impose any specific timing requirements for a required agency action , the agency still must act within a "reasonable time" under the apa . persons alleging unreasonable delay by agencies may sue in court to compel agency action . however , the recourse such individuals will have , if any , depends on the statutory scheme and the severity of the delay . in the absence of specific deadlines , most courts employ a multifactor balancing test to determine whether the agency's delay is "unreasonable" ; this test examines , among other things , the length of the delay , the importance of the regulation at issue , and the interests harmed by the delay . courts are generally deferential to agencies in this analysis . in other situations , such as when congress has imposed a specific statutory deadline , courts are more willing to compel agency action , with some courts holding that an order compelling agency action is mandatory whenever a statutory deadline is violated . this report provides an overview of the various tools that congress can use to encourage agencies to act within a particular time frame . it then analyzes how those tools inform judicial analysis of challenges to agency actions as "unreasonably delayed" or "unlawfully withheld" under the apa . the report concludes by noting that lawsuits are not the only way to force agencies to issue delayed regulations ; congress can also use political pressure , its oversight powers , or its power of the purse to encourage the agency to act . when drafting legislation granting agencies the power to engage in rulemaking , congress can employ a variety of means that create incentives for the agency to issue regulations in a timely manner . at one end of the spectrum , congress may decline to impose any timing requirements on the agency . in that case — presuming that the statute imposes some nondiscretionary duty to act — the agency will be subject only to the apa's general requirement that it complete its rulemaking within a "reasonable time.