are these authorities sufficient ? are the services using them effectively ? what nonmonetary incentives are most attractive to individuals with those skills ? do the armed forces have the authority to offer those incentives ? how valuable are those skills to private - sector employers ? how competitive are the armed forces in competing for this type of labor ? should certain eligibility criteria for joining the armed forces be modified to make military service a more viable option for those with the necessary skills ? to what extent can other federal civilians and contractors with advanced technical skills be substituted for military personnel with those skills ? some considerations for training servicemembers on ras and ai include the following: how much training will the armed forces have to provide to their work force can effectively employ ras and ai systems ? when and where will this training occur , and at what cost ? how quickly will the armed forces be able to adapt their training programs to account for technical advances in ras and ai , and new concepts of operations ? what role might private - sector training or training with industry play , particularly for those whose work roles require the most sophisticated knowledge of ras and ai ? some considerations for developing a career path model for ras and ai experts include the following: what assignments will be most critical to the professional development of ras and ai experts and their ability to contribute to operational missions ? might private - sector or academic assignments be part of the career path ? will specialists in ras and ai be expected to lead units and , if so , of what size and complexity ? does a technical track make sense ? how much professional military knowledge will ras and ai specialists need to possess to effectively integrate into military organizations ? how much knowledge of warfighting functions will they need to advise commanders on how best to employ ras and ai and how to synchronize them with other systems for maximum effect ? legal and ethical considerations associated with the possible development and adoption of fully autonomous lethal weapon systems are both considerable and complicated . as ras and ai technology development advances in both the commercial and military sectors , a point will likely be reached where u.s. policymakers will be faced with the decision — can the united states ( legally ) and should the united states ( ethically ) develop laws ? the administration will likely have its own views on the legality and morality of laws , as will congress . as previously noted authorizing a machine to make lethal combat decisions is contingent on political and military leaders resolving legal and ethical questions . these include the appropriateness of machines having this ability , under what circumstances should it be employed , where responsibility for mistakes lies , and what limitations should be placed on the autonomy of such systems... . ethical discussions and policy decisions must take place in the near term in order to guide the development of future [unmanned aircraft systems] capabilities , rather than allowing the development to take its own path apart from this critical guidance .