cost - reimbursement contract . in contrast , through a cost - reimbursement contract , a procuring agency agrees to reimburse a contractor for specified allowed costs the contractor incurs , subject to a cap . the payment structure of cost - reimbursement contracts subjects the government to a greater risk of wasteful spending than in fixed - price contracts . an agency will typically use a cost - reimbursement contract when there are too many uncertainties regarding the cost , performance , or specifications for the procuring agency to utilize a fixed - price contract . when overseeing the administration of a cost - reimbursement contract , the government generally focuses on "ensuring that the contractor expends funds to most effectively accomplish the government's objectives. table 1 details selected common contract types for each category ; the situations in which they are typically utilized ; and a selection of regulatory conditions imposed on their use . what follows is an analysis of selected contractual rights and remedies that federal agencies may employ to obtain products and services that meet the quality , cost , and other specifications for which they contracted . when selecting contractors , procuring agencies often must consider various contractor accountability issues , notably including the contractor's performance under other contracts , through ( 1 ) "responsibility determinations" to assess whether the contractor is capable of performing on the contract ; and ( 2 ) source selections under negotiated contracting . ( similarly , as is discussed in the next section of this report , procuring agencies also must ensure that a contractor is legally eligible to be awarded a federal contract. ) procuring agencies generally have considerable discretion in how they evaluate prospective contractors when conducting a selection process , as long as selection decisions are rationally based and comply with the law . the far generally requires procuring agencies to compile and review information about potential contractors in the federal government's contractor performance assessment reporting system ( cpars ) . these databases include the past performance information retrieval system ( ppirs ) , which is available only to authorized government personnel and the contractor in question , and the publicly available federal awardee performance and integrity information system ( fapiis ) . in addition , agencies are required to compile and review information in a separate but linked government - run database called the system for award management ( sam ) exclusions . this section of the report first analyzes far provisions requiring procuring agencies to evaluate prospective contractors in connection with ( 1 ) responsibility determinations and ( 2 ) the source selection process . it then analyzes far provisions requiring agencies to document contractor performance - related matters in ppirs , fapiis , and sam exclusion while administering existing contracts . the far also requires agencies to have policies and procedures in place to "suspend" and "debar" contractors — i.e. , to exclude , except under limited circumstances — from being eligible to receive new federal contracts for some length of time because of various criminal convictions , civil judgments , serious contract performance failures , or specified grounds . these policies and procedures are designed to ensure that agencies award contracts to responsible contractors that are capable of successful performance .