each of these factors is discussed in more detail below . development of the cvp made significant changes to california's natural hydrology . in addition to the aforementioned cvpia efforts to address some of these impacts , three ongoing , congressionally authorized restoration initiatives also factor into federal activities associated with the cvp: the trinity river restoration program ( trrp ) , administered by reclamation , attempts to mitigate impacts and restore fisheries impacted by construction of the trinity river division of the cvp . the san joaquin river restoration program ( sjrrp ) is an ongoing effort to implement a congressionally enacted settlement to restore fisheries in the san joaquin river . the california bay - delta restoration program aims to restore and protect areas within the bay - delta that are affected by the cvp and other activities . in addition to their habitat restoration activities , both the trrp and the sjrrp involve the maintenance of instream flow levels that use water that was at one time diverted for other uses . each effort is discussed briefly below . reductions in available water deliveries due to hydrological and regulatory factors have caused some stakeholders , legislators , and state and federal government officials to look at other methods of augmenting water supplies . in particular , proposals to build new or augmented cvp and / or swp water storage projects have been of interest to some policymakers . additionally , the state of california is pursuing a major water conveyance project , the california waterfix , with a nexus to cvp operations . congress plays a role in cvp water management and previously has attempted to make available additional water supplies in the region by facilitating efforts such as water banking , water transfers , and construction of new and augmented storage . in 2016 , congress enacted provisions aiming to benefit the cvp and the swp , including major operational changes in the wiin act and additional appropriations for western drought response and new water storage that have benefited ( or are expected to benefit ) the cvp . congress also continues to consider legislation that would further alter cvp operational authorities and responsibilities related to individual units of the project . the below section discusses some of the main issues related to the cvp that may receive attention by congress . the cvp is one of the largest and most complex water storage and conveyance projects in the world . congress has regularly expressed interest in cvp operations and allocations , in particular pumping in the bay - delta . in addition to ongoing oversight of project operations and previously enacted authorities , a number of developing issues and proposals related to the cvp have been of interest to congressional decisionmakers . these include study and approval of new water storage and conveyance projects , updates to the state's bay - delta water quality plan , and a multipronged effort by the trump administration to make available more water for cvp water contractors , in particular those south of the delta . future drought or other stressors on california water supplies are likely to further magnify these issues .