the other benefit is dic . legislative history of the survivors benefit plan tabl . dic is an indemnity payment , received from the va. dic serves as an indemnity payment for death . since death is the ultimate disability the surviving spouses should be entitled to concurrent receipt of both sbp and dic . in addition , military spouse advocates have argued that the inability for families to receive both benefits in full creates financial hardship . lastly , changes in how the offset is applied based on the status of the beneficiary ( i.e. the rsfpp had a number of unpopular features . first , it was intended to be actuarially neutral in terms of costs — in other words , the cost of this program was fully paid for by its participants . as a result , it could be expensive for the retiree . in addition , the decision to elect rsfpp coverage had to be made by the prospective military retiree before his or her 18 th year of military service . as such , the methods used in computing the rsfpp's cost and benefit could change between the time at which the servicemember elected to provide coverage and the time at which the member actually retired . therefore , the costs and benefits remained an unknown quantity , limiting the ability of the retiree to make future financial plans . during its 19-year history , participation in the rsfpp never exceeded more than 15% of eligible military retirees . rsfpp continues to pay survivor annuities for spouses of covered servicemembers who retired before 1972 and who did not convert to the sbp . dod obligations for the remaining 5,045 rsfpp survivors in fy2017 were $15 million . it was expected — and has largely been proven — that the sbp would be more popular than the rsfpp , due to lower costs to the retiree and broader benefits for the survivors . however , sbp also entails higher costs to taxpayers because the sbp costs are shared with the government in most cases . coverage provisions and calculation of the benefit vary depending on the status of the member ( i.e. , active duty retiree , reserve retiree , or deceased on active duty ) , the member's dependents , and certain elections that the member makes at the time of retirement . when sbp was enacted in 1972 , lawmakers sought to integrate the program within the existing system of federal benefits available to servicemembers and their families , namely , social security and va - related benefits . consequently , sbp serves a two - fold purpose: ( 1 ) to provide full survivors coverage in cases where no social security or va - related benefits are payable and ( 2 ) to provide supplemental survivor coverage in cases where social security or va - related benefits are insufficient to provide a reasonable level of support ( generally 55% of the servicemember's retired pay ) . when a surviving spouse ( or surviving former spouse ) is entitled to both sbp and va dependency and indemnity compensation ( dic ) , sbp law requires that the sbp benefit be reduced , dollar for dollar , by the amount of the dic benefit .