into an investment contract. the report argues further that a premise on which the saft concept relies — that the timing of a token creator's efforts makes a difference in assessing the "efforts of others" element of the howey test — lacks meaningful support in the case law . specifically , the report notes that although the d.c . circuit drew a distinction between a promoter's pre - purchase and post - purchase efforts in life partners , other courts ( such as the eleventh circuit in mutual benefits corp. ) have come to the opposite conclusion and have held that pre - purchase entrepreneurial activities ( such as developing a platform ) are relevant to the "efforts of others" analysis . the report also questioned whether the post - purchase activities performed by most developers using safts in fact qualify as insignificant "ministerial" efforts , noting that platform developers routinely release updated versions of their platforms with additional features after tokens are sold . third , the report argues that one of the concerns motivating the saft concept — that "pre - functional utility tokens" are likely to be "securities" because they involve dependence on the "efforts of others" — is misplaced . the report argues that because purchasers of "pre - functional utility tokens" are likely motivated primarily by a desire to use or consume the platform or products they are funding and not by a desire for financial returns , such tokens do not involve an "expectation of profit" under howey , and accordingly do not qualify as "securities" even if they involve dependence on the "efforts of others" for their ultimate consumptive value . fourth , the report argues that use of the saft could harm consumers . specifically , the report contends that unlike traditional equity offerings , which often involve "lockup periods" during which investors cannot sell their shares , safts offer investors the ability to quickly "flip" their tokens for a profit , incentivizing token creators to focus on the profitability of such near - term sales at the expense of viable long - term projects . the report also raises concerns about the ability of saft purchasers who hold large numbers of tokens to manipulate the market for those tokens to the detriment of other investors and the token issuer . in light of this ongoing debate over the saft framework and the lack of guidance from regulatory agencies and the courts , it remains unclear whether ( and in what circumstances ) tokens issued pursuant to safts will qualify as "securities" under federal law . the sec has pursued a number of enforcement actions against token issuers and other actors in the virtual currency industry , and sec officials have testified before congress and given other public statements on their general approach toward icos . the subsections below review two prominent sec enforcement actions concerning icos and a recent speech by the director of the sec's division of corporation finance that has generated considerable discussion about the agency's views on icos .