provisions from h.r . 4243 were then incorporated as title ii of the va mission act . this title aims to address vha clinical workforce shortages by amending and creating new programs that provide scholarships , loan repayments , and bonuses to va personnel in hard - to - recruit fields as determined by the inspector general ( ig ) , who is required to publish annual reports on staffing shortages . one provision amends the va's health professional scholarship program ( 38 u.s.c . §7611 ) to prioritize recruiting physicians and to extend the program's authorization , which was set to terminate on december 31 , 2019 . another three provisions amend the va's education debt reduction program , which provides loan repayment to vha clinical employees in hard - to - recruit and hard - to - retain specialties . one provision increases the annual and cumulative limits , the second makes new provider types eligible for the program , and the third adds vet centers to the locations where they can fulfill their service commitment . other provisions create a new pilot program to recruit veterans into medical schools in exchange for their commitment to provide clinical care at the vha , and to increase the amount of bonus payment that the va can award in certain years . the provisions in this title aim to increase health services to veterans in underserved areas – – areas where there are access issues or shortages of health professionals . it does so by developing a process to designate va facilities as underserved and reporting requirements around that process . it also includes two provisions that aim to address staffing issues at these underserved facilities: the first by developing mobile teams that can be deployed to provide clinical services at underserved facilities , and the second to establish a medical residency training program at certain va and non - va facilities , including facilities operated by the indian health service ( ihs ) or an indian tribe or tribal organization . prior to enactment of the va mission act of 2018 , the va did not have a process to designate its facilities as underserved and thereby to direct resources to facilities with greater need . in contrast , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) designates facilities that serve the general population , indian tribes , or prisoners as being underserved if they meet certain criteria , including a low ratio of providers to population and high rates of certain health conditions . hhs uses this designation to direct resources , including loan repayment for providers and higher reimbursement rates in certain programs to facilities that have this designation . hhs does not designate whether va - operated facilities are underserved . the va has a long - term historical role in supporting and directly training medical residents ( among other types of health professionals ) . generally , its support for medical residency training ( called graduate medical education , or gme ) is through partnerships with non - va hospitals and medical schools that operate programs where residents spend a period of time training at a va facility .