, repaye ) . these changes enabling additional borrowers to qualify for idr plans and to repay their loans at a lower rate mean that individuals may also be more likely to qualify for pslf benefits . each will be discussed in the sections that follow . implementation issues relate to how the pslf program's statutory requirements have been operationalized , difficulties experienced by borrowers in participating in the program , and program administration . they include how employment in a "public service job" has been operationally defined , how qualifying payments are determined , the effects of loan consolidation on a borrower's progress towards receiving pslf benefits , and the administrative challenges and complexities faced by ed , borrowers , and student loan servicers . a foundational concept in the pslf program is defining what comprises employment in public service . statutory provisions provide broad guidance but do not precisely define what constitutes qualifying employment , and regulatory and sub - regulatory administrative decisions have resulted in operationally defining it based primarily on employer characteristics rather than borrower job functions . this has led to some perceived inequities among borrowers and difficulties in identifying eligible employers . the hea requires , among other criteria , that an individual be employed in a "public service job" for 10 years to be eligible for pslf benefits . it specifies that a public service job includes full - time jobs in a variety of fields including , but not limited to , government , military service , law enforcement , public education , public health , and public interest law services . it adds that jobs in an organization "described in section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) of the internal revenue code of 1986 and exempt from taxation under section 501 ( a ) of such code" ( hereinafter a "501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organization" ) are also considered public service jobs . in implementing the statutory provisions , ed added specificity to the employment requirements in regulations by focusing largely on the type of employer at which an individual is employed , rather than on the type of services rendered by the employee . specifically , the program's regulations state that an eligible individual must be an employee of a "public service organization," which includes federal , state , local , or tribal governments ; most 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations ; and private organizations that provide at least one of many specified types of public service ( eg , public interest law services or public health ) and that are "not businesses organized for profit. thus , operationally , employment in public service is identified largely by employer type rather than the nature of the work performed by an individual . concerning pslf , ed regulations define "employed" as being hired and paid by a public service organization . individuals who are hired and paid by an employer that is not a qualifying public service organization but that is under contract with and renders services for a public service organization are ineligible for pslf benefits .