response to the tragedy in burma. everything should be based on evidence. the icoe also set a deadline of january 31 , 2019 , for people to submit evidence of the commission of human rights abuses . since burma's security forces began its "clearance operations" in august 2017 , commander - in - chief senior general min aung hlaing has repeatedly denied that his troops committed human rights abuses in rakhine state , or elsewhere in burma . on february 15 , 2019 , min aung hlaing told asahi shimbun that "there is no certain proof that the national army was involved in the persecution" of rohingya. he also said that such accusations "hurts the nation's dignity. besides the united states , australia , canada , and the european union have imposed sanctions on burmese military or security officers responsible for human rights violations in burma ( see table 1 ) . the european union placed sanctions on seven burmese security officers on june 25 , 2018 , and another seven officers on december 21 , 2018 . on june 25 , 2018 , canada placed sanctions on the same seven officers as the eu . on october 5 , 2018 , australia placed financial sanctions of five burmese security officers . three people appear on all four lists — lt . general aung kyaw zaw , major general khin maung soe , and major general maung maung soe . two officers , brigadier general aung aung and brigadier general than oo , have been sanctioned by australia , canada , and the eu , but not the united states . the following tables list the names of burmese security force officers ( table 2 ) and units ( table 3 ) that have been identified in one or more of the reports mentioned above as being responsible for human rights violations in burma since 2011 . for purposes of this report , the "types of responsibility" include the following: authorization — authorized and / or ordered other security personnel to commit human rights abuses on burmese civilians ; commission — committed the human rights abuses and / or took no action to prevent the commission of human rights abuses ; and cover - up — became aware of credible allegations that security personnel under their command had committed or were committing human rights violations , but took no action to stop the further commission of human rights violations ; attempted to conceal alleged human rights violations by burmese security personnel ; and / or tried to prevent or undermine investigations or prosecutions of alleged human rights violations by burmese personnel .