in the fy2015 ndaa ( p.l . 113-291 ) , congress required a report on "enhancing security and stability in afghanistan," among other reporting requirements , and biannual reports have been submitted under that title since june 2015 ( most recently on july 3 , 2018 ) . in addition to these ongoing reports , congress has regularly mandated the submission of one - time reports on specific issues in appropriations and defense authorization bills . individual report directives proposed to and included in legislation in the 115 th congress can be found below . congress has appropriated $126.3 billion for relief and reconstruction in afghanistan s ince fy2002 , according to sigar's july 30 , 2017 quarterly report . during the karzai administration , the united states and oth e r international donors "increasingly sought to condition assist ance funds for afghanistan… as a result of inadequate reforms. a 2014 report by m ajority s taff of the senate foreign relations committee also recommended that "a higher proportion of u.s. assistance should be conditioned based on specific reforms by the afghan government. accordingly , congress has imposed a number of directives and conditions on the use of both security and development assistance to afghanistan ( e.g . , economic support fund , esf , and international narcotics control and law enforcement , incle ) for a number of years . most of those statutory conditions have been enacted through appropriations measures . as outlined below , fy 2019 appropriations bills would prohibit the use of funds for activities that involve individuals suspected of involvement in corruption , narcotics trafficking , or human rights violations . a dditionally , they would require the secretary of state to certify that the afghan government is governing democratically , protect ing women's rights , and publicly reporting its national budget ( among other conditions ) before obligating funds . t here are a number of additional conditions on u.s. assistance not specific to afghanistan , such as the leahy laws prohibiting security assistance to foreign security forces that have perpetrated a gross violation of human rights . s ome have suggested that afghan forces may have committed such violations . the first parliamentary elections followed in september 2005 . sporadic taliban attacks continued during this time , with u.s. intelligence collecting evidence of an "organized taliban revival" by early 2004 . under intense u.s. pressure most al qaeda and taliban fighters had fled into pakistan , where they helped to inspire an islamist insurgency that would later drive the pakistani state into full - scale crisis . at the same time as they battled al qaeda and other islamist militants at home , pakistan's security institutions aided the afghan taliban , including by providing safe haven to much of its leadership , a legacy of pakistan's formal recognition of the group from 1996 to 2001 . by 2007 , despite nascent democratic development and improvements in most afghans' quality of life , the american effort in afghanistan , once described as "the good war," appeared "off course," with security deteriorating , narcotics production increasing , and levels of taliban violence steadily rising .