this section was not adopted . section 702 of the enacted bill requires dod to carry out a pilot program to treat servicemembers suffering from post - traumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) resulting from military sexual trauma . behaviors associated with sexual trauma may affect the nature of a victim's discharge from the armed forces . this provision was not adopted . military protective orders ( mpos ) may currently be issued by commanding officers having full force and effect on military installations , but are not enforceable by civilian law authorities . dod is required to produce an annual report for congress on sex - related offenses . section 547 of the enacted bill requires dod to also report information on collateral misconduct of victims of sexual assault . collateral misconduct by the victim is considered to be one barrier to reporting assault due to the victim's fear of punishment for offenses such as underage drinking or fraternization . psychological trauma following a sexual assault incident has been associated with negative behavioral changes in the victim such as increased drug or alcohol use , poor work performance , or other disciplinary issues . the department of veterans affairs defines psychological trauma related to sexual assault or harassment as military sexual trauma ( mst ) . dod's policies recognize psychological trauma related to sexual assault and defines it as trauma - informed care . section 547 of the house bill would have required dod and va to develop a joint definition of military sexual trauma . discharges that are not under "honorable" conditions affect servicemember eligibility for certain veterans' benefits . under certain circumstances , servicemembers may appeal these decisions through discharge review boards or boards of correction for military records . senate section 536 was not adopted , but would have amended 10 u.s.c . §1552 and §1553 with respect to the correction of military records to ensure that the claimants receive "liberal consideration" that the sexual trauma contributed to the circumstances surrounding discharge or dismissal . following a sexual assault investigation in the military , the investigator will provide recommendations for legal or other actions to a disposition authority – typically a military commander in the accused's chain of command . section 535 of the enacted bill adopts senate section 548 , requiring the secdef to establish a uniform command action form for reporting the final disposition of certain sexual assault cases . section 544 of the enacted bill seeks to improve compliance with sex offender reporting requirements by establishing a single entity within dod for the oversight of the registered sex offender management program . adding the coast guard to dod's contract with lpdh increased the award ceiling to $5.5 billion . dod intends to deploy mhs genesis at all military treatment facilities ( mtfs ) by 2022 . the va intends to start with three operational sites by 2020 . discussion: while there are no provisions in the enacted bill relating to dod's new electronic health record , house section 718 was incorporated into the conference report .