4395 , on the same day . several other versions of the bill were circulated without formal introduction in 2018 . in september 2018 , another version of the bill , the geospatial data act of 2018 ( gda ) , was included in h.r . congress did not act on either bill . in the 115 th congress , senator hatch introduced s. 1253 , the geospatial data act of 2017 , on may 25 , 2017 ; representative westerman introduced companion legislation , h.r . this report provides a summary and analysis of each section of the gda . it also discusses possible implications of the new law and issues for congress . the gda codifies aspects of circular a - 16 , authorizing many of the circular's existing components and modifying or expanding upon other aspects . the gda continues the federal geographic data committee and supports the goal of creating a national spatial data infrastructure . it also adds several congressional oversight components ; for example , it adds a requirement for annual performance reporting from each of the covered agencies to the fgdc , and it requires a summary and evaluation by the fgdc of each agency in fulfilling the responsibilities listed in the gda . the annual summaries and evaluations must be made available to the national geospatial advisory committee ( ngac ) , and the law directs the fgdc to respond to comments from the ngac . further , it requires the fgdc to make available to congress , not less than every two years , a report summarizing and evaluating agency performance , comments from the ngac , responses to those comments , and responses to comments from the covered agencies themselves . the following is a brief summary and analysis of each section of the gda , referencing section numbers as enumerated in the enacted bill under subtitle f - geospatial data , title vii , of p.l . 115-254 , the faa reauthorization act of 2018 . the gda provisions are in sections 751-759 of title vii of p.l . stakeholders have long recognized the need to better organize and manage geospatial data among federal agencies and among the federal government , local and state authorities , the private sector , and academia . some observers have commented that the gda has the potential to improve the extent and efficiency of executive branch agency coordination of geospatial activities and thus to help minimize duplication of effort in acquiring and using geospatial data , saving taxpayers money . however , others have argued that some level of duplication of effort , and of inefficiency in the management and sharing of geospatial information , will always exist across a vast federal bureaucracy in which a large amount of government information has some geospatial component . it also could be argued that the size of the federal bureaucracy is only one factor contributing to the challenges of organizing and managing geospatial data . surveying and mapping activities themselves are prone to duplication of effort among the executive branch's different missions and goals . the gda largely codifies an executive branch structure for managing the federal geospatial enterprise under omb circular a - 16 , coordinated under the auspices of the fgdc .