opm figures differ from doi budget office data . the doi budget office calculates employment by full - time equivalents ( ftes ) , defined as the total number of regular straight - time hours ( not including overtime or holiday hours ) worked by employees , divided by the number of compensable hours applicable to each fiscal year . the opm fedscope data presented in table 1 are available by location of employment for each bureau and office reflected . table 2 shows doi employment figures both within and outside the dc core - based statistical area ( cbsa ) . opm defines a cbsa as "a geographic area having at least one urban area of population , plus adjacent territory that has a high degree of social and economic integration with the core as measured by commuting ties. in addition , the report includes an overview of the annual funding and appropriations process for the department . in addition to absorbing the functions of the patent office , the office of indian affairs , pension office , and glo , the newly established doi assumed responsibility for a wide range of other domestic matters . as part of doi's organic legislation , congress conferred on the secretary of the interior the "supervisory and appellate powers" held by the president over the commissioner of public buildings , as well as oversight responsibility for both the u.s. census and the penitentiary of the district of columbia . over time , congress further expanded the department's functions to include the construction of the national capital's water system , the colonization of freed slaves in haiti , water pollution control , and the regulation of interstate commerce . executive branch reorganization efforts are an ongoing area of congressional interest and scrutiny as part of congress's lawmaking and oversight functions . the order required executive agency heads to , "if appropriate," submit a proposed reorganization plan for their agencies to the director of the office of management and budget within 180 days . then - secretary of the interior zinke subsequently submitted a proposal for reorganization aimed at — among other goals — improving agency coordination and service to the public . included in this proposal is a plan to consolidate the various agency - specific regional boundaries ( as seen in the "at a glance" boxes included in each bureau summary ) into 12 unified regional boundaries . in addition , the plan looks to shift some resources and authority "to the field," potentially in the form of staff , budget , and / or facilities . president trump issued a separate set of reorganization recommendations in june 2018 as part of the delivering government solutions in the 21 st century report . two proposals in particular would affect doi and its structure . the first would consolidate most of the u.s. army corps of engineers' ( usace's ) civil works division within doi , including usace's activities related to flood and storm damage reduction and aquatic ecosystem restoration .