many agricultural groups have expressed concerns about the retaliatory tariffs . 6699 ( bustos ) would have required that any duties collected as part of the section 232 or section 301 tariffs on u.s. imports be provided to the foreign market development program , the market access program , and the technical assistance for specialty crops program . as u.s. farmers and ranchers look to regain or expand existing markets and establish new ones , members of congress may consider engaging the administration through their oversight activities to identify actions that would facilitate additional sales of agricultural products in domestic and export markets and enhance the long - term economic vitality of u.s. food and agricultural interests . exports account for about 20% of u.s. farm income , according to usda , so u.s. farmers and ranchers have an interest in both maintaining and expanding export markets . farm groups are concerned about the immediate loss of export sales and the prospect of losing access to markets , or losing market share , over the long term . the asa has expressed "extreme disappointment" over ustr's escalating tariffs on china that have led to retaliation on soybeans . the nppc has stated that the retaliatory tariffs are "threatening the livelihoods of thousands of u.s. pig farmers. dairy export council has warned that the retaliatory tariffs that china and mexico have imposed could result in billions of dollars of lost sales for u.s. dairy producers . farmers for free trade — a coalition led by former senators max baucus and richard lugar that advocates for free trade and opposes tariffs that injure farmers , ranchers , and rural communities — has run radio , print , and television ads in key markets across the country expressing concern about the administration's trade policies and the potential economic fallout they may have on u.s. agriculture . while president trump and members of his administration have met with officials from many of the retaliating markets , including chinese president xi jinping and european commission president jean - claude junker , usda's trade aid package is the trump administration's short - term effort to ease the retaliatory tariffs on u.s. agricultural products . a number of producer groups have indicated that the trade aid package is inadequate to compensate growers for lost export sales . for example , western growers , an association that represents specialty crop producers , has stated that the $12 billion plan falls "substantially short" of what many producers affected by the retaliatory tariffs need . the american farm bureau federation , the largest general farm organization , concluded that the package provides "some breathing room" for farmers and ranchers but added that it will likely only help producers through a few months . in general , numerous farmer and rancher organizations have urged the administration to resolve the trade concerns that have led to tariff retaliation against u.s. agriculture and food products in order to facilitate the removal of these tariffs . it also plans to use $1.2 billion to purchase excess supplies of 29 different commodities . another $200 million will be spent on trade promotion efforts similar to the existing market access and foreign market development programs .