most states have both ffs and managed care enrollees . medicaid is financed jointly by the federal government and the states . federal medicaid funding is an open - ended entitlement to states , which means there is no upper limit or cap on the amount of federal medicaid funds a state may receive . the federal government reimburses states for a share of each dollar spent in accordance with states' federally approved medicaid state plans . states traditionally have used ffs for medicaid . however , since the 1990s , the share of medicaid enrollees covered by managed care has increased , as states transition portions of their medicaid programs to managed care . as of july 2016 , about 81% of medicaid enrollees were covered by some form of managed care . the federal government's share of most medicaid service costs is determined by the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) rate , which varies by state and is determined by a formula set in statute based on per capita income . currently , seven states report having waiver authority for an uncompensated care pool: california , florida , kansas , massachusetts , new mexico , tennessee , and texas . uncompensated care pool arrangements were first awarded under the george w. bush administration through the approval of section 1115 waivers in certain states , including california , florida , and massachusetts . during the obama administration , cms identified these financing arrangements as a policy that would be reviewed as a part of waiver renewals . in negotiating the terms of certain state waivers , cms identified concerns with a "lack of transparency" and "encouragement of overreliance on supplemental payments. medicaid enrollees generally receive benefits through either a ffs or managed care service delivery system . under ffs , state medicaid programs pay health care providers for each service provided to a medicaid enrollee . under managed care , medicaid enrollees receive most or all of their services through a managed care organization ( mco ) under contract with the state , and the mco is primarily paid on a capitated basis ( i.e. , a set amount per enrollee regardless of the services used ) . in fy2019 , fmap rates range from 50% ( 14 states ) to 76.4% ( mississippi ) . states incur medicaid costs by making payments to service providers ( eg , for beneficiaries' doctor visits ) and performing administrative activities ( eg , making eligibility determinations ) . in addition to the medicaid payments for services provided to enrollees , states may make supplemental payments , which are medicaid payments to providers that are separate from and in addition to medicaid payments for services . all states make supplemental payments under ffs , and different federal regulations and requirements apply depending on the type of payment and the type of provider . this section will discuss two types of ffs supplemental payments: dsh payments and non - dsh supplemental payments . as states move medicaid enrollees from ffs to managed care , the total ffs payments decrease , which in turn may lower the upls for supplemental payments .