retrospective studies face all the challenges mentioned . forecasting studies face the additional challenge of attempting to model the future based on historical patterns and current conditions , adding another level of uncertainty . according to epa , no x emissions from electricity generating units have decreased 81% nationally compared to 1990 levels due in part to the acid rain program and ozone transport rules . while these reductions have resulted in total ozone decreases across most of the united states , models suggest that temperature increases in many areas of the united states during that same time frame have negated what would have been additional ozone benefits . decreasing trends in total ozone concentrations measured at regulatory monitors between 1990 and 2010 generally occur in the eastern united states . many western monitors do not show similar trends in total ozone over the same time period despite similar reductions in no x from the power sector and individual personal vehicles . the lack of a decreasing ozone trend at many monitors in the west could be due to a number of causes: increasing seasonal average temperatures , an increase in incidents of fire since 1986 , emissions from oil and gas development , increasing contributions from international transport of air pollution , and increasing global methane concentrations . according to the 2017 u.s. national climate assessment , on average since 1986 in the united states , the number of wildfires and the burn duration have both quadrupled . the number of acres burned has increased six - fold , compared to 1970 to 1986 . the report also indicates that total no x emissions from fire events are expected to increase with fire temperature , duration , and area burned . figure 3 shows the annual count , and total area burned of all wildfires larger than 1,000 acres from 1984 through 2015 . while emission inventories from asia are highly uncertain — and outdated in some modeling cases — several sources of data suggest that asian emissions , and potentially their impact on u.s. air quality , have peaked . projections of fossil fuel combustion in asian countries suggest uncertainty about peaking , although the chinese government recently announced a target of a 15% reduction in no x emissions by 2020 compared to 2015 emissions . a review of measurements of baseline ozone taken at monitors along the western coast of north america show that , after two decades of increasing trends , ozone flowing into the continental united states from the west stopped increasing in the mid - 2000s and has begun to decrease . however , since about 2000 , ozone levels measured at a rural site in alaska have been increasing , with the source suspected in part to be transport of east asian air . several issues may arise for congressional deliberations with regard to background ozone pollution . stakeholders suggest challenges with meeting the naaqs , in part due to the difficulty of reducing ozone in areas with potentially large contributions from background sources and in part due to lack of data availability to conduct demonstrations of those background contributions . congress may seek to understand the progress of research on background ozone as epa revisits the naaqs for ozone .