exclusions . certain waters would be excluded from cwa jurisdiction . some were restated exclusions under pre - 2015 rules ( eg , prior converted cropland ) . some have been excluded by practice and would be expressly excluded by rule for the first time ( eg , groundwater and some ditches ) . some were new in the final rule ( eg , stormwater management systems ) . the 2015 clean water rule did not affect existing statutory exclusions — that is , exemptions for existing "normal farming , silviculture , and ranching activities" and for maintenance of drainage ditches ( cwa §404 ( f ) ) as well as for agricultural stormwater discharges and irrigation return flows ( cwa §402 ( l ) and cwa §502 ( 14 ) ) . much of the controversy since the supreme court's rulings has centered on instances that have required cwa permit applicants to seek a case - specific analysis to determine if cwa jurisdiction applies to their activity . the corps and epa's stated intention in promulgating the clean water rule was to clarify questions of cwa jurisdiction in view of the rulings while also reflecting their scientific and technical expertise . specifically , they sought to articulate categories of waters that are and are not protected by the cwa , thus limiting the water types that require case - specific analysis . industries that are the primary applicants for cwa permits and agriculture groups raised concerns over how broadly the 2014 proposed rule would be interpreted . they contended that the proposed definitions were ambiguous and would enable agencies to assert broader cwa jurisdiction than is consistent with law and science . the final 2015 clean water rule added and defined key terms , such as tributary and significant nexus , and modified the proposal in an effort to improve clarity , but the concerns remained . some local governments that own and maintain public infrastructure also criticized the 2014 proposed rule . they argued that it could increase the number of locally owned ditches under federal jurisdiction because it would define some ditches as wotus under certain conditions . corps and epa officials asserted that the proposed exclusion of most ditches would decrease federal jurisdiction , but the issue remained controversial . the final 2015 clean water rule excluded most ditches and expressly excluded stormwater management systems and structures from jurisdiction . some states supported a rule to clarify the scope of cwa jurisdiction , but there was no consensus on the 2014 proposed rule or the final 2015 clean water rule . many states asserted that the changes would too broadly expand federal jurisdiction , some believed that the agencies did not adequately consult with states , and some were largely supportive . environmental groups generally supported the agencies' efforts to protect waters and reduce uncertainty . still , some argued that the scope of the 2014 proposed rule should be further expanded — for example , by designating additional categories of waters and wetlands ( eg , prairie potholes ) as categorically jurisdictional . the final 2015 clean water rule did not do so . instead , such waters would require case - specific analysis to determine if jurisdiction applies .