part 2 . the section requires that the model programs and materials be periodically updated and disseminated , and that the development , identification , and updating of the models and programs must include input from relevant stakeholders . the section authorizes to be appropriated $4 million for fy2019 , $2 million for each of fy2020 and fy2021 , and $1 million for each of fy2022 and fy2023 . health care providers prescribe opioids to pregnant and postpartum women ( ppw ) with the goal of reducing their pain . some pregnant women who use opioids become addicted to them . opioid use disorder during pregnancy is linked to maternal mortality . the prevalence of pregnant women with ouds at the time of delivery has increased in the united states . the cdc reported that the u.s. rate of oud cases among women who deliver in the hospital more than quadrupled , from 1.5 oud cases per 1,000 hospital deliveries in 1999 to 6.5 oud cases per 1,000 hospital deliveries in 2014 . the cdc has raised concern about this increasing rate because infants born to women with ouds generally are born with neonatal abstinence syndrome ( nas ) . according to the cdc , nas "occurs when newborn babies experience withdrawal after being exposed to drugs in the womb. section 7061 requires the secretary — in coordination with specified hhs agencies — to submit a report on opioid use during and after pregnancy to specified congressional committees not later than 18 months after enactment . this section does not authorize any additional appropriations for these activities . section 2 of the protecting our infants act of 2015 ( p.l . 114-91 ) required the secretary to conduct a review of the hhs's planning and coordination activities related to prenatal opioid use , including nas . in carrying out this review , the secretary was required to develop a strategy to address gaps in research and duplication , overlap , and gaps in federal programs . congress directed the secretary to submit a report to specified congressional committees on the findings of the review and the related strategy , no later than november 25 , 2016 . section 3 of p.l . 114-91 required the secretary to conduct a separate study on , and develop recommendations for , preventing and treating prenatal ouds , and to publish the recommendations on hhs's website no later than may 25 , 2016 . in response to the requirements in section 2 and section 3 , the secretary submitted a report in january 2017 , protecting our infants act: report to congress , which discussed findings and outlined a strategy to address gaps , challenges , and recommendations related to prenatal opioid exposure and nas . after seeking public comment about this strategy , hhs released a follow - up report in june 2017 , protecting our infants act: final strategy ( final strategy ) . the final strategy report outlined the steps the department would take to address the findings and implement the recommendations in the protecting our infants act: report to congress . the report also stated that hhs's ability to fully implement the recommendations is contingent upon funding .