departments of justice and the interior . after approval , any federal projects associated with approved indian water rights settlements generally have been implemented by reclamation or the bureau of indian affairs ( both within the department of the interior ) , pursuant to congressional directions . congress has appropriated discretionary and mandatory funding ( and , in some cases , both ) for these activities , including in recent appropriations bills . one of the primary mandatory funding mechanisms for indian water rights settlements , the reclamation water settlements fund , is currently authorized to provide $120 million per year in appropriations for qualifying tribal water settlement projects through fy2029 . the 115 th congress considered but did not enact legislation proposing congressional approval of new settlement agreements . the primary challenge facing new settlements is the availability of federal funds to implement ongoing and future agreements that require federal resources ( not all settlements require these resources ) . under what conditions and how should the federal government be involved in planning and constructing water resource projects ? how may federal and nonfederal water resource science , observation , and monitoring be performed and used to inform water resource management and project design and operation ? congress historically has played a role in water resources through authorization of and appropriations for regional and site - specific projects and activities . water resource policy questions relevant to the 116 th congress include the following: what will be the federal role in maintaining the performance and safety of existing water resource infrastructure ? some of the projects are for facilitating navigation and expanding water supplies for irrigation and other uses . other projects are aimed at reducing flood and drought losses and restoring aquatic ecosystems . congress principally has directed either the bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) in the department of the interior ( doi ) or the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) in the department of defense to plan and construct the existing stock of large federal water resource projects . historically , reclamation constructed projects in the 17 arid states west of the mississippi river ; these projects were designed principally to provide reliable supplies of water for irrigation and some municipal and industrial uses . usace constructs projects nationwide that primarily seek to improve navigation , reduce flood damages , and restore aquatic ecosystems . for more on the federal water resource infrastructure , see the appendix . in addition , congress authorizes and funds selected water resource science and monitoring activities at multiple federal agencies . doi's u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) has a prominent role in federal water resource science and observation ( eg , streamgages , groundwater information , and other water resource data ) . this report also does not address municipal water systems , municipal wastewater infrastructure , or environmental protections , such as water quality and wetlands regulations . this report first discusses some broad categories of water resource topics relevant to the 116 th congress — projects and activities of usace , western water and reclamation , indian water rights settlements , international waters shared with canada and mexico , and water resource science at usgs .