yet 18 u.s.c . ยง 1346 establishes that the term "scheme or artifice to defraud" as used in chapter 63 also "includes a scheme or artifice to deprive another of the intangible right of honest services. this provision was enacted in the late 1980s , in response to the u.s. supreme court's holding in mcnally v. united states that the mail fraud statute was "limited in scope" to only "the protection of property rights. section 1346 abrogates mcnally 's holding , codifying the understanding of some of the lower federal courts that the mail and wire fraud statutes extend to conduct that deprives a person or group of the right to have another act in accordance with some externally imposed duty or obligation , regardless of whether the victim so deprived has suffered or would suffer a pecuniary harm . recognizing that this lower court understanding in fact evinced "considerable disarray" as to the kinds of schemes that would qualify as "honest services" fraud , however , the supreme court subsequently read a limiting principle into section 1346 in skilling v. united states in order to avoid invalidating the statute as unconstitutionally vague . after skilling , mail and wire fraud prosecutions under an honest services theory may extend only to "offenders who , in violation of a fiduciary duty , participate[] in bribery or kickback schemes. the conversation between the court and congress regarding the scope of honest services fraud and its culmination in skilling have presented more questions that lower courts have been tasked with answering , including the sources of fiduciary duties and the types of conduct that qualify as bribery and kickback schemes . this report provides an overview of the mail and wire fraud statutes and the pre - skilling development of the "honest services" theory of fraud . the report then examines the theory's codification in 18 u.s.c . ยง 1346 and subsequent limitation in skilling , and surveys post - skilling judicial elaboration of the requirements for honest services fraud . finally , this report briefly addresses some issues congress may consider if it seeks to alter the scope of honest services fraud through legislation . ยง 1341 prohibits use of the mails ( including the united states postal service and "any private or commercial interstate carrier" ) for the purpose of executing "any scheme or artifice to defraud , or for obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses , representations , or promises. ยง 1343 likewise prohibits transmissions "by means of wire , radio , or television communication in interstate or foreign commerce" for the purpose of executing such schemes or artifices . these federal crimes , commonly known as "mail fraud" and "wire fraud," encompass multiple forms of fraudulent conduct using jurisdictional hooks that reach practically all forms of communication . because the two statutes ( save for the medium used in connection with the offense ) essentially mirror each other , interpretations and analyses of one statute will typically apply to the other .