each of these risks is discussed below . as discussed in the " government authority: fiat money " section , in the united states , the federal reserve has the authority to conduct monetary policy with the goals of achieving price stability and low unemployment . the central banks of other countries generally have similar authorities and goals . some central bankers and other experts and observers have speculated that the widespread adoption of cryptocurrencies could affect the ability of the federal reserve and other central banks to implement and transmit monetary policy , and some have suggested that these institutions should issue their own digital , fiat currencies . the future role and value of cryptocurrencies remain highly uncertain , due mainly to unanswered questions about these currencies' ability to effectively and efficiently serve the functions of money and displace existing money and payment systems . proponents of the technology assert cryptocurrencies will become a widely used payment method and provide increased economic efficiency , privacy , and independence from centralized institutions and authorities . skeptics — citing technological challenges and obstacles to widespread adoption — assert cryptocurrencies do not effectively perform the functions of money and will not be a valuable , widely used form of money in the future . as technological advancements and economic conditions play out , policymakers likely will be faced with various issues related to cryptocurrency , including concerns about its alleged facilitation of crime , the adequacy of consumer protections for those engaged in cryptocurrency transactions , the level of appropriate regulation of the industry , and cryptocurrency's potential effect on monetary policy . these intermediaries store and protect huge amounts of data . in general , these intermediaries are highly regulated to ensure safety , profitability , consumer protection , and financial stability . intermediaries recoup the costs associated with these systems and earn profits by charging fees directly when the system is used ( such as the fees a merchant pays to have a card reading machine and on each transaction ) or by charging fees for related services ( such as checking account fees ) . in addition , intermediaries generally are required to provide certain protections to consumers involved in electronic transactions . for example , the electronic fund transfer act ( p.l . 95-630 ) limits consumers' liability for unauthorized transfers made using their accounts . similarly , the fair credit billing act ( p.l . 93-495 ) requires credit card companies to take certain steps to correct billing errors , including when the goods or services a consumer purchased are not delivered as agreed . both acts also require financial institutions to make certain disclosures to consumers related to the costs and terms of using an institution's services . notably , certain individuals may lack access to electronic payment systems . to use an electronic payment system , a consumer or merchant generally must have access to a bank account or some retail payment service , which some may find cost prohibitive or geographically inconvenient , resulting in underbanked or unbanked populations ( i.e. , people who have limited interaction with the traditional banking system ) . in addition , the consumer or merchant typically must provide the bank or other intermediary with personal information .