, they do not require enactment of legislation ) . members of the first congress viewed the constitution as contemplating the creation of "departments of an executive nature" to "aid" the president in the execution of law . toward this end , the first congress enacted measures creating the departments of foreign affairs , treasury , and war . at this early stage , congress sought to ensure it retained some degree of influence and control over the new departments . such legislation must comport with the constitutional requirements of bicameralism ( i.e. , it must be approved by both houses of congress ) and presentment ( i.e. , it must be presented to the president for signature ) . for legislation to take effect , that constitutional process requires the support of the house , senate , and the president , unless the support in both houses is sufficient to override the president's veto . but congress does not always need to act through legislation to impact agency decisionmaking . several tools available to the house , senate , congressional committees , and even individual members of congress may be employed to influence agency action . some tools are explicitly enumerated in the constitution , such as impeachment and subsequent removal from office , and senate advice and consent to the ratification of treaties and the appointment of certain executive officers , ambassadors , and judges . under these provisions , the constitution has explicitly authorized an individual house of congress to act unilaterally with binding legal effect . other tools , however , are both non - constitutional ( i.e. , they are not explicitly established in the constitution ) and non - statutory ( i.e. most of these non - constitutional , non - statutory tools , while capable of influencing agency decisionmaking , cannot themselves legally compel agency action . this distinction between the compulsory nature of statutory enactments and the non - binding nature of most ( though not all ) non - statutory legislative actions is essential to understanding the scope of congressional authority over federal agencies . congress's power to create agencies is well established . the secretary of the treasury , for example , had to report directly to congress , either "in person or in writing," on "all matters referred to him by the senate or the house. yet the debates of the first congress also provide evidence of congress's acknowledgment of what would become the delicate , and at times uneasy , balance between congressional creation and control of agencies and the president's authority to supervise executive officials pursuant to his constitutional obligation to "take care that the laws be faithfully executed. from the very outset , congress wrestled with defining the scope of both presidential and congressional control of executive agencies . for example , in 1789 congress engaged in a historically significant debate on the president's authority to remove the secretary of foreign affairs . although members' views differed , ultimately the prevailing position was "in favor of declaring the power of removal to be in the president," rather than in the congress .