several aspects of lng use in shipping may be of congressional interest . its standards limiting sulfur emissions from ships , adopted in 2008 , have led vessel operators to consider alternatives to petroleum - based fuels to power their ships . in 1973 , the imo adopted the international convention for the prevention of pollution from ships ( marpol ) . annex vi of the convention , which came into force in 2005 , deals with air pollution from ships . the annex established limits on nitrogen oxide ( no x ) emissions and set a 4.5% limit on the allowable sulfur content in vessel fuels . in 2008 , the imo announced a timeline to reduce the maximum sulfur content in vessel fuels from 4.5% to 0.5% by january 1 , 2020 . annex vi requires vessel operators to either use fuels containing less than 0.5% sulfur or install exhaust gas - cleaning systems ( "scrubbers" ) to limit a vessel's sulfur oxide ( so x ) emissions to a level equivalent to the required sulfur limit . if these levels were reached , they could create a significant new market for lng suppliers . assuming a henry hub spot market price of $4 / mmbtu in 2030 , the annual market for lng in shipping could be worth $2.9 billion to $5.8 billion , before accounting for liquefaction and transportation charges . some studies have projected the lng bunkering market to be even larger and to grow more quickly . however , key variables — such as the prices of henry hub natural gas and crude oil , the number of new vessel orders , and the future costs of emissions technology — are notoriously hard to predict with accuracy . thus , it is not assured that natural gas consumption in the maritime sector will absorb more than a small amount of the global liquefaction capacity in development . the imo sulfur standards apply to ship owners globally , as does the development of new lng supply and bunkering infrastructure . in addition to these factors , domestic lng bunkering also may be influenced by considerations more specific to the united states . these considerations include growth of the u.s. natural gas supply , domestic shipbuilding opportunities , and lng safety and security . the imo's overall framework for controlling vessels emissions ( marpol annex vi ) has been in place since 2005 . while the united states , as an imo member , is subject to the imo's 2020 sulfur standards , the international standards apply equally to all parties and all vessels . the impacts of sulfur standards on bunker fuel have been an important consideration , but imo member nations have agreed to the standards independent of any particular energy policies . moreover , marpol annex vi preceded the u.s. shale gas boom , so commitment to that initial imo framework could not have anticipated united states' current role as a dominant energy producer .