there are different types of virtual currencies . convertible virtual currencies can be exchanged back - and - forth with fiat ( real ) currencies , while non convertible virtual currencies are used in restricted online domains ( such as multiplayer online gaming ) and are not converted into fiat currencies . there are a number of exchanges that have been established to facilitate the conversion of virtual currencies to other assets , such as conventional fiat money or different virtual currencies . additionally , some virtual currencies are run by a centralized administrator that issues currency and maintains a central payment ledger . other virtual currencies are decentralized , for which transactions are recorded on a distributed ledger , which is maintained by many independent , peer - to - peer computers . governments around the world are taking different approaches to cryptocurrencies . some governments are actively promoting digital currencies in their jurisdictions , while others are banning them outright . others still are seeking a middle path , allowing cryptocurrency transactions , but regulating the industry to minimize the risks . the interest and debate surrounding cryptocurrencies has led some central banks to examine whether the technology underpinning cryptocurrencies could be leveraged to create digital versions of state - created currencies , which would have legal status in their jurisdiction of issue . a major policy question is whether state - issued digital currencies could draw on the benefits of cryptocurrencies while minimizing the risks , but there are varying views on the need for or desirability of digital fiat currencies . the policy questions posed by digital currencies , as well as variation in government responses , have also become a focus for several international organizations and forums . in november 2018 , the u.s. department of the treasury announced it is developing a report on cryptocurrency regulation , including a legislative framework for the 116 th congress to consider in 2019 . as congress considers issues related to digital currencies , including whether to regulate further the cryptocurrency industry , the approaches taken by other governments and international bodies may be of interest . this report is part of a suite of crs products on digital currencies and the underlying technology , distributed ledger technology and blockchain ( see textbox below ) . the international monetary fund ( imf ) , an international organization tasked with promoting international monetary stability , has weighed the pros and cons of cryptocurrencies . imf managing director christine lagarde has said that international regulation and supervision of cryptocurrencies is "inevitable. the imf has also discouraged at least one country ( the marshall islands ) from adopting a digital fiat currency , and released a staff discussion paper conceptually evaluating the creation of digital fiat currencies . the basel committee on banking supervision ( bcbs ) , the primary global standard setter for the prudential regulation of banks and a forum for regular cooperation on banking supervisory matters , is assessing banks' direct and indirect exposure to cryptocurrencies . it is also considering whether to formally clarify the prudential treatment of cryptocurrencies across the set of risk categories .