an analogous resolution was not introduced in the senate in the 115 th congress . as figure 2 illustrates , between the 108 th and 111 th congresses , most of the introduced bills would have established cap - and - trade systems . between the 112 th and 115 th congresses , most of the introduced bills would have established carbon tax or emissions fee programs . in the 111 th congress , members offered multiple and varied proposals , ultimately resulting in the house passage of h.r . 2454 , an economy - wide cap - and - trade bill . a companion bill in the senate ( s. 1733 ) was ordered reported from the committee on environment and public works , but the bill was never brought to the senate floor for consideration . in subsequent congresses , some members continued to offer ghg emission control legislation , but these proposals saw minimal legislative activity . during that time frame , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) used existing clean air act authorities to promulgate ghg emission standards for key sectors , including the electric power and transportation sectors . epa rulemakings in this area — particularly the 2015 clean power plan final rule and the 2018 affordable clean energy proposed rule — generated considerable interest and debate in congress . the proposals from the 116 th congress range in their scope of emissions covered from co 2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion to multiple ghg emissions from a broader array of sources . in addition , the proposals differ by how , to whom , and for what purpose the fee revenues or allowance value would be applied . some economic analyses indicate that policy choices to distribute the tax , fee , or emission allowance revenue would yield greater economic impacts than the direct impacts of the carbon price . the first section of this report provides background information on cap - and - trade and carbon tax or emission fee programs . the second section compares the ghg emission reduction legislation in each congress ( 108 th - 116 th ) . over the last 15 years , broad ghg emission reduction legislation has generally involved market - based approaches — such as cap - and - trade systems or carbon tax programs — that rely on private sector choices and market forces to minimize the costs of emission reductions and spur innovation . both carbon tax and emissions cap - and - trade programs would place a price — directly or indirectly — on ghg emissions or their inputs ( eg , fossil fuels ) , both would increase the price of fossil fuels for the consumer , and both would reduce ghg emissions to some degree . preference between the two approaches ultimately depends on which variable policymakers prefer to precisely control: emission levels or emission prices . as a practical matter , these market - based policies may include complementary or hybrid designs , incorporating elements to increase certainty in price or emissions quantity . for example , legislation could provide mechanisms for adjusting a carbon tax / fee if a targeted range of emissions reductions were not achieved in a given period .