nor was mississippi's system unique in this regard . "[d]ual system[s]" of public higher education — one for black students , another for white — were codified in other state and local laws throughout the country . thus far , federal courts that have addressed de jure segregation in higher education have done so in the context of such codified segregation , as in fordice . the absence of a codified dual system of higher education , however , may not mean that a university system was not or is not intentionally segregated . as reflected in the supreme court decision keyes v. school district no . 1 , denver , colorado , even when state authorities have not segregated their public schools by statute , they may still have engaged in unconstitutional racial segregation . thus , in the k - 12 context , federal courts have found de jure segregation based on evidence reflecting a state actor's impermissible segregative intent . this line of cases would appear to apply in the context of higher education as well . as the court noted in fordice , where a plaintiff is unable to show that a policy or practice is a vestige of prior de jure segregation , she may nonetheless prove a "new" constitutional violation with evidence of a present - day intent to racially segregate students "under traditional principles" governing discriminatory intent . this would be consistent with the court's application of brown and its progeny broadly across "the field of public education," including higher education , as reflected in fordice . because the supreme court has yet to address segregative intent in higher education , it is unclear what intent evidence would be sufficient to establish a de jure segregated public university or institution , apart from a law codifying such segregation . as a general matter , though , a court's determination of discriminatory intent is a fact - intensive , "sensitive inquiry. and the supreme court has observed that this is even more so in cases alleging de jure segregation in public education . where the evidence indicates , for example , that a state actor undertook a policy or practice knowing that doing so would have the "foreseeable" effect of segregating students by race , that evidence may support an inference of de jure segregation . in addition , at least in the k - 12 context , a finding of a state entity's segregative intent in one part of a school system creates a rebuttable presumption that segregation found in other parts of the same system was also intentional . de jure segregation proved by such nonstatutory evidence generally triggers the same affirmative obligation on the state to eliminate the vestiges of its state - imposed segregation , as when de jure segregation is shown through state or local laws . though segregative intent analyses at the k - 12 level may be instructive , the guidance these decisions provide may be limited by the nature of the evidence at issue in those particular cases: the method of student assignment to elementary or secondary schools , for example , or the drawing of attendance zones to create racially segregated schools .