appendix a . scores of house - passed and senate - passed versions of h.r . 2 appendix b . discretionary authorizations in addition to providing mandatory spending , various sections of the farm bill authorize appropriations that may be provided in future discretionary appropriations acts . such "authorizations for appropriation" are not actual funding but are essentially an indication from the authorizing committees to the appropriations committees about funding intentions . they are subject to budget enforcement via future appropriations bills . although the score of the farm bill is primarily about mandatory spending , some cbo scoring documents include an estimate of the discretionary spending that would be needed to implement provisions that have authorizations of appropriations . the cbo score of the conference agreement did not address discretionary authorizations . however , earlier cbo scores of the house - and senate - passed bills did summarize the authorizations for appropriation . overall , the similarity between the scores of these bills may be an indicator of the authorization levels in the enacted farm bill . for the house - passed version of the farm bill , cbo estimated that implementing the provisions of h.r . 2 that specified authorizations of appropriations would cost $24.5 billion over the five - year period fy2019-fy2023 , assuming appropriation of the specified amounts . for the senate - passed version , the amount was slightly smaller at $23.7 billion . these projections were for the whole bill and not by title . however , the earlier committee - reported scores did estimate the authorizations by title , as shown in table b - 1 . because the totals of the chamber - passed versions remain nearly the same as the committee - reported totals , the earlier title - level estimates may be indicative of the conference agreement . three titles account for about 85% of the discretionary authorizations for appropriation in the house and senate committee - reported farm bill scores: trade , research , and rural development ( table b - 1 ) . actual funding in annual agriculture appropriations acts does not necessarily correlate to the authorization for appropriation in the farm bill . the annual authorization for appropriation provided in the 2018 farm bill is between $2 billion and $6 billion ( table b - 1 ) , which for this comparison is broadly similar to nearly $7 billion in authorizations for appropriation that were in the 2014 farm bill . however , actual discretionary funding in recent agricultural appropriations acts total in excess of $20 billion . the difference is because not all of the actual appropriations have their authorization in each farm bill . for example , the agriculture appropriations act includes funding for salaries and expenses of usda agencies that may be permanently authorized or is not necessarily reauthorized in the farm bill . also , jurisdiction for appropriations acts may include agencies or programs that are not in the jurisdiction of the farm bill authorizing committees ( such as the roughly $6 billion appropriation for the special supplemental nutrition assistance program for women , infants , and children that is not in house agriculture committee jurisdiction ) . the baseline is the benchmark against which proposed changes in law are measured .