shouse. ) circuit for further consideration . epa prepared a supplemental "appropriate and necessary" finding based on the agency's review of the 2012 rule's estimated costs in 2016 . the 2016 supplemental finding concluded that it is appropriate and necessary to regulate air toxics , including mercury , from power plants after including a consideration of the costs . as of this writing , the mats rule remains in effect and litigation remains on hold , at the agency's request . in late 2018 , however , epa proposed to reverse the 2016 finding that it is appropriate and necessary to regulate air toxics under section 112 ( "2018 a&n proposal" ) . the proposal , even when finalized , would not revoke the mercury and acid gas emissions limits established in the 2012 mats rule . that would require a separate regulatory action , which epa has not proposed . some members of congress and various stakeholder groups have raised concerns about the 2018 a&n proposal and advised against further actions that would revoke the mats standards . for example , a bipartisan group of u.s . senators wrote to epa to "strongly oppose any action that could lead to the undoing" of the 2012 mats rule and requested the agency withdraw the 2018 a&n proposal . a group of power sector trade organizations — representing all u.s. investor - owned electric companies , over 2,000 community - owned , not - for - profit electric utilities , over 900 not - for - profit electric utilities , and others — wrote to "urge that epa leave the underlying mats rule in place and effective" and "take no action that would jeopardize" the industry's estimated $18 billion investment in the mats rule . not all stakeholders have disagreed with the 2018 a&n proposal , however . murray energy corporation , which describes itself as the largest privately owned u.s. coal company , testified that "mats should never have been adopted" and "urge[d] epa to take the only reasonable action flowing from its repudiation of the legal basis for mats , and rescind the [2012 mats] rule immediately. while it is unclear whether epa will take additional action on the mats standards , the 2018 a&n proposal reveals changes in epa's interpretation of the caa and use of benefit - cost analysis . epa's analysis for the 2018 a&n proposal excludes co - benefits — the human health benefits from reductions in pollutants not targeted by mats — from its consideration of whether mats is "appropriate and necessary" under caa section 112 ( n ) . with this exclusion , the 2018 analysis finds that monetized costs outweigh monetized benefit estimates by several orders of magnitude . ( for additional discussion , see crs in focus if11078 , epa reconsiders basis for mercury and air toxics standards , by kate c . in 2015 , epa published final emission standards for new residential wood heaters , including wood stoves , pellet stoves , hydronic heaters , and forced air furnaces . the 2015 wood heater regulations generated a substantial amount of interest , particularly in areas where wood is used as a heating fuel .