, the rld ) . by relying on fda's previous determination that the rld is safe and effective , the generic drug company can avoid replicating the expensive clinical trials already conducted by the brand company . the generic drug applicant must , among other things , submit either a section viii statement or one of four certifications for every patent listed in the orange book with respect to the rld referenced in the anda: the brand company has not filed any patent information with respect to the rld ; the patent has expired ; the date on which the patent will expire ; or the patent is invalid or will not be infringed by the drug for which the anda is submitted , as specified . section 4004 also makes numerous technical changes to mma title xi , as amended by p.l . this section applies to taxable years beginning after december 31 , 2018 . the support act is a sweeping measure designed to address widespread overprescribing and abuse of opioids in the united states . the act includes provisions involving law enforcement , public health , and health care financing and coverage . broadly , the legislation imposes tighter oversight of opioid production and distribution ; imposes additional reporting and safeguards to address fraud ; and limits coverage of prescription opioids , while expanding coverage of and access to opioid addiction treatment services . the bill also authorizes a number of programs that seek to expand consumer education on opioid use and train additional providers to treat individuals with opioid use disorders . fda , pursuant to its authority under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) , is responsible for ensuring the safety and effectiveness of prescription and nonprescription drugs sold in the united states , regardless of whether they are controlled substances . fda regulates the full life - cycle of a drug product , starting with drug development , through the approval process , and then for as long as the product remains on the market . subtitle a addresses fda medical product regulation and includes provisions that , among other things , facilitate the development of new medical products for treatment of pain ; provide for special packaging and disposal mechanisms for opioids ; and amend postmarket study and labeling requirements . the dea , under the controlled substances act ( csa ) , has primary responsibility for regulating the use of controlled substances for legitimate medical , scientific , research , and industrial purposes , and for preventing these substances from being diverted for illegal purposes . while the ffdca requires that certain drugs be dispensed only pursuant to a prescription from a health care provider , the csa sets forth requirements for dispensing controlled substances specifically . subtitle b addresses dea regulation of controlled substances and includes provisions that , among other things , provide additional flexibility with respect to medication - assisted treatment ( mat ) for opioid use disorders ; modify controlled substances disposal requirements at qualified hospice programs ; and authorize grants to states to increase participation of eligible collectors in drug - disposal programs . the drug price competition and patent term restoration act of 1984 ( hatch - waxman act ; p.l .