increasingly , though , space is becoming commercial . science and technology play an important role in national defense . the department of defense ( dod ) relies on a robust research and development effort to develop new military systems and improve existing systems . issues that may come before the 116 th congress regarding the dod's s&t activities include budgetary concerns and the effectiveness of programs to transition r&d results into fielded products . energy - related science and technology issues that may come before the 116 th congress include those related to reprocessing spent nuclear fuel , advances in nuclear energy technology , the development of biofuels and ocean energy technology , and international fusion research . the federal government spends billions of dollars supporting research and development to protect the homeland . some of the issues that the 116 th congress may consider include how the department of homeland security performs research and development ; federal efforts to develop and procure new medical countermeasures against chemical , biological , radiological , and nuclear agents ; and federal efforts to ensure the safety and security of laboratories working with dangerous pathogens . the rapid pace of advancements in information technology presents several issues for congressional policymakers , including those related to cybersecurity , artificial intelligence , broadband deployment , access to broadband networks and net neutrality , public safety networks , emergency alerting , 5g networks , the internet of things , federal networking r&d , and quantum information science . some of the policy issues in the physical and material sciences that the 116 th congress may address include funding and oversight of the national science foundation and the multiagency initiative supporting research and development in the emerging field of nanotechnology . congress has historically had a strong interest in space policy issues . space topics that may come before the 116 th congress include the funding and oversight of the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) and issues related to the commercialization of space and to earth - observing satellites . spaceflight has attracted strong congressional interest since the establishment of nasa in 1958 . issues include the goals and strategy of nasa's human spaceflight program , the impact of constrained budgets on nasa's other missions , and the future of nasa's earth science program . the 116 th congress may address these and other issues through nasa reauthorization legislation . with the end of the space shuttle program in july 2011 , the united states lost the capability to launch astronauts into space . since that time , nasa has relied on russian spacecraft for crew transport to the international space station ( iss ) . for iss cargo transport , nasa - contracted u.s. commercial flights have been delivering payloads of supplies and equipment since october 2012 . as directed by the nasa authorization act of 2010 ( p.l . 111-267 ) , nasa is pursuing a two - track strategy for human spaceflight . first , for transport to low earth orbit , including the iss , nasa is supporting commercial development of a crew transport capability like the commercial cargo capability achieved in 2012 . commercial crew transportation services are expected to become operational in late 2019 or 2020 .