what criteria would so indicate ? could oversight of intelligence be further improved such that the ic would , as a result , be more effective in support of national security ? in addition , congress has perspective that few others outside of the ic have . oversight of the ic enables congress to determine whether classified intelligence programs that are restricted from public disclosure are legal , ethical , and respectful of civil liberties . when there have been perceived abuses , congress has often intervened to conduct hearings and legislate changes in intelligence process or organization . several competing , sometimes overlapping , perspectives exist on the purpose for conducting congressional oversight of the ic: some have argued that the primary responsibility of the intelligence committees is to provide the authority and strategic direction to enable continual improvement in the performance of intelligence programs in support of the most pressing national security challenges . as an alternative to a joint committee , the commission recommended consolidating authorizations and appropriations in the hpsci and ssci , a reform measure that would be a direct challenge to the authority of the appropriations committees . the commission also recommended separating the national intelligence program ( nip ) appropriation from the defense appropriation , and , to promote bipartisanship , changing committee rules to ensure the majority never exceed minority representation by more than one . finally , the commission recommended abolishing term limits in order to promote depth and experience among committee members . following is an examination of selected oversight reform proposals that could be considered in developing a framework for discussion . the 9 / 11 commission recommended most of them in its report , though some , such as the idea to establish a joint committee on intelligence , have a much longer history . to the extent that members share a perspective on oversight of the ic , they may be more likely to share views on the ways to conduct the oversight . significant differences of opinion among members on the purpose for conducting intelligence oversight , however , may signal a discordant tone in congress's relations with the ic and hamper oversight efforts . some believe that the intelligence committees' perceived tradition of bipartisanship and objectivity is of particular importance for effective oversight and a constructive relationship with the ic . others , both within and outside of congress , focus on what they perceive as weaknesses in the structure and authority of the congressional intelligence committees . while the ic has experienced significant reform over the past forty years since the establishment of the hpsci and the ssci , some have contended that congress could do more to change the rules governing the committee structure and authority for conducting intelligence oversight . they note , for example , the number of committees that claim jurisdiction over intelligence matters dilutes the authority of the hpsci and ssci .