congressional committee. a bill to this effect was introduced during the 99th congress , prompting the department of justice's office of legal counsel to issue a memorandum opinion "strongly oppos[ing] any provision that would permit congress independently to petition the courts for rule 6 ( e ) material. in the office's view , such a provision would "codify legislative encroachment into the executive's exclusive authority to enforce the law. government official. nonetheless , other statutory provisions suggest that the term "government official" could be construed to include a member of congress . as with the "government personnel" exception , however , disclosure under this exception would be limited: only grand jury information pertaining to the specified subject matter would be available , at the discretion of the attorney for the government , and the member receiving the information could use it "only as necessary in the conduct of [her] official duties subject to any limitations on the unauthorized disclosure of such information. rule 6 ( e ) 's "judicial proceeding" exception may also be relevant to congress . as previously described , the rule provides that a court may authorize disclosure of a grand jury matter "preliminarily to or in connection with a judicial proceeding," with the term "judicial proceeding" generally contemplating some necessary resort to the judicial system . two courts have determined that a congressional committee's request for grand jury materials pursuant to its ordinary investigative and oversight functions does not qualify under this exception , as the possibility that "the actions it is investigating may wind up in the courts if wrongdoing is uncovered" is "too remote to trigger the rule 6 ( e ) exception. by contrast , where a congressional committee has sought grand jury materials in connection with the contemplated impeachment of a specific public official , several courts have recognized that court - ordered disclosure may be available pursuant to the "judicial proceeding" exception . under this view , though "impeachment proceedings before congress . are not by a 'court,'" a "contemplated trial" in the senate is still "very much a judicial proceeding. a committee seeking court - authorized disclosure on the basis of this exception must establish a "particularized need" for the materials at issue , which requires a showing that the need outweighs the public interest in secrecy . in the context of impeachment , courts have concluded that a congressional committee's need is sufficient to warrant disclosure , at least where the grand jury's work has concluded . nevertheless , given that mere "relevance" or "efficiency" is generally insufficient to establish a particularized need for grand jury materials , the context of the request and the materials at issue could influence whether a committee can show such a need . as discussed , some federal courts have recognized that courts have "inherent authority" to order the release of grand jury information in "special" or "exceptional" circumstances , regardless of whether an explicit rule 6 ( e ) exception would otherwise apply . one lower court has relied on this inherent authority over grand jury matters , among other things , to authorize the release to the house judiciary committee of a report prepared by the grand jury investigating the alleged — and potentially impeachable — improprieties of president nixon .