this report focuses on the nczmp . the nczmp encourages interested coastal states and territories ( hereinafter referred to as states ) to work with noaa to develop and implement coastal zone management programs . to join , states must develop cmps pursuant to czma and federal regulations . states that join the nczmp are eligible for several federal grants and have the right to review federal actions for consistency with state coastal policies . congress may continue to consider the effects of natural and man - made changes on the coast , the effectiveness of czma implementation , and the expired czma grant program authorizations of appropriations . these concerns have been considered in previous congresses and / or have been recently raised by government agencies and various coastal stakeholders . congress may continue to examine czma in light of continued population and infrastructure growth along the coast , as well as coastal hazards such as flooding and erosion . according to the 2010 census , coastal shoreline counties were home to over 123 million people ( 39% of the u.s. population ) , and were expected to grow by another 10 million people by 2020 . the ocean and great lakes economy accounted for 2.3% of total employment and contributed $320 billion to the total u.s. gross domestic product in 2015 . others argue that funding should not be appropriated to the grant programs , as noted above , making the authorizations for appropriations no longer necessary . much of the population and infrastructure growth has occurred in shoreline communities amid ecosystems such as beaches , reefs , sea grasses , wetlands , estuaries , and deltas . the combination of built and natural systems has been and likely will continue to be affected by changes in sea level ( and its impacts , such as higher tides , greater storm surge , saltwater intrusion , erosion , etc .

 ) , local rainfall , increasing water and air temperatures , and ocean acidification , among other factors . several bills to amend czma would have addressed some of these changes . in the 115 th congress , members proposed bills focused on climate change preparedness or adaptation ( eg , h.r . 4426 ) and "working waterfronts" ( eg , h.r . other proposals would have expanded czma grant programs to locations ( the district of columbia , eg , s. 3146 and h.r . 2540 ) and groups ( indian tribes , eg , h.r . 2607 ) currently not eligible to apply to the grant programs . in previous congresses , other bills proposed additional grant programs related to offshore activities , such as renewable energy siting surveys ( eg , h.r . 1690 , 111 th congress ) , responses to oil spills and other disasters related to outer continental shelf energy activity ( eg , h.r . 3757 , 112 th congress ) , aquaculture siting ( eg , h.r . 2046 , 104 th congress ) , harmful algal blooms ( eg , h.r . 4235 , 105 th congress ) , and great lakes restoration ( eg , s. 2337 , 108 th congress ) .