these are summarized in this report . domestic food assistance programs also receive funds from sources other than appropriations: usda provides commodity foods to the child nutrition programs using funds other than those in the child nutrition account . these purchases are financed through post - transfer "section 32" funds . for example , about $465 million out of a total of $1.9 billion in entitlement commodity support for the national school lunch program in fy2017 came from outside the child nutrition account . the fresh fruit and vegetable program ( ffvp ) for selected elementary schools nationwide is financed with permanent , mandatory funding . the underlying law ( section 19 of the richard b. russell national school lunch act ) provides funds at the beginning of every school year ( july ) . in fy2017 and prior years , appropriations laws have delayed a portion of the funds ( generally $125 million ) to the start of the next fiscal year ( october 1 ) . in the fy2018 appropriations law , this delay was not included , so for fy2018 usda received both the full amount for the fiscal year ( $172 million ) on july 1 , 2018 , and $125 million that fy2017 appropriations had delayed until october 1 , 2017 . therefore , funding for ffvp in fy2018 is higher than in previous fiscal years . the food service management institute ( technical assistance to child nutrition providers , also known as the institute of child nutrition ) is funded through a permanent annual appropriation of $5 million . the senior farmers' market nutrition program receives nearly $21 million of mandatory funding per year ( fy2002-fy2018 ) outside of the regular appropriations process . declining participation in snap is responsible for most of the difference . over 95% of the fy2018 appropriations are for mandatory spending . table 1 summarizes funding for the domestic food assistance programs , comparing fy2018 levels to those of prior years . in addition to the accounts' appropriations language , the enacted appropriation's general provisions include additional funding , rescissions , and / or policy changes . the federal budget process treats discretionary and mandatory spending differently . discretionary spending is controlled by annual appropriations acts and receives most of the attention during the appropriations process . the annual budget resolution process sets spending limits for discretionary appropriations . agency operations ( salaries and expenses ) and many grant programs are discretionary . mandatory spending — though carried in the appropriation — is controlled by budget rules during the authorization process . appropriations acts then provide funding to match the parameters required by the mandatory programs' authorizing laws . for the domestic food assistance programs , these laws are typically reauthorized in farm bill and child nutrition reauthorizations . domestic food assistance funding ( table 1 ) largely consists of open - ended , appropriated mandatory programs — that is , it varies with program participation ( and in some cases inflation ) under the terms of the underlying authorization law . the largest mandatory programs include snap and the child nutrition programs ( including the national school lunch program and school breakfast program ) .