oil availability associates with energy independence and energy security more than any other fuel . supply generally does not follow demand smoothly , and this results in price volatility . for example , supply bottlenecks can constrain open trade , which can conflate prices and access . the government of alberta instituted a crude oil curtailment policy in january 2019 , as crude producers faced export infrastructure bottlenecks . supply , demand , the strength of currencies , and other factors link crude oil to the world market to determine the price . because the united states is a top consumer and producer of oil , it has the ability to influence this world market . trade agreements , regulation , sanctions , and unpredictable events all contribute to the flow of oil in the world market . congress may consider policies that affect the world oil market , including sanctions , alternative fuel standards , emission controls , use of electric vehicles , and protection of international trade routes . u.s. production is at an all - time high as a result of technological advancements and policy . the report also includes analysis on selected examples of international conditions that in the past have affected policy decisions in the united states . despite the recent surge in u.s. oil production , the united states remained a net importer of oil in 2018 . this report provides an introduction to the u.s. and world oil markets , with an overview of supply and demand , price considerations , and trade flows . this report does not focus on trade associated with the entire crude oil and petroleum product value chain , the history of imports and exports , or provide an in - depth country trade balance analysis . the potential impacts of the world oil market on the climate and the environment are not within the scope of this report . the united states has abundant reserves of various natural resources , including crude oil in both conventional and unconventional deposits , such as shale . technological advancements and new policies have changed the outlook for oil production in the united states from perceived scarcity to abundance . the united states , both the top oil producer and the world's greatest consumer of crude oil and petroleum products ( eg , gasoline ) , remains a net oil importer . in general , the world oil market determines the price and supply of oil and petroleum products for u.s. consumers , which may impact policy decisions by congress . while the oil market directly affects the economy , oil - related policy has the power to influence geopolitics and can be utilized as a tool to influence other countries . oil policy can be influential in a number of ways , for instance as a response to or in anticipation of undesirable international behavior or as a means to bring balance and stability to an otherwise volatile market . decisions about energy conservation , environmental protection , and protection of strategic resources can also affect a country's oil supply and demand . the united states plays a multifaceted role in the world oil market , which may affect congress's policy decisions .