appendix a . impact aid appropriations in constant 2018 dollars table a - 1 provides impact aid appropriations in constant 2018 dollars . table a - 2 provides dod impact aid program appropriations in constant 2018 dollars . appendix b. glossary of acronyms ada: average daily attendance appe: average per - pupil expenditure bsp: basic support payment ddess: domestic dependents elementary and secondary school dod: u.s. department of defense dodea: department of defense education activity ed: u.s. department of education esea: elementary and secondary education act essa: every student succeeds act idea: individuals with disabilities education act l - hhs - ed: departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies appropriations act lcr: local contribution rate lea: local educational agency lot: learning opportunity threshold ndaa: national defense authorization ac . sections are generally discussed in order . there is also a summary of the title vii sections that focus primarily on program administration and are not otherwise discussed in the section - by - section analyses , including section 7005 and sections 7010 through 7014 . appropriations for the impact aid program are made through the annual l - hhs - ed appropriations act . appropriations to provide additional funding to leas serving significant numbers of children whose parents are on active duty in the uniformed services and children with severe disabilities whose parents are on active duty in the uniformed services have also been made available through the department of defense ( see " department of defense "impact aid" programs " for more information ) . this section provides detailed information about impact aid funding provided through l - hhs - ed appropriations acts from fy2010 through fy2019 in current dollars . for appropriations data in constant 2018 dollars , see table a - 1 . the first dod impact aid program , supplemental assistance , was established in the early 1990s to supplement the impact aid programs administered by ed . a second dod impact aid program , for leas serving military dependent children with severe disabilities , has been funded since fy2002 . the annual national defense authorization act provides the authorization of appropriations for these programs . the authorizations of appropriations for these programs have been lower than those provided for the impact aid programs administered by ed . funds for these programs are appropriated in the annual dod appropriations acts under operation and maintenance for department - wide activities . this section provides an overview of the two impact aid programs administered by dod and funded in fy2019 and their appropriations in current dollars . for appropriations data in constant 2018 dollars , see table a - 2 . the supplemental assistance program ( also referred to as "dod supplemental impact aid" and "assistance to schools with significant numbers of military dependent students" ) provides funds to leas with significant numbers of military students . funds are provided to eligible leas if , without the additional funding , an lea would be unable to provide students with a level of education equivalent to the minimum level available in the schools of other leas in the state .