ยง503 ( c ) ) . the fast act currently authorizes $250 million and $135 million , respectively , for these programs through fy2020 . a third approach would be to direct spending congressionally . from the start of the 112 th congress in 2011 until the end of the 115 th congress in january 2019 , the house and senate observed a ban on congressionally directed spending , also known as earmarking . the earmark ban effectively blocked members of congress from inserting language in authorization or appropriations bills to designate funds for specific freight - related projects , as frequently occurred prior to 2011 . the ban was established through rules adopted by the house republican conference , the senate republican conference , and the senate appropriations committee . the democratic party majority that has controlled the house since january 2019 has not adopted similar language , and it is unclear whether earmarks are permitted in proposed legislation in that chamber . because freight infrastructure decisions are often made at the state or local level , it would be helpful for transportation planners to know the characteristics of the trucks traveling particular highway segments . information about the industries served , the origin and destination of the shipments , and daily or seasonal variations in volume could help planners identify freight users that share an economic interest in mitigating a bottleneck or determine the feasibility of moving some of the traffic to off - peak hours or to other modes . dot's bureau of transportation statistics and the census bureau conduct a survey of shippers every five years ( the commodity flow survey cited in table 1 ) that provides information on outbound shipments . however , the sample size is not sufficient to provide reliable data for any specific urban area . the survey does not record through traffic , does not distinguish between imports and domestic freight , and occurs too infrequently to identify trends in freight patterns . the survey was designed more to provide a national picture of freight transport than to meet local or regional needs . in the fast act , congress requested dot to "... consider any improvements to existing freight flow data collection efforts that could reduce identified freight data gaps and deficiencies...." a policy decision for congress is whether the federal government should be responsible for providing adequate freight data for state and local transportation planners . autonomous vehicle technology has potential applications in the freight sector . autonomous trucks potentially offer significant freight transportation savings , as driver compensation represents either the largest or second - largest cost component for truck carriers , depending on the price of fuel . fuel and driver compensation typically each account for about one - third of total operating costs . it handles domestic shipments of a few miles as well as international shipments of thousands of miles . often , a shipment of cargo will move across multiple modes before reaching its destination , using road , rail , air , pipeline , and / or maritime infrastructure in the process ; when freight changes modes in this way , it is referred to as multimodal .