this demonstration has not been evaluated . there were other proposals and hearings related to congregate feeding in sfsp in recent years . for example , in the 114 th congress , committee - reported child nutrition reauthorization proposals in the senate and the house ( s. 3136 and h.r . 5003 , respectively ) would have enabled some rural meal sites to provide sfsp meals for consumption offsite . specifically , both proposals would have allowed offsite consumption for children ( 1 ) in rural areas ( h.r . 5003 to a more limited extent than s. 3136 ) and ( 2 ) in nonrural areas in which more than 80% of students are certified as eligible for free or reduced - price meals . the bills would have also permitted congregate feeding sites to provide meals to be consumed offsite episodically under certain conditions such as extreme weather or public safety concerns . the hhfka created the community eligibility provision ( cep ) , an option to provide free meals ( lunches and breakfasts ) to all students in schools with high proportions of students who automatically qualify for free or reduced - price lunches . cep became available to schools nationwide starting in sy2014-2015 , and participation has increased since then . as of sy2016-2017 , more than 20,700 schools participated in cep , according to data from the food research and action center ( frac ) , a nonprofit advocacy organization . this is roughly 22% of nslp schools . several groups have expressed support for cep during its implementation , arguing that the provision improves access to meals , reduces stigma associated with receiving free or reduced - price meals , and reduces schools' administrative costs . others have sought to change the option . for example , in the 114 th congress , the house's committee - reported child nutrition reauthorization bill ( h.r . 5003 ) would have restricted schools' eligibility for cep , which the committee majority argued was "to better target resources to those students in need , while also ensuring all students who are eligible for assistance continue to receive assistance. one secondary effect of cep is that it has created data issues for other nonnutrition federal and state programs . many programs , most notably the federal title i - a program ( the primary source of federal funding for elementary and secondary schools ) , use free and reduced - price lunch data to determine eligibility and / or funding allocations . these data come from school meal applications , which are no longer collected under cep's automatic eligibility determination process . for more information on this issue , see crs report r44568 , overview of esea title i - a and the school meals' community eligibility provision . students may qualify for free meals , or they may have to pay for reduced - price or full - price meals . in recent years , the issue of students owing and not paying their meal costs , and schools' responses to such situations , has received increased attention . in many cases , schools serve students a regular meal , charging the unpaid meal cost and creating a debt that they may try to collect later from the family .