the deployment of 5g technologies is just beginning . countries around the world are striving to be first to market with 5g technologies and services to capture the bulk of the economic benefits from this new technology . some members introduced resolutions in support of 5g technologies and services: s.res . 521 introduced in august and september 2017 , respectively . the resolutions would have expressed the sense that the united states should commit to modernizing infrastructure policies to meet demand for wireless broadband services , to increase access , quality , and affordability of broadband services , and to promote economic development and digital innovation throughout the united states . if passed , the resolutions would have shown congressional support for the deployment of 5g technologies in the united states . countries around the world ( i.e. , central governments ) are supporting 5g efforts to ensure their companies are first to deploy 5g products and services , and positioned to capture the bulk of the economic benefits from the new technology — to "win the race to 5g. the first mobile phones appeared in the 1980s . since then , mobile phone use has increased exponentially . the number of smartphone users in the united states has grown from nearly 63 million in 2010 to an estimated 238 million in 2018 . worldwide , there are an estimated 4.5 billion mobile phone users , 2.5 billion of which are smartphone users . more people are using more data on more mobile devices ; as a result , demand for mobile data is rapidly increasing . telecommunication companies continually invest in their networks to provide faster , more reliable service , expand the capacity of networks to meet growing demands for data , and support new technology uses . approximately every 10 years , a new technology solution emerges from industry studies and research that offers vastly improved speeds , supports new features and functions , and creates new markets and new revenue for providers . these technologies offer such significant improvements to networks and devices that they change the way people use mobile communications , and thus represent the next generation of mobile technology . in mobile communications , there have been five generations of technology . figure 1 provides an overview of the technologies . first - generation ( 1g ) technologies brought consumers the first mobile phone . the phone and the service were expensive , and the basic analog networks offered voice - only services , and limited coverage and capacity . second - generation ( 2g ) technologies used digital networks , which supported voice and texting . networks were expanded and phones were made more affordable , increasing adoption . third - generation ( 3g ) technologies supported voice , data , and mobile access to the internet ( eg , email , videos ) . smartphones were introduced , and people began using mobile phones as computers for business and entertainment , greatly increasing demand for data . fourth - generation ( 4g ) technologies offered increased speeds , and true mobile broadband that could support music and video streaming , mobile applications , and online gaming .