2 ) include tefap provisions . 104-127 ) extended the discretionary authority to appropriate money for commodities and distribution - cost grants for tefap and soup kitchen programs through fy2002 . but , more significantly , the subsequent 1996 welfare reform law ( the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act ; p.l . 104-193 ) changed how these federal efforts are structured and funded . the welfare reform law ( 1 ) consolidated tefap and the soup kitchen program in one statute ( the efa ) so that states could get a single tefap grant of commodities and distribution - cost funds for all types of emergency feeding organizations and ( 2 ) mandated funding of $100 million a year ( through fy2002 ) to purchase food commodities for the program . this was in addition to any commodities that might be bought with money appropriated under discretionary authority in the efa and any bonus commodities that might be made available at usda's discretion . this second change was intended to entitle the program to a minimum level of commodity support when regularly appropriated money is not made available to buy commodities or excess federal commodity holdings for tefap distribution are minimal or nonexistent . it was accomplished through an amendment to the food stamp act ( now , the food and nutrition act ) effectively setting aside $100 million a year in "entitlement" appropriations under the act to purchase tefap commodities . many states limit income eligibility to household incomes at or below 185% of poverty . some states also confer household eligibility based on participation in other federal and state programs ( "categorical eligibility" ) . states may also create other eligibility rules for households' receipt of tefap foods , such as requiring identification or proof of residency within the state . however , according to federal regulations , length of residency cannot be a criterion . federal assistance through tefap is primarily provided in the form of usda - purchased domestic agricultural products ( "usda foods" ) . a smaller amount of assistance is provided in the form of cash support for administrative and distribution costs . roughly half of the funding for tefap's commodities is an appropriated entitlement ( "entitlement" commodities ) , meaning that the authorizing law sets the level of spending but an annual appropriation is needed to provide funding . the other half of tefap's commodity funding is not included in the tefap appropriation and is instead provided by separate usda budget authority . these funds are used by usda for "bonus" commodity purchases for the program throughout the year . tefap's administrative funds are discretionary spending , requiring an annual appropriation . in fy2018 , the enacted appropriation provided $289.5 million for entitlement commodities and $64.4 million for administrative costs . appropriations for tefap's entitlement commodities were contained in the snap account and appropriations for administrative costs were contained in the commodity assistance program ( cap ) account . in fy2017 ( the most recent year with complete data ) , usda purchased and distributed $268.6 million worth of bonus commodities for tefap . states have the authority to distribute existing inventories of usda foods to disaster relief organizations when the president issues a disaster declaration .