similarly to h.r . 723 and s. 239 , the bill would require energy managers to bundle and implement energy - or water - saving measures that are found to be life cycle cost - effective . s. 1460 would also modify annual reporting requirements for federal agencies regarding espcs and uescs . the bill would clarify that the espcs and uescs are to be considered by the office of management and budget as best practices for meeting performance goals for energy - efficient and energy - saving information technology . according to h.rept . 115-240 , this "would have the effect of capturing any long - term budgetary savings ( and costs ) resulting from these contracts. the scoring would classify the estimated net present value of the budget authority and any outlays as direct spending , and according to the accompanying report , "it would not change the fact that federal agencies would continue to cover contractual payments through annual , discretionary appropriations. according to cbo , "the provision [in h.con.res . 71 ] that prohibits any savings estimated by cbo to be considered as an offset for purposes of budget enforcement applies only to legislation considered by the house of representatives , not the senate. both the executive branch and congress have promoted energy efficiency within federal agencies . shared energy savings ( and later espcs and uescs ) were included as part of an overall strategy to meet federal energy reduction goals . since that time , espcs and uescs have continued to be used to implement energy and water efficiency improvements at federal facilities . congress has revised the policies enabling espcs and uescs over time , and congress may wish to assess additional changes going forward . among the issues for consideration . in the 115 th congress , several bills would address various issues concerning espcs and uescs . identical bills , h.r . 723 and s. 239 , "energy savings through public - private partnerships act of 2017," were introduced in january 2017 and seek to facilitate the use of espcs and uescs by implementing several changes to necpa . section 543 ( f ) ( 4 ) of necpa states that not later than 2 years after the completion of each evaluation under paragraph ( 3 ) , each energy manager may ( a ) implement any energy - or water - saving measure that the federal agency identified in the evaluation conducted under paragraph ( 3 ) that is life cycle cost - effective ; and ( b ) bundle individual measures of varying paybacks together into combined projects . the bills would replace "may" with "shall," which would require energy managers to bundle individual energy - or water - saving measures that are found to be life cycle cost - effective into combined projects to be implemented no later than two years after evaluating a facility for energy and water efficiency measures .