it also reports on what the drugs were used for . it might examine the effect on costs incurred by patients . commissioner of food and drugs gottlieb and senator johnson , the sponsor of the senate bill , have exchanged statements that potentially foretell conflict if fda issues rules that would limit the law's scope . finally , is the rtt act a harbinger of reduced authority for fda ? writing in opposition to the bill , four former fda commissioners warned that it would "create a dangerous precedent that would erode protections for vulnerable patients. that is something future congresses may choose to address . by trying to help one set of ill patients , does congress wear down the health of the institution meant to protect the public's health ? the rtt act concludes with a "sense of the senate" section that appears to acknowledge that this legislation offers minimal opportunity to patients . it is explicit in asserting that the new law "will not , and cannot , create a cure or effective therapy where none exists. the legislation , it says , "only expands the scope of individual liberty and agency among patients. and it is not clear whether it sufficiently deals with the obstacles it does address — use of clinical outcomes data and liability protection . the reporting required by the rtt act was not designed to answer those questions . but congress could turn to the government accountability office for help . it could also encourage manufacturers , patient advocates , and fda to collaborate in the search for answers . third: how will this affect fda ? one news article referred to the rtt act's "bizarre twist," as fda must determine its role in implementing a law whose function is to remove fda from the situation . the drafters realistically end that phrase with "in limited circumstances. first: will more patients get investigational drugs ? the rtt act requires manufacturers to report each year on the number of doses supplied and patients treated as a result of the law . what role could congress play now that the rtt act is law ? it could answer three questions at the core of measuring its effect on fda , drug manufacturers , and patients . over time — and perhaps with requesting other data — congress could determine whether the law has had the effect its sponsors intended . second: has the law removed the obstacles to access to investigational drugs ? while the rtt act achieves proponents' objective of removing the fda application step in a patient's quest for an investigational drug , it does not address many of the obstacles — such as a limited drug supply or limits on staff and facility resources — that could lead a manufacturer to refuse access to its drugs . he was battling an infection no antibiotic had been able to tame . his physicians thought an experimental drug might help . because the food and drug administration ( fda ) had not yet approved that experimental drug , it was not available in pharmacies . but fda did have the authority to permit the use of an unapproved drug in certain circumstances — a process referred to as expanded access or compassionate use .