each purpose area specifies certain activities . the activities are generally the same for the high schools / community service centers and ihes , and therefore are grouped together in the subsequent discussion . ( figure a - 1 summarizes the four purpose areas , the populations they target , and the activities supported in each of the categories. ) the paf statute and the program grant announcements include requirements for state grantees and subgrantees in carrying out activities under the paf program . for the purposes of this section , "grantees" generally means applicants ; however , some of the requirements discussed apply only to applicants who were selected to receive paf funding . through fy2018 , oah has awarded five rounds ( or "cohorts" ) of funding to 30 states , dc , and five tribes across these cohorts ( see figure 2 ) . ( table a - 1 lists each of the grantees for each cohort. ) funding levels have generally ranged from $380,000 to $1,500,000 annually , with a mean of approximately $1,200,000 . the grant periods have ranged from 1 year ( cohort 4 , fy2017 ) to 4 years ( cohort 2 , fy2013-fy2016 ) . hhs shortened the grant period for cohort 3 grantees from 5 years to 3 years . hhs expects to provide funding for two to three additional grantees with fy2019 funding . hhs has contracted with mathematica policy research , a social policy research organization , to conduct a process evaluation of how the paf program is carried out and an impact evaluation about the effectiveness of the program in shaping youth outcomes . as discussed , the process evaluation provided background information on the design and implementation of the paf programs in the second and third cohorts . the impact evaluation is measuring selected outcomes of paf participants in california and dc . the outcomes vary depending on the site , and include those related to subsequent pregnancy , sexual risk behaviors , school engagement , educational attainment , or parenting skills . findings are available for the program in dc , where paf - funded services were provided in nine high schools through a voluntary program known as new heights . case coordinators from the program were embedded at the schools to provide ( 1 ) one - on - one case management to help youth meet their educational goals ; ( 2 ) weekly educational workshops held three times a week to provide supplemental education on relevant topics ; and ( 3 ) in - kind incentives that students earn when they attain personal goals and use for purchasing items such as maternity and baby supplies . researchers found that teen mothers in the program improved in school engagement and credits earned per year compared to teen mothers who attended the high schools immediately before the program was introduced . the participants were significantly more likely to have excused absences ( and significant less likely to have unexcused absences ) , to attend more days of school per semester , and to graduate . because of its cross - cutting approach to meeting the needs of the expectant and parenting population , paf may overlap with activities of other programs serving the needs of broader populations .