however , this was not always the case . 5121 et seq .

 ) , outline the federal role in supporting state , local , tribal , and territorial governments as they respond to and recover from a variety of incidents . they take effect in the event that nonfederal levels of government find their own capacity to deal with an incident is overwhelmed . the current emergency management policy environment assumes this federal role in domestic disaster relief as the default position and the availability of resources through the drf a necessary requirement . the concept of general disaster relief from the federal government predates both fema and the stafford act , but federal involvement in relief after natural and man - made disasters was very rare before the civil war , and was at times considered unconstitutional . congress may also debate whether to try to limit disaster relief spending . the most direct means of doing this would not be to change the drf appropriation , but by changing the underlying laws that authorize the programs it funds . implementing relief limits or deductibles for states or smaller jurisdictions , larger nonfederal cost shares , or changes in the declaration process may prove unpopular , and having to vote for them once in more durable authorizing legislation may be more practical than doing so annually in appropriations legislation , which expires . domestic disaster relief efforts became more common after the civil war , but were not seen as a necessary obligation of the federal government . standing federal domestic disaster relief programs and a pool of resources to fund them only emerged after the second world war . prior to the development of these programs , domestic disaster relief and recovery was a matter for private nongovernmental organizations and state and local governments . once established , the federal role in domestic disaster response and recovery grew , proving politically popular and resilient despite periodic concerns about management , execution , and budgetary impacts . as the drf is the source of funding for most general disaster relief programs , it is an indicator of the scope of those programs and the volume of taxpayer - funded aid they provide . understanding the trends in the growth of the federal government's role in general disaster relief and recovery , and the associated costs of that role , may be useful as congress considers changes in both emergency management and budgetary policies . this report introduces the drf and outlines how its resources are made available through a series of simple questions , presents a brief history of the federal government's involvement in domestic disaster relief , describes how the request for general disaster relief funding has been formulated over time , and examines the congressional response to those requests . it also provides the funding history for the drf , and discusses several issues before congress connected to the fund and the general disaster relief programs it supports . disaster relief has not always been a part of the mission of the federal government .