is it feasible to engage china in this regard ? should congress press the administration to pursue international rules on development finance ? u.s. involvement in developing such rules could help advance u.s. strategic interests . this section discusses the build act provisions that describe how the new idfc is expected to function once established . the 116 th congress will have responsibility for overseeing the implementation of the build act , including review of the reorganization plan , the transition it prescribes , and impact on u.s. foreign policy objectives . as part of this process , congress may consider a number of policy issues , including the following: is the administration meeting the implementation requirements of the build act ? in creating the build act , congress gave great consideration to strategic foreign policy concerns . in addition to providing commercial opportunities for u.s. firms , development finance may shape how countries connect to the rest of the world through ports , roads , and other transportation and technological links , providing footholds for the united states to advance its approaches to regulations and standards . another potential role for development finance is to provide a means to spread u.s. values on governance , transparency , and environmental and social safeguards . does the reorganization plan reflect congressional intent , and are the choices made within the discretion allowed by the build act justified ? more fundamentally , is the idfc's aim to compete with , contain , or counter the bri and chinese world vision it represents ? beyond establishing the idfc , congress may consider whether to advocate for creating international "rules for the road" for development finance . such rules could help ensure that the idfc operates on a "level playing field" relative to its counterparts , given the variation in terms , conditions , and practices of dfis internationally . however , such rules would only be effective to the extent that major suppliers of development finance are willing to abide by them . for example , china is not a party to international rules on export credit financing , though it has been involved in recent negotiations to develop new rules on such financing . how can the idfc best balance its mission to support u.s. businesses in competing for overseas investment opportunities with its development mandate ? what are the policy trade - offs associated with the capacity limits , authorities , policy parameters , and other features formulated by congress in the build act ? does the legislation find the right balance , or does the implementation process identify areas where legislative changes might be beneficial ? does the current statutory framework enable the idfc to respond effectively to u.s. strategic concerns , particularly with regard to china's bri ? while the idfc authorized by the build act has yet to be established , and some implementation questions remain , the act detailed many aspects of how the new entity should be structured , managed , and overseen by congress .