appendix a . congressional reporting requirements related to the rio grande pursuant to the reporting requirements discussed below , the u.s department of state has delivered reports to various committees of congress , including as recently as march 2018 . the reporting requirements are for report delivery directly to congress and congressional committees ; only limited information about these reports and their contents has been publicly available . ongoing reporting requirements since 2014 , congress has asked the u.s. department of state to annually report to congress on mexico's rio grande water deliveries . the 2014 farm bill ( agriculture act of 2013 ; p.l . 113-79 ) included the following requirement in section 12310: not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this act and annually thereafter , the secretary of state shall submit to congress a report on efforts by mexico to meet its treaty deliveries of water to the rio grande in accordance with the treaty between the united states and mexico respecting utilization of waters of the colorado and tijuana rivers and of the rio grande ( done at washington , february 3 , 1944 ) . this reporting requirement has no explicit end date ; that is , the 2014 farm bill reporting requirement remains in effect . reporting requirements in annual appropriations bills and accompanying reports water delivery reporting requirements beginning with statutory provisions for fy2015 , appropriators have regularly included direction in congressional reports accompanying appropriations bills for the u.s. department of state . the direction is for a report on mexico's water deliveries to the united states in the rio grande . on december 16 , 2014 , section 7045 ( g ) ( 3 ) of division j of p.l . 113-235 — the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act of 2015 — was enacted . it required that the secretary of state report to the committees on appropriations on the following water delivery and accounting issues: not later than 45 days after the enactment of this act , the secretary of state , in consultation with the commissioner for the united states section of the international boundary and water commission ( ibwc ) , shall report to the committees on appropriations on the efforts to work with the mexico section of the ibwc and the government of mexico to establish mechanisms to improve the transparency of data on , and predictability of , the water deliveries from mexico to the united states to meet annual water apportionments to the rio grande , in accordance with the 1944 treaty between the united states and mexico respecting utilization of waters of the colorado and tijuana rivers and of the rio grande , and on actions taken to minimize or eliminate the water deficits owed to the united states in the current 5-year cycle by the end of such cycle: provided , that such report shall include a projection of the balance of the water delivery deficit at the end of the current 5-year cycle , as well as the estimated impact to the united states of a negative delivery balance . the joint explanatory statement for the fy2016 consolidated appropriations act ( division k , p.l . 114-113 ) carried forward reporting requirements from p.l .