omb has not released data on those designations . the budget appendix that omb issues annually , while not including information on that designation , does present detailed subaccount - level data that often indicate whether a federal program's budgetary resources rely on fee income . the format of the budget appendix , however , makes it an impractical source of data for government - wide research . as far as crs can determine , a comprehensive and authoritative list of federal fees is not publicly available . budget and financial documents from omb and the u.s. treasury , however , do provide detailed information on offsetting collections and offsetting receipts — the budget categories that typically contain user fees and other charges — as well as information on budgetary accounts . in some cases , account descriptions clearly indicate an association with one or more fees . in other cases , however , whether or not an account receives fees is unclear . for example , an account might be labeled as miscellaneous receipts , or as fines , fees , and penalties . user fees , as noted above , can tie benefits enjoyed by households or firms — such as passports , access to national parks , or approvals to raise investment funds from the public — to payments that can help defray public costs of providing them . an economist's rule of thumb known as the benefit principle , which suggests linking the fiscal burden of publicly provided benefits to those who enjoy those benefits , can promote fairness and efficiency . for example , many would contend that those with the opportunity to travel abroad should shoulder more of the costs of reviewing passport applications and issuing documents than those who do not . moreover , if fees are set at levels that match the incremental cost of providing benefits , then when an agency is called to expand its work — such as an uptick in demand for passports , park visits , or company registrations — then those fees could fund the needed extra resources . matching fees to incremental costs , however , is difficult where demand is irregular or unpredictable . omb guidelines on user fees outline aims similar to the benefit principle , mandating that federal agencies ensure that each service , sale , or use of government goods or resources provided by an agency to specific recipients be self - sustaining ; promote efficient allocation of the nation's resources by establishing charges for special benefits provided to the recipient that are at least as great as costs to the government of providing the special benefits ; and allow the private sector to compete with the government without disadvantage in supplying comparable services , resources , or goods where appropriate . a private firm would normally adjust its balance sheet to reflect a loss . omb designates whether each account receives collections associated with user charges , and that information is contained within omb's max budget data system . omb mandates that agencies review user fees every other year . omb also encourages agencies seeking new authority to assess fees to "seek to remove restraints on user charges.