the declaration is to be made by the importer at the time of import . there is a cost to the importer associated with each epermit application . aphis and the state - level authorities often request health import permit submissions alongside supporting documentation ( figure 4 ) . the creation of aphis consolidated these bureaus in 1972 . is the primary federal law governing the protection of animal health . it gives aphis broad authority to detect , control , or eradicate pests or diseases of livestock or poultry . ahpa consolidated all of the animal quarantine and related laws — some dating back to the late 1800s — and replaced them with one statutory framework . while most of the authorities contained in the consolidated ahpa were taken from existing laws , some new provisions were added to fill in gaps in legal authority . the plant protection act of 2000 ( ppa , 7 u.s.c . § § 7701 et seq . ) is the primary federal law governing plant pests in foreign and interstate commerce , covering agricultural commodities , plants , biological control organisms , articles that might be infested , means of transportation , and other pathways for moving pests . it authorizes aphis to prohibit or restrict the importation , exportation , and interstate movement of plants , plant products , certain biological control organisms , noxious weeds , and plant pests . it also authorizes aphis to inspect foreign plant imports , quarantine any state or premise infested with a new pest or noxious weed , and cooperate with states in certain control and eradication actions . both ahpa and ppa give aphis authority to inspect agricultural imports . however , after the events of september 11 , 2001 , congressional concern about agroterrorism — the deliberate introduction of an animal or plant disease to infect food , causing economic losses and / or undermining social stability — triggered the strengthening of aphis and other federal agency agricultural inspection activities . the act requires declarations — in addition to the aphis - issued plant health import permits — for imported shipments of most plants or plant products . aphis works with cbp , the u.s. coast guard ( eg , for fisheries violations ) , the national marine fisheries service , the federal bureau of investigation , the u.s. forest service , and u.s. immigration and customs enforcement to enforce the lacey act through inspection or monitoring activities . aphis's role in this context is to collect aphis - issued health import permits , manage the declaration requirement , provide guidance to importers regarding the declaration , perform compliance checks , and provide enforcement agencies with information to assist their investigations . according to usda , both cbp and aphis activities have contributed to an increase in the number of declarations , with approximately 1 million declarations in fy2017 , up roughly 300,000 from fy2016 . this increase has coincided with the introduction of the online system in lieu of paper - based declarations . in february 2018 , aphis announced it had implemented all of gao's recommendations . importers must obtain aphis - issued health import permits before beginning the inspection process .