u.s. industry has always been involved in spaceflight . key federal agencies involved in the regulation , oversight , and promotion of commercial space activities include the federal aviation administration , for regulation of launch and reentry ; the department of commerce , for regulation of earth remote sensing from space , promotion of the u.s. space industry , and export controls on space technology ; and the federal communications commission , for regulation of satellite communications . some functions , such as mitigation of orbital debris , are shared among agencies . agency roles are not yet fully settled for certain other functions , such as space situational awareness . as well as regulating , overseeing , and promoting the commercial space industry , the federal government is a customer , acquiring commercial services . in taking this approach , agencies may hope to increase efficiency and reduce cost in their own programs , while helping to develop an industry that could contribute to broader national objectives . in response to industry concerns about the complexity of this regulatory framework , the administration and congress have made several reform proposals , including space policy directive – 2 , streamlining regulations on commercial use of space ( spd - 2 , issued in may 2018 ) ; the american space commerce free enterprise act ( h.r . the section ends with a discussion of factors that congress and the administration may consider when deciding whether agencies should conduct space activities themselves or acquire them commercially . as congress addresses the issues discussed in this report , there are several key policy questions to consider . should the federal regulatory framework for commercial space activities be consolidated ? stakeholders sometimes call for a "one - stop shop" for commercial space licensing and regulation . congress and the administration have made proposals to consolidate functions currently executed by multiple offices of the commerce department . proposals for a new civil authority for space situational awareness would place it at an existing agency ( either commerce or the faa ) rather than create a new office . so far , however , congress appears to have little appetite for transferring existing regulatory responsibilities between agencies . how can the commercial space licensing process be made simpler , more timely , and more transparent ? congressional attention to this question has focused , in large part , on the process for interagency consultation on commercial remote sensing licenses . the challenge for that process is balancing industry's need for timeliness and transparency with the government's need to meet national security and foreign policy objectives . the rapidly advancing capabilities of foreign government and commercial satellites make identifying the appropriate balance more difficult , because if sensitive imagery can be obtained elsewhere , prohibiting u.s. companies from providing it may have few security benefits . how should federal regulatory policies be adjusted as the commercial space industry develops new capabilities and applications ? for commercial human spaceflight , the limitation on faa safety regulation was instituted to avoid burdening a nascent industry . at some point , congress may judge that the industry's development is ready for the limitation to be lifted or allowed to expire .