coverage of quality losses . many crops are vulnerable to lower prices or to becoming unmarketable due to quality losses . small markets for specialty crops that are not sold on commodity exchanges may be particularly price - sensitive to variations in quality ( eg , herbs and spices , certain fruits and vegetables , honey ) . certain federal crop insurance policies cover some quality losses , but the range of such coverage is limited . congress might consider ( 1 ) whether the current coverage for quality losses is available for all crops that are vulnerable to quality losses , ( 2 ) whether loss adjustment procedures for quality losses accurately assess the variations in quality and the effects on marketability and prices , and ( 3 ) whether the procedures for assessing quality losses properly balance cost efficiency and fraud prevention . effect of ad h oc payments on demand for crop insurance . section 11120 of p.l . 115-334 modifies the definition of reasonable research and development costs related to policies that have been approved by the fcic board for reimbursement . costs are to be deemed reasonable if based on ( 1 ) for employees or contractors , wage rates equal to not more than two times the bureau of labor statistics hourly wage rates , plus benefits ; and ( 2 ) other actual documented costs incurred by the applicant . that section also limits the fcic board's review of user fees . given that congress reinstated rma's authority to develop new products in the 2014 farm bill ( p.l . 113-79 ) , congress might inquire whether costs incurred for rma - developed policies could provide a benchmark for the reasonableness of private sector requests for reimbursement of development costs . limited participation in wfrp policies . wfrp is available in every county of every state . its premium subsidies range from 55% to 80% , and coverage levels range from 50% to 85% . in crop year 2017 the average premium subsidy for wfrp was 70% , whereas the average premium subsidy across the entire crop insurance portfolio was 63% . that year wfrp policies accounted for about 3% of all federal crop insurance liabilities . some speculate that part of the reason that wfrp participation is not higher is that producers are reluctant to provide tax return data . these policies require producers to provide five consecutive years of schedule f from their federal tax forms . given the benefits of risk pooling achieved by insuring a whole farm's revenue and the fraud prevention benefits from requiring tax returns to set historical revenue guarantees , congress might consider whether there are efficiencies to be gained from incentivizing greater participation in wfrp . determining a " market price" for commodities not sold on exchanges . lack of reliable pricing data for crops that are not traded on commodity exchanges has been an ongoing challenge for usda in the federal crop insurance program . rma's price discovery for specialty crops largely relies on agricultural marketing service , nass , and other usda agency data and academic and industry sources .