appendix a . trade surplus and deficit partners appendix b. u.s. trade: value and share in the economy appendix c. crs resources below are some recent crs reports and products on international trade developments: crs report r45420 , u.s. trade trends and developments , by andres b. schwarzenberg . crs report r44717 , international trade and finance: overview and issues for the 115th congress , coordinated by mary a. irace and rebecca m. nelson . crs report r45148 , u.s. trade policy primer: frequently asked questions , coordinated by cathleen d. cimino - isaacs . crs report r44546 , the economic effects of trade: overview and policy challenges , by james k. jackson . crs insight in10972 , global trade imbalances , by james k. jackson . crs in focus if10619 , the u.s. trade deficit: an overview , by james k. jackson . the agreements and negotiations raise several important policy questions: do the agreements and the ongoing negotiations serve u.s. interests ? is the administration fulfilling its obligations under trade promotion authority ( tpa ) ? are bilateral and regional ftas and negotiations , on the one hand , and the u.s. multilateral agenda at the wto , on the other hand , mutually supportive or in conflict ? in deciding whether to approve new bilateral ftas , or debate more generally on u.s. trade policy , members of congress may weigh potential costs and benefits to their constituents and to the u.s. economy as a whole . this report provides a summary of the main economic developments in the trade activities of the united states with its major trading partners in 2017 — the most recent year for which yearly u.s. trade data are available . it is intended primarily as a reference , and it focuses on what has happened with u.s. bilateral trade relations in recent years — not why or what the changes imply . the main objective of this report is to present the current data and statistics in a way that is accessible and understandable to help inform policy discussions . it is important to note that the growth in global production chains , intrafirm trade , and trade in intermediate goods means that traditional accounting methods may distort trade data and not fully reflect the source of resources that are used in producing goods and services ( see " limitations of trade data " ) . this makes it increasingly difficult to understand and interpret the implications of trade data for the u.s. economy . ( a comprehensive overview of recent trends and developments in u.s. trade is provided in crs report r45420 , u.s. trade trends and developments , by andres b . schwarzenberg. ) south korea was the united states' sixth - largest single - country merchandise trading partner in 2017 . u.s. two - way ( exports plus imports ) merchandise trade totaled $121.1 billion , up 6.82% ( $7.7 billion ) from $113.4 billion in 2016 . the share of u.s. trade with south korea remained at 3.10% of u.s. trade with the world .