they also have implications for u.s. geopolitical interests . conversely , geopolitical tensions , risks , and opportunities can have major impacts on international trade and finance . these issues are complex and at times controversial , and developments in the global economy often make policymaking more challenging . however , it does include references to more in - depth crs products on the issues . the united states has been a driving force in breaking down trade and investment barriers across the globe and constructing an open and rules - based global trading system through a wide range of international institutions and agreements . as such , the administration's withdrawal from the proposed trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) , imposition of unilateral trade restrictions on various u.s. imports , renegotiation of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , modification of certain provisions in the u.s. - south korea ( korus ) free trade agreement ( fta ) , and launch of an extensive review of u.s. participation in the world trade organization ( wto ) were among the most notable developments in u.s. trade policy in the past two years . other issues before congress included approving legislation to ( 1 ) strengthen the process used to review the national security implications of foreign direct investment transactions in the united states ; ( 2 ) modernize u.s. development finance tools to help advance u.s. national security and economic interests and global influence ; and ( 3 ) provide temporary tariff suspensions and reductions — through miscellaneous tariff bills — on certain products not available domestically . continued focus on economic sanctions against russia , north korea , iran , cuba , and other countries were also of interest to many in congress . the trump administration has displayed a more critical view than past administrations of u.s. trade agreements , made greater use of various u.s. trade laws with the potential to restrict u.s. imports , and focused on bilateral trade balances as a key metric of the health of u.s. trading relationships . as part of this shift in focus , the administration has placed a greater emphasis on "fair" and "reciprocal" trade . china has also been a center of attention as the administration has sought to address longstanding concerns over its policies on intellectual property ( ip ) , forced technology transfer , and innovation . citing these concerns and others , the president has unilaterally imposed trade restrictions on a number of u.s. imports under u.s. laws and authorities — most of which have been used infrequently since the establishment of the wto in 1995 . during the 115 th congress' second session , many members weighed in on the president's actions . while some supported his use of unilateral trade measures , others raised concerns about potential negative economic implications of these actions and the risks they pose to the rules - based international trading system . several members introduced bills to amend some of the president's trade authorities — for example , to require congressional consultation or approval before imposing new trade barriers .