the esrp were enforced on all ales beginning in 2017 . although 2015 was the first year in which the provisions were enforced , ales did not receive a notification from federally facilitated exchanges during that year because the federally facilitated exchanges' employer notification program was not phased in until 2016 . with respect to the irs notification , ales began receiving a notification about potential penalties for tax year 2015 in november 2017 . by january 2 , 2018 , the irs had notified only 3,820 of 33,080 ales identified as being potentially subject to a penalty for tax year 2015 . in 2017 , an audit by the treasury's inspector general for tax administration found that the delay in irs notifications resulted from some of the irs's esrp compliance processes either not working as intended or being delayed , not initiated , or canceled . the audit also found that as of march 21 , 2018 , the irs still was unable to process paper information returns promptly and accurately . appendix a. definitions as used under the employer shared responsibility provisions appendix b . it then discusses the two types of esrp penalties and introduces administrative aspects of the esrp . this report also includes two appendixes that contain definitions of terms as used in the report and a summary of how various worker classifications are considered for ale determinations and under the esrp ( appendix a and appendix b ) . all common - law employers , including government entities ( such as federal , state , local , or indian tribal government entities ) and nonprofit organizations that are exempt from federal income taxes , can be subject to the esrp . for an employer to be subject to the esrp , the employer must be considered an ale , which is an employer that has an average of at least 50 full - time employees ( including full - time equivalent employees ) on business days during the preceding calendar year . if an employer does not qualify as an ale , then it will not be subject to the esrp , nor will it be at risk of a penalty for failing to offer appropriate health insurance coverage to its full - time employees . the irs enforced a limited rollout of the provisions in 2015 , generally applying the esrp to employers with at least 100 full - time employees ( including full - time equivalent employees ) . in 2016 , the irs further expanded enforcement to include nearly every business as required by law , except for certain specific circumstances . employer shared responsibility provisions treatment of different types of worker classification . for purposes of the esrp , ales must identify which of their employees are considered full - time employees and need to be offered health insurance in order to not risk being subject to a penalty . the employer shared responsibility provisions ( esrp ) of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l . 111-148 , as amended ) generally incentivize large employers to offer adequate and affordable health insurance coverage to their full - time employees and their full - time employees' dependents .