those changes are described below . ssa section 1937 does not refer to alternative benefit plans ; instead , it refers to benchmark or benchmark - equivalent coverage . the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) introduced the term alternative benefit plan in lieu of those terms in the preamble to a july 2013 regulation . cms decided to refer to the medicaid benchmark and benchmark - equivalent plans as abps in an effort to prevent confusion regarding the term benchmark , which is used in both the ssa's medicaid regulations and private health insurance market regulations . although the term is used in both contexts , the benchmarks used for purposes of ssa section 1937 abps and for purposes of the private health insurance market are different . in the private insurance market , cms regulations implementing aca requirements concerning the provision of essential health benefits ( ehbs ) in the individual and small - group markets use the term base - benchmark to refer to the specific health insurance plan selected by a state to determine the scope of its ehb package , in keeping with federal ehb benchmark plan guidelines . the following types of health insurance coverage constitute benchmark coverage for purposes of medicaid abps ( abp benchmark options ) : the standard blue cross / blue shield preferred provider option service plan offered through the federal employees health benefit program ( fehbp ) - equivalent health insurance coverage . the health benefits coverage plan offered to state employees . the commercial health maintenance organization ( hmo ) with the largest insured commercial , non - medicaid enrollment in the state . "secretary - approved coverage. the fourth abp benchmark option , secretary - approved coverage , can be any health benefits coverage that the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) , upon application by a state , determines provides appropriate coverage for the proposed population . notably , secretary - approved coverage may correspond to the medicaid state plan benefit package offered in the state . alternatively , states may design and seek cms approval for benchmark - equivalent coverage , which is coverage that a state seeks to offer as an abp that does not correspond precisely to one of the four abp benchmark options listed above . benchmark - equivalent coverage must meet statutory requirements including the following: the coverage must include benefits within each of the following categories: inpatient and outpatient hospital services ; physicians' surgical and medical services ; laboratory and x - ray services ; prescription drugs ; mental health services ; well - baby and well - child care , including age - appropriate immunizations ; and other appropriate preventive services . the coverage must have an aggregate actuarial value equivalent to one of the abp benchmark options . if the benchmark - equivalent coverage includes vision or hearing services , the coverage for these services must have an actuarial value that is at least 75% of the actuarial value of the coverage in that category for the benchmark plan used to measure aggregate actuarial value .