are discussed . it permits negotiation on a cross - sectoral basis , so countries can make a concession in one area of negotiation and receive a concession elsewhere . the method is intended to prevent smaller countries from being "steamrolled" by the demands of larger economies , and helps ensure that each country sees a net benefit in the resulting agreement . on the other hand , arguably , the single undertaking has contributed to the breakdown of the negotiating function under the wto , exemplified by the never - completed doha round , as issues of importance to one country or another served to block consensus at numerous points during the round . some members , including the eu , have called for "flexible multilateralism," based on continued support for full multilateral negotiations where possible , but pursuit of plurilateral agreements on an mfn basis where multilateral consensus is not possible . an important task of the wto is to monitor each member's compliance with various agreements . a wto member is required to notify the secretariat of certain relevant domestic laws or practices so that other members can assess the consistency of wto members' domestic laws , regulations , and actions with wto agreements . required notifications include measures concerning subsidies , agricultural support , quantitative restrictions , technical barriers to trade , and sanitary and phytosanitary standards . compliance with the wto agreement's notification requirements , especially regarding government subsidy programs , has become a serious concern among certain members , including the united states . many wto members are late in submitting their required notifications or do not submit them at all . this effectively prevents other members from fully examining the policies of their trading partners . in response , some members — notably the united states and the eu — have proposed incentives for compliance or sanctions for noncompliance with notification reporting requirements . these include the following: a u.s. proposal to impose a series of sanctions including steps to "name and shame" an offending member , limiting the member from using certain wto resources , and designating a member "inactive. an eu proposal to create a rebuttable presumption that a non - notified subsidy measure is an actionable subsidy or a subsidy causing serious prejudice , thereby allowing a member to challenge the subsidy under wto dispute settlement . an eu proposal to encourage counternotifications — a challenge to the accuracy or existence of another member's notification — against members that do not voluntarily notify on their own . in may and november 2018 , for example , the united states launched counternotifications of india's farm subsidy notifications regarding wheat , rice , and cotton . in november 2018 , the united states , eu , japan , argentina , and costa rica put forward a joint proposal that reflects several of these elements , including penalties for noncompliance . it also specifies exemptions for developing countries that lack capacity and have requested assistance to help fulfill notification obligations . a country's development status can affect the pace at which a country undertakes its wto obligations .