c . §1034 provides whistleblower protections . department of defense ( dod ) implementing guidance for section 1034 can be found in dod directive 7050.06 , military whistleblower protection . in january 2018 , congress passed p.l . section 110 amended the national security act of 1947 and the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 to include provisions to address perceived gaps in protections for ic contractors . the intelligence community whistleblower protection act of 1998 ( icwpa ) was intended to assist whistleblowers in the ic who are specifically excluded from the whistleblower protection act of 1989 . it should be noted that the icwpa makes no explicit mention of members of the armed forces assigned to an ic element . it amended previous acts of congress — the central intelligence agency act of 1949 , and the inspector general act of 1978 — to enable an ic government employee or contractor "who intends to report to congress a complaint or information with respect to an urgent concern" to report to the inspector general ( ig ) of the employee's or contractor's ic agency . congress noted that the absence of this provision in law previously "may have impaired the flow of information needed by the intelligence committees to carry out oversight responsibilities. consequently , the icwpa defines formal processes for submitting complaints that ensure the protection of classified information that may be involved: it requires the ig to report within 14 days all credible complaints to the director of the cia or to the head of the establishment who , in turn , is required to report the complaint to the congressional intelligence committees within 7 days . in the event the ig does not report the complaint or reports it inaccurately , the employee or contractor has the right to submit the complaint to congress directly . this may be done: ( 1 ) after the employee has provided notice to the ig , and ( 2 ) after the employee has obtained from the ig procedures for protecting classified information when contacting the congressional intelligence committees . although the icwpa provides a process for ic whistleblowers — employees and contractors — to securely report complaints to congress via the relevant ic agency ig , it offers no specific provisions for protecting whistleblowers from reprisal or punishment . the iaa for fy2010 ( p.l . 111-259 ) included the first general provisions for protection of whistleblowers as part of legislation that established the office of the inspector general of the intelligence community ( oigic ) , headed by the inspector general of the intelligence community ( igic ) . section 405 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the iaa for fy2010 added a new section 103h to the national security act of 1947 .