similar requirement . the requirement is similar , but not identical , to a corresponding requirement in the ig act . appendix b . selected ig statutory authorities and requirements table b - 1 compares selected statutory authorities and requirements across the four different types of statutory igs in the federal government . unless otherwise noted in bold , the listed authorities and requirements apply to all igs grouped under each type . the table focuses on ig authorities and requirements that are expressly mandated in the applicable authorizing statute . although special igs and other permanent igs in the legislative branch are not created under the ig act , their authorizing statutes incorporate — and therefore make applicable — certain provisions of the ig act . these "incorporation by reference" provisions are subject to some interpretation . even when the authorizing statute for a special ig or other permanent ig in the legislative branch clearly and unequivocally incorporates a specific provision of the ig act , interpretation may vary regarding whether subsequent amendments to that incorporated provision apply to the igs if they occurred after the enactment of the ig's authorizing statute . the list below defines and explains recurring terms included in the table: identical requirement . the requirement is identical to the corresponding requirement in the ig act . the authorizing statutes for the listed igs explicitly state the identical requirement or clearly incorporate the sections of the ig act that contain the requirement . applies to the listed igs . the authorizing statutes for the listed igs explicitly state the similar requirement or clearly incorporate portions of the sections of the ig act that contain the requirement . applies to the listed igs . no similar requirement specified in authorizing statutes . the authorizing statutes for the listed igs do not explicitly state the requirement , nor do they incorporate sections of the ig act containing the requirement . does not apply to listed igs . unclear requirement . the authorizing statutes for the listed igs incorporate the ig act section that includes the requirement , but the requirement was added as an amendment to the ig act after enactment of the authorizing statutes for the listed igs . others have asserted that pas appointments — including converting an ig from agency appointment to a pas appointment — might politicize the ig position and reduce ig effectiveness . similar debates exist regarding ig removal methods . some observers have expressed concern over potential politicization of the ig removal process , which may undermine ig independence . some have suggested that limiting the removal of igs "for cause" could mitigate arbitrary removal ( such as for political reasons ) and enhance ig independence . others have asserted that this limitation might prevent the president or agency heads from removing igs for legitimate reasons ( such as poor performance ) , thus diminishing ig accountability . for example , in a gao report , some permanent igs and oig employees responding to a survey provided several reasons for why acting igs are not less independent than permanent igs .