part 36 . faa established part 36 , as well as additional operating standards applicable to aircraft noise , pursuant to the control and abatement of aircraft noise and sonic boom act of 1968 ( p.l . 90-411 , as amended ) . that act required the faa administrator to prescribe standards and regulations to "afford present and future relief and protection to the public from unnecessary aircraft noise and sonic boom. faa prohibited supersonic flights over land in 1973 , based on the expectation that such flights would cause a sonic boom to reach the ground . faa amended its operating standards in 1989 to allow for the authorization of supersonic flights in a designated test area if the flight is necessary to determine the sonic boom characteristics of an airplane or to establish means of reducing or eliminating the effects of sonic boom ; or to demonstrate the conditions and limitations under which flight at supersonic speeds will not cause a measurable sonic boom overpressure to reach the surface . in 2008 , faa issued a statement updating its policy on noise limits for future civil supersonic aircraft to reflect then - current noise limits . the statement acknowledged that designers and prospective manufacturers of supersonic aircraft had approached faa and icao for guidance on the feasibility of changing operational limitations that prohibited civil supersonic aircraft flight over land . in response , the agency stated , in part , before the faa can address a change in operational restrictions , it needs thorough research to serve as a basis for any regulatory decisions . public involvement will be essential in defining an acceptable sonic boom requirement , and public participation would be part of any potential rulemaking process . while technological advances in supersonic aircraft technology continue , many factors still will need to be addressed . at present , the faa's guidance for supersonic aircraft is the same as for subsonic , that the same noise certification limits apply for supersonic aircraft when flown in subsonic flight configurations . [emphasis added. the final policy statement notes faa's expectation that any rulemaking affecting noise operating rules would propose that any future supersonic airplane produce no greater noise impact on a community than a subsonic airplane . further , faa stated that "noise standards for supersonic operation will be developed as the unique operational flight characteristics of supersonic designs become known and the noise impacts of supersonic flight are shown to be acceptable. between 2009 and 2011 , faa held public meetings and solicited technical information from other federal agencies , industries , universities , and other interested parties on the mitigation of sonic boom from supersonic aircraft . according to faa , it did so in an effort to determine whether there are sufficient new data supported by flight over land . on october 10 , 2018 , faa announced it is initiating two rulemakings relevant to supersonic flights , one to amend domestic noise certification standards for supersonic aircraft and the other to update the operating standards applicable to supersonic flight testing . faa anticipates issuing both proposed rules in 2019 . faa stated that the proposals are intended to streamline and clarify the procedures to obtain faa authorization .