appendix a . trade statistics and resources trade data the u.s. government compiles trade data in four different ways . the data on merchandise or goods trade are first compiled on a census basis . bilateral trade with countries and sectoral data are reported only on a census basis . the census numbers are then adjusted and reported monthly on a balance of payments ( bop ) basis that includes adjustments for valuation , coverage , and timing , and excludes military transactions . the data are finally reported in terms of national income and product accounts ( nipa ) . the nipa data also can be further adjusted to include correcting for inflation to gauge movement in trade volumes as distinct from trade values . conceptually , this procedure is analogous to adjusting macroeconomic data from nominal to real values . specific values can help in understanding the concepts involved . valuation methods are very important in trade data evaluation . the census bureau also reports imports on a c.i.f . ( cost , insurance , and freight ) basis , which includes the value of insurance , international shipping , and other charges incurred in bringing merchandise to u.s. ports of entry . the customs ( or f.a.s. — free alongside ship ) data do not include these supplementary costs . u.s. import data are reported on a customs basis with insurance and freight charges counted in u.s. services trade . other countries , however , commonly report merchandise import figures that include insurance and freight charges . this tends to overstate their imports and understate their trade surpluses with the united states . for analysis of specific industries or sectors , the classification system used is also important . the u.s. harmonized tariff schedule ( hts ) identifies products by a 10-digit number in order to assign duty rates . do the costs of international trade outweigh the benefits to the u.s. economy ? if so , should the united states suspend or reverse past u.s. efforts to liberalize u.s. and international trade ? members of congress could reevaluate trade policy as a whole to determine if it has benefitted or harmed u.s. interests , and they could reserve the opportunity to renegotiate trade agreements if trading partners fail to honor their commitments . this approach would aim to protect u.s. national sovereignty over matters pertaining to u.s. economic welfare and national security . opponents of this approach have argued that it is very difficult , if not impossible , to determine the impact of trade negotiations and agreements on economic trends ( e.g . the level of employment , the u.s. trade deficit , etc .

 ) , because so many other factors play a role . they also argue that revisiting and renegotiating trade agreements could undermine the credibility of the united states as a trading partner . has u.s. trade policy failed to address effectively foreign protectionist practices and enhance reciproc al market access for u.s. firms , workers , and exports ? if so , should the united states only support greater international economic integration if it provides for a "level playing field" ?