appendix a . national and international educational assessments: authorization and oversight provisions appendix b . additional resources on national and international assessments for more information on naep: https: / / nces.ed.gov / nationsreportcard / for more information on timss: https: / / nces.ed.gov / timss / https: / / iea.nl / timss / for more information on pirls: https: / / nces.ed.gov / surveys / pirls / https: / / iea.nl / pirls / for more information on pisa: https: / / nces.ed.gov / surveys / pisa / http: / / www.oecd.org / pisa / for more information on the coordination of naep and international assessments: https: / / nces.ed.gov / nationsreportcard / about / international.aspx other crs reports on assessment in elementary and secondary education: crs in focus if11021 , national and international educational assessments crs report r45048 , basic concepts and technical considerations in educational assessment: a primer crs report r45049 , educational assessment and the elementary and secondary education act appendix c. glossary of acronyms ccss: common core state standards ed: u.s. department of education el: english learner esea: elementary and secondary education act esra: education sciences reform act ( p.l . 107-279 , title i ) essa: every student succeeds act ( p.l . 114-95 ) fims: first international math study gdp: gross domestic product iea: international association for the evaluation of educational achievement ltt naep: long - term trends national assessment of educational progress naep: national assessment of educational progress naepaa: national assessment of educational progress assessment act ( p.l . 107-279 , title iii ) nagb: national assessment governing board nces: national center for education statistics nclb: no child left behind act ( p.l . of a nation decreased or remained the same . if naep and timss both measure 8 th grade mathematics , are those results comparable ? if naep and pirls both measure 4 th grade reading , are those results comparable ? as international test scores increased , the creativity indicator also increased . the answers to these questions largely depend on the alignment between assessments and the purpose of the comparison . the following section of the report discusses some of the alignment studies that have been conducted and the usefulness of making comparisons across large - scale assessments . as previously discussed , students already participate in myriad assessments at the state and local levels , including state assessments in reading , mathematics , and science required under esea title i - a . these state assessments must be aligned with state standards in the relevant subject areas . from a policy perspective , this raises obvious questions about why the united states participates in naep and international large - scale assessments when data on student performance are available from a multitude of other assessments . while there are several reasons that the united states chooses to administer naep and to participate in international large - scale assessments , there are several factors that limit the use of national and international assessment results in shaping education policy . in addition , it is unclear whether student achievement on international assessments may be related to economic prosperity and whether increasing student achievement on these assessments may be linked to improvements in a country's economic health .