the number of excepted and furloughed personnel varied by agency . as previously discussed , nrcs funds technical assistance and related agency staff through both mandatory and discretionary accounts . as such , nrcs was initially able to claim as excepted 100% of its 9,342 staff using mandatory conservation program funding authorized through the farm bill ( and therefore not affected by the lapse in discretionary appropriations ) , and discretionary carryover funding from prior fiscal years . as the shutdown continued , however , nrcs announced its intention to furlough some employees beginning on february 3 , 2019 , to conserve carryover balances and focus excepted staff on mandatory farm bill conservation program implementation . this plan was not implemented because the shutdown ended on january 25 , 2019 . generally , congress employs two separate types of legislative measures — authorizations and appropriations . authorization acts establish , continue , or modify agencies or programs . appropriations acts generally provide discretionary funding for authorized agencies and programs . while this practice is infrequent and subject to various procedural rules and limitations , the agriculture appropriations bill may serve as a vehicle for amendments to authorized programs that permanently alter or create programs . these amendments generally have the force of law by amending the u.s. code or by creating a permanent authorization . this is different from policy - related provisions ( discussed in the " policy - related provisions " section ) , which generally direct how the executive branch should carry out the appropriations and whose effect is typically limited to the current fiscal year . in some cases , the 2018 farm bill further amended the conservation programs that were amended in the fy2018 appropriations act . where relevant , these amendments are noted ; however , the focus is on amendments made in appropriations acts . in addition to setting budgetary amounts , the agriculture appropriations bill may also include policy - related provisions that direct how the executive branch should carry out an appropriation . these provisions may have the force of law if they are included in the text of an appropriations act , but their effect is generally limited to the current fiscal year ( see table 3 ) . unlike the aforementioned authorization amendments that may be included in appropriations acts , policy - related provisions generally do not amend the u.s. code or have long - standing effects . for example , the wfpo program has historically been called the "small watershed program," because no project may exceed 250,000 acres , and no structure may exceed more than 12,500 acre - feet of floodwater detention capacity or 25,000 acre - feet of total capacity . the fy2018 and fy2019 enacted appropriations also include a policy provision that waives the 250,000-acre project limit when the project's primary purpose is something other than flood prevention . this provision does not amend the wfpo authorization and therefore is effective only for the funds provided during the appropriation year . table 3 compares some of the policy provisions that have been identified in the farm production and conservation programs ( title ii ) and general provisions ( title vii ) titles of the fy2018 and fy2019 agriculture appropriations bills related to conservation .