89-329 , as amended ) . hea title ii - a includes financial support and accountability provisions intended to improve programs that prepare teachers before they reach the classroom . title ii - a consists of two major components: ( 1 ) a competitive grant program that supports certain reforms in a small number of programs that prepare prospective teachers , and ( 2 ) reporting and accountability provisions that require states to track and report on the quality of all teacher preparation programs within their jurisdiction . the 115 th congress has already taken steps to consider a reauthorization of the hea . one comprehensive reauthorization bill , h.r . 115-14 ) nullifying regulations that had been issued in october 2016 . the new regulations would have retained current reporting and accountability requirements and added three main elements: ( 1 ) clearer guidance on what constitutes a provider versus a program , ( 2 ) new post - program completion measures , and ( 3 ) additional penalties for poor performance . congress may continue to consider legislation that would reauthorize the hea , including the provisions in title ii . some of the issues that may receive consideration during this process include the following: the appropriate role for the federal government to play in supporting innovations and reforms for teacher preparation programs ; the optimal mix of tqp authorized activities such as support for clinical practice , induction , mentoring , and pre - service assessment ; and the extent to which current reporting and accountability provisions encourage program quality . some argue that the current federal role in supporting teacher preparation is far too limited and that the current tqp program primarily amounts to supporting demonstration projects . this perspective asserts that a lot is known about what good teacher preparation looks like and that the federal role should be greatly expanded to support quality programs broadly . on the other hand , others argue that responsibility for teacher training should remain a state , local , and training institution endeavor and that the federal government should have no role in the support of standards for teacher preparation . in between these views , there is debate over the optimal mix of activities currently supported under the tqp program . those who favor traditional routes to teaching would often like to see greater support for enhancements to those programs , including support for supervised clinical practice and assessments that must be passed prior to becoming a teacher . those favoring alternative routes often want fewer restrictions on tqp partners ( i.e. , allowing nonprofit organizations to serve as primary , not just supplemental , partners ) and want more emphasis placed in the tqp program on in - service supports such as induction and mentoring for teachers . some argue for the expansion of federal policy around program quality and that current reporting and accountability provisions do not adequately hold teacher preparation programs to high standards . they cite as evidence the fact that less than 3% of programs have been identified as being low - performing and that three - fifths of the states have never identified a program in this manner .