quantum computing is not just "faster" than classical computing . it is not useful for many types of problems where a classical supercomputer would excel . however , there are certain tasks for which the power of quantum computing is unmatched , such as code breaking . this power is derived from quantum computing's use of "qubits" or "quantum bits. whereas classical computing uses "bits" for data processing , quantum computing uses qubits . the practical difference between a bit and a qubit is that a bit can only exist in one of two states at a time , usually represented by a 1 and a 0 , whereas a qubit can exist in both states at one time . this is a phenomenon called "superposition" and it is what allows the power of a quantum computer to grow exponentially with the addition of each bit . two bits in a classical computer provides four possible combinations — 00 , 01 , 11 , and 10 , but only one combination at a time . two bits in a quantum computer provides for the same four possibilities , but , because of superposition , the qubits can represent all four states at the same time , making the quantum computer four times as powerful as the classical computer . so , adding a bit to a classical computer increases its power linearly , but adding a qubit to a quantum computer increases its power exponentially — doubling power with the addition of each qubit . quantum computing , for all its promise , is still a developing technology ( along with other quantum applications ) . assembling a working quantum computer is much more difficult than assembling a classical computer . the difficulty is caused by the narrow set of conditions that must exist for a quantum computer to work . for example , the temperature must be exactly 1 / 100 th of a degree above absolute zero . also , the slightest vibration can cause a qubit to lose its superposition . until systems can be developed to maintain the ideal conditions to maintain a qubit , many quantum systems will remain theoretical in nature . although much of the press coverage of qis has been devoted to quantum computing , there is more to qis . the government's interest in qis dates back at least to the mid - 1990s , when the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) and the department of defense ( dod ) held their first workshops on the topic . qis is first mentioned in the fy2008 budget of what is now the networking and information technology research and development program and has been a component of the program since then . some of the funding instability has been attributed to insufficient coordination among federal agencies , which has led to uncertainty in university research programs . in september 2018 , the department of energy ( doe ) announced that it had committed $218 million to 85 research projects lasting from two to five years . also in september 2018 , the national science foundation ( nsf ) announced that it had awarded $31 million in grants to 33 projects .