115-141 , division a ) . both the house and the senate appropriations committees have reported agriculture appropriations bills for fy2019 ( h.r . the senate amended and passed its version as division c of a four - bill minibus ( h.r . the final appropriation for fy2019 is pending , and current funding is authorized under a continuing resolution ( p.l . 115-245 ) through december 7 , 2018 . the enacted fy2018 appropriation and both the fy2019 house - reported bill and the senate - passed bill include funding for food safety programs and related activities at fda and usda . this report provides a brief overview of the fy2018 and fy2019 appropriations that address food safety activities at fda and fsis . the agency's meat and poultry inspection program conducts continual inspections at federal meat and poultry plants . fsis also ensures that meat and poultry products imported to the united states are produced under standards equivalent to u.s. inspection standards and facilitates the certification of regulated products . table 3 compares selected policy provisions that have been identified in the agriculture programs ( title i ) , the related agencies and food and drug administration ( title vi ) , and general provisions ( title vii ) titles of the fy2018 agriculture appropriations act and the fy2019 agriculture appropriations bills related to federal food safety activities at both fda and fsis . many of these provisions have been included in past years' appropriations acts . table 4 compares selected policy provisions in the fy2018 and the fy2019 agriculture appropriations report language or explanatory statements related to federal food safety activities at both fda and fsis . the program plays a major food safety role , ensuring that the nation's food supply , quality of foods , food ingredients , and dietary supplements ( and also cosmetic products ) are safe , sanitary , nutritious , wholesome , and properly labeled . numerous federal , state , and local agencies share responsibilities for regulating the safety of the u.s. food supply . federal responsibility for food safety rests primarily with fda and fsis . fda , an agency of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , is responsible for ensuring the safety of the majority of all domestic and imported food products ( except for meat and poultry products ) . fsis , an agency at usda , regulates most meat , poultry , and processed egg products . roughly speaking , fsis regulates about 10% - 20% of the u.s. food supply , while fda is responsible for the remaining 80% - 90% . combined appropriations covering food safety activities at both fda and usda totaled nearly $2.1 billion in fy2018 , which is roughly split between the two agencies ( figure 1 , table 1 ) . this funding distribution reflects greater increases in congressional appropriations for fda compared with fsis since fy2011 . the enacted fy2018 appropriation for fda's food safety activities provided $1,041.6 million . for fsis , the fy2018 appropriation provided $1,056.8 million . annual appropriations for fda and usda are augmented by existing ( currently authorized ) user fees .