it then presents trend data on employment - based immigration . those who favor eliminating the per - country cap contend that such circumstances effectively encourage employers to sponsor prospective employment - based immigrants primarily from india . according to this perspective , de facto discrimination results on the basis of origin country , fostered partly by u.s. laws which otherwise prohibit most forms of labor market discrimination . the more that employers follow this hiring approach , the greater the queue of indian prospective immigrants and the longer the waiting times for acquiring lpr status , creating a self - reinforcing cycle that may limit hiring of prospective employment - based immigrants from other countries . , the "yoder amendment" to the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2019 ( h.r . those who favor raising or eliminating the employment - based per - country ceiling argue that the current employment - based immigration system makes prospective employment - based immigrants wait for excessively long periods to acquire lpr status . during these waits , such foreign workers are generally unable to reunite with spouses and children who reside overseas . others who favor eliminating the per - country ceiling contend that the current system discriminates against some foreign workers based on their country of origin , a characteristic they contend has little bearing on workers' labor market contributions . such proponents argue that the current system effectively ties immigrant workers to the employers that sponsor them for extended periods and invites potential exploitation . according to this perspective , employers who petition on behalf of prospective employment - based immigrants have disproportionate power over them . because such employers can withdraw their petitions at will , they discourage foreign workers from negotiating for higher wages and / or improved working conditions . all else being equal , rational employers therefore benefit financially by sponsoring such workers who remain relatively immobile during their extensive waits to receive lpr status . prospective immigrants who consider leaving their employers face the prospect of effectively forfeiting their pending employment - based immigrant petitions . humanitarian assistance occurs primarily through the u.s. refugee and asylum programs . origin - country diversity occurs primarily through the diversity immigrant visa . this report focuses on the second lpr pathway noted above , employment - based immigration . employment - based immigrants enter the united states through one of five preference categories , each with its own eligibility requirements and numerical limitations and , in some cases , different application processes . in addition to the numerical limits imposed upon each preference category , employment - based immigrants face a per - country ceiling , or "cap," that limits the number of immigrants from any single country of origin to 7% of the annual limit for each of the five preference categories . this limitation was imposed to prevent any one country or handful of countries from dominating the flow of employment - based immigration to the united states . the numerical limits imposed upon each preference category , combined with the per - country ceiling , mean that employment - based immigrants from certain countries can face considerable waits before they can acquire lpr status .