they are discussed in alphabetical order . created by the bonneville project act of 1937 ( 16 u.s.c . §832 ) just before the completion of two large dams in the pacific northwest — bonneville dam in 1938 and grand coulee dam in 1941 — bpa was the first pma . though it serves a smaller geographical area , bpa is on par with wapa ( which serves the largest area ) in the size of its transmission system . the agency operates and maintains about 75% of the high voltage transmission lines in its service territory , which includes idaho , oregon , washington , western montana and small parts of eastern montana , california , nevada , utah , and wyoming . bpa also markets wholesale electricity from 31 federally owned hydropower facilities in the northwest . these generation facilities are owned both by the corps and bor . bpa differs from the other three pmas in that it is self - financed: it receives no federal appropriations . since passage of the federal columbia river transmission system act of 1974 ( 16 u.s.c . §838 ) , bpa has covered its operating costs through power rates set to ensure repayment to the treasury of capital and interest on funds used to construct the columbia river power system . bpa also has permanent treasury borrowing authority , which it may use for capital on large projects . this money is repaid with interest , through power sales . as of 2018 , bpa had $5.53 billion of bonds outstanding to the u.s. treasury , with bpa's current borrowing authority capped by congress at $7.70 billion . bpa has also looked at other financing options as it approaches its debt limit , looking at nonfederal debt refinancing , lease - purchases , and other asset management strategies . the southeastern power administration was created in 1950 by the secretary of the interior to carry out the functions assigned to the secretary by the flood control act of 1944 ( p.l . 78-534 ) in 11 states ( alabama , florida , georgia , illinois , kentucky , mississippi , north carolina , south carolina , tennessee , virginia , and west virginia ) . sepa is unique among the four pmas in two ways . it is the smallest pma , with just over 40 employees , and , unlike the other three agencies , sepa does not operate or maintain any transmission facilities , and thus contracts with other utilities for transmitting the federal power it markets to more than 12 million consumers . section 5 of the flood control act of 1944 ( p.l . 78-534 ) established the southwestern power administration . swpa markets hydroelectric power in arkansas , kansas , louisiana , missouri , oklahoma , and texas from 24 multipurpose corps dams with a combined capacity of 2,194 mw . swpa serves more than 100 preference customer utilities with more than 8 million end - use customers . the agency manages nearly 1,400 miles of high - voltage transmission lines .