appendix a . affirmative asylum applications table a - 1 provides the underlying data for figure 1 on new affirmative asylum applications filed annually with uscis since fy1995 . table a - 2 expands on the data in table a - 1 to show the top 10 nationalities filing new affirmative asylum applications annually since fy2007 . for each of the top 10 nationalities for each year , table a - 2 provides a rank and a percentage of all applications that were filed by applicants of that nationality . the table also includes annual data on the total number of applications filed by all applicants ( the latter totals match the data in table a - 1 ) . as shown in table a - 2 , the top four nationalities filing new affirmative asylum applications in fy2007 ( china , haiti , mexico , and guatemala ) remained in the top 10 throughout the period , with china holding the top spot in all years except fy2017 and fy2018 . between fy2009 and fy2012 , chinese nationals filed one - third of all new affirmative asylum applications each year . in fy2017 and fy2018 , however , china's rank fell to 2 nd and 4 th , respectively . in each of those two years , venezuelans filed more new affirmative asylum applications than nationals of any other country , accounting for one - fifth of all applications filed in fy2017 and more than a quarter of the total in fy2018 . since fy2015 , nationals of venezuela and four other latin american countries ( guatemala , el salvador , mexico , and honduras ) have accounted for five of the top six nationalities filing new affirmative asylum applications each year . appendix b. uscis asylum decisions and credible fear findings table b - 1 provides the underlying data for figure 2 on uscis decisions on affirmative asylum applications issued annually from fy2009 through fy2017 . it also includes an additional small outcome category ( cases dismissed ) . these are cases where the applicant did not appear for fingerprinting / biometrics collection . for the cases referred to an immigration judge ( which involve applicants without lawful status ) , table b - 1 distinguishes among three mutually exclusive subcategories: cases that were interviewed by uscis ; cases that were interviewed by uscis where the applicant did not meet the filing deadline ; and cases that were not interviewed by uscis . ( the referrals "total" column in table b - 1 matches the referrals data displayed in figure 2 . ) in addition to deciding affirmative asylum cases , uscis is tasked with assessing the credible fear of persecution claims made by individuals in expedited removal . table b - 2 and table b - 3 provide the underlying credible fear - related data for figure 4 . table b - 2 contains data on referrals of credible fear claims to uscis and uscis completions of these cases . the protocol eliminated that date restriction . it also provided that the refugee definition would apply without geographic limitation , while allowing for some exceptions .