the coast guard authorization act of 2018 ( p.l . the surface transportation inspector program has been a focus of congressional interest . issues of concern to congress have included whether the inspectors promoted from screening passengers at airports have sufficient expertise in surface transportation security ; the administrative challenge of having the surface inspectors managed by airport - based federal security directors who themselves typically have no surface transportation experience ; and the security value of the tasks performed by surface inspectors . the number of surface inspectors declined from 404 in fy2011 to 222 ( full - time equivalent positions ) in fy2018 . tsa attributed the decrease to efficiencies achieved through focusing efforts on the basis of risk . however , in 2017 gao reported that surface transportation inspectors were spending more time on the surface transportation mode that tsa had identified as the lowest risk than on the one identified as the highest risk . surface inspection field offices are located near airports , and surface inspectors may spend a significant portion of their time on tasks related to aviation safety , but tsa does not have complete information on the extent to which surface inspectors are tasked to work on aviation security . gao reported in 2014 that lack of guidance to tsa's surface inspectors resulted in inconsistent reporting of rail security incidents and that tsa had not consistently enforced the requirement that rail agencies report security incidents , resulting in poor data on the number and types of incidents . gao also found that tsa did not have a systematic process for collecting and addressing feedback from surface transportation stakeholders regarding the effectiveness of its information - sharing effort . in a 2015 hearing , gao testified that tsa had put processes in place to address these issues . dhs provides grants for security improvements for public transit , passenger rail , and occasionally other surface transportation modes under the transit security grant program . the vast majority of the funding goes to public transit providers . crs estimates that , on an inflation - adjusted basis , funding for this program has declined 84% since 2009 , when congress allocated $150 million in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , in addition to routine appropriations ( see table 1 ) . in a 2012 report , gao found potential for duplication among four dhs state and local security grant programs with similar goals , one of which was the public transportation security grant program . despite this finding , congress has not supported consolidation of the programs , though appropriators have expressed concern that grant programs have not focused on areas of highest risk and that significant amounts of previously appropriated funds have not yet been awarded to recipients . 114-50 , congress directed tsa to ensure that all passenger transportation providers it considers as having high - risk facilities have in place plans to respond to active shooters , acts of terrorism , or other security - related incidents that target passengers . the challenges of securing rail passengers are dwarfed by the challenge of securing bus passengers . there are some 76,000 buses carrying 19 million passengers each weekday in the united states .