prefix ) . 1777 ( presidential allowance modernization act of 2016 ) and s. 2040 ( justice against sponsors of terrorism act ) . suspension is , however , the most common procedure used to consider minority - sponsored legislation in the house by a wide margin . in the 114 th congress , 85% of the minority - sponsored measures that were considered on the house floor were raised under the suspension procedure . members of the house or senate minority parties sponsored 31% of all suspension measures originating in either chamber , compared to 9% of legislation subject to different procedures , including privileged business ( 17 measures ) , unanimous consent ( 21 measures ) , and special rules ( one senate bill ) . suspension motions are in order on designated days . as rule xv states , "the speaker may not entertain a motion that the house suspend the rules except on mondays , tuesdays , and wednesdays and during the last six days of a session of congress. however , in most instances , a true opponent never claims half the time , and most speakers come to the floor to express support for the measure . debate time is controlled by two floor managers , one from each party , who sit on a committee of jurisdiction . each manager makes an opening statement and may yield increments of the 20 minutes they control to other members to debate the measure . once debate has concluded , a single vote is held on the motion to suspend the rules and pass the measure . the motion requires approval by "two - thirds of the members voting , a quorum being present. should the vote fall short of the two - thirds required for passage ( 290 , if all members vote ) , the measure is not permanently rejected . before the end of the congress , the house may consider the measure again under suspension , or the committee on rules may report a special rule that provides for floor consideration of the measure . as illustrated in figure 1 , the majority of measures considered on the house floor during the 114 th congress were called up under the suspension of the rules procedure . sixty - two percent of all measures that received floor action were considered under suspension ( 743 out of the 1,200 ) , compared to those under the terms of a special rule ( 14% ) , unanimous consent ( 7% ) , or privileged business ( 16% ) . figure 2 displays the form of suspension measures . most of the measures considered under suspension during the 114 th congress ( 94% ) were bills . house bills made up 83% of the suspension total , senate bills 11% . as represented in figure 3 , most suspension measures were sponsored by members of the majority party during the 114 th congress . house or senate majority - party members sponsored 69% of all bills and resolutions initially considered in the house under suspension , while house majority - party members sponsored 467 ( 71% ) of the 660 house - originated measures ( designated with an h.r.