an option for congress , such as h.r . 731 ( 116 th congress ) , is to require tifia loans to be considered part of the nonfederal share of surface transportation projects . some project sponsors have stated that the process for obtaining tifia assistance led them not to seek tifia loans . a number of proposals have been suggested to speed up approvals , such as regular and more frequent dot credit council meetings , increased administrative spending to more quickly assess applications , regular publication of information on the time it takes to reach application milestones , and changes to the letter of interest process to provide greater schedule certainty . the fast act required dot to expedite projects thought to be lower - risk — those requesting $100 million or less in credit assistance with a dedicated revenue stream unrelated to project performance and standard loan terms — but it is not clear what effect this could have , as only two projects have received tifia loans of less than $100 million since the passage of the fast act . s. 3631 ( 115 th congress ) proposed additional criteria for expedited loans for public agency borrowers . the share of loans that have been fully repaid is about 15% . many of the projects that have received assistance are permitted to defer interest and principal payments and have very long amortization schedules , so there is still a great deal of uncertainty as to how they will perform over the long term . for example , the i - 495 high occupancy toll ( hot ) lanes project in northern virginia received credit assistance in 2007 and the lanes opened in 2012 , but interest payments did not begin until 2017 . principal repayments are not scheduled to begin until 2032 , and are to continue until loan maturity in 2047 . ultimately , decisions about the level of risk that the tifia program is willing to take are made by dot's credit council and the secretary of transportation within the limits of the program's statutory requirements . however , a critic of tifia's decisions on risk has suggested developing "an underlying risk framework and underwriting standards within which loans can be negotiated," and "creating a federal advisory committee to evaluate industry trends and periodically assess the effectiveness of tifia's risk framework in meeting its policy objectives. map - 21 greatly enlarged the tifia program and at the same time raised the maximum federal share from 33% to 49% of eligible project costs . however , dot announced after the statutory change that it would typically provide up to 33% and would provide amounts between 33% and 49% only in exceptional circumstances . to date , no project has received more than 33% . tifia appears to be maximizing its leveraging of nonfederal resources , but it may be limiting the projects that could use a larger share of tifia assistance . for example , the american public transportation association has argued that an increased federal share "would enable tifia credit assistance to meaningfully support certain projects with large public benefits that may be difficult to finance conventionally without federal credit support , while still ensuring other investors share in project costs and risks.