countries vary in their policies and laws on these issues . the united states has traditionally supported open data flows and has regulated privacy at a sectoral level to cover data , such as health records , rather than create a comprehensive policy . u.s. trade policy has sought to balance the goals of consumer privacy , security , and open commerce , including eliminating trade barriers and opening markets . individuals often want to control who accesses their data and how it is used . experts suggest that data may therefore be considered both a benefit and a liability that organizations hold . data has value , but an organization takes on risk by collecting personal data ; they become responsible for protecting users' privacy and not misusing the information . data privacy concerns may become more urgent as the amount of online information organizations access and collect , and the level of global data flows , continue to expand . other countries are developing data privacy policies that affect international trade as some governments or groups seek to limit data flows outside of an organization or across national borders for a number of reasons . blocking international data flows may impede the ability of a firm to do business or of an individual to conduct a transaction , creating a form of trade protectionism . research demonstrates not only the economic gains from digital trade and international data flows , but also the real economic costs of restrictions on such flows . for many policymakers , the crux of the issue is: how can governments protect individual privacy in the least trade - restrictive way possible ? the question is similar to concerns raised about ensuring cybersecurity while allowing the free flow of data . in recent years , congress has examined multiple issues related to cross - border data flows and online privacy . in the 115 th congress , congressional committees held hearings on these topics , introduced multiple bills , and conducted oversight over federal laws on related issues such as data breach notification . members are introducing new bills and holding hearings in the 116 th congress . organizations value consumers' personal online data for a variety of reasons . for example , companies may seek to facilitate business transactions , analyze marketing information , detect disease patterns from medical histories , discover fraudulent payments , improve proprietary algorithms , or develop competitive innovations . some analysts compare data to oil or gold , but unlike those valuable substances , data can be reused , analyzed , shared , and combined with other information ; it is not a scarce resource . however , personal data is considered personal private property . congress may consider the proposed u.s. - mexico - canada agreement ( usmca ) and examine the digital trade chapter as an example of how to address the issues through trade agreements . there are no comprehensive multilateral rules specifically about privacy or cross - border data flows .