only a portion of this water has been developed . congress likely will face the decision of whether to fund development of previously authorized infrastructure associated with indian water rights settlements in the colorado river basin . for example , the ongoing navajo - gallup water supply project is being built to serve the jicarilla apache nation , the navajo nation , and the city of gallup , new mexico . §§4321 et seq. ) for example , in the 116 th congress , h.r . and the endangered species act ( esa ; 87 stat . thus , many of the environmental impacts associated with the development of basin resources were not originally taken into account . over time , multiple efforts have been initiated to mitigate these effects . some of the highest - profile efforts have been associated with water quality ( in particular , salinity control ) and the effects of facility operations on endangered species . twenty - two federally recognized tribes in the colorado river basin have quantified water diversion rights that have been confirmed by court decree or final settlement . these tribes collectively possess rights to 2.9 maf per year of colorado river water . however , as of 2015 , these tribes typically were using just over half of their quantified rights . additionally , 13 other basin tribes have reserved water rights claims that have yet to be resolved . increased water use by tribes with existing water rights , and / or future settlement of claims and additional consumptive use of basin waters by other tribes , is likely to exacerbate the competition for basin water resources . the potential for increased use of tribal water rights ( which , once ratified , are counted toward state - specific allocations where the tribal reservation is located ) has been studied in recent years . in 2014 , reclamation , working with a group of 10 tribes with significant reserved water rights claims on the colorado river , initiated a study known as the 10 tribes study . the study , published in 2018 , estimated that , cumulatively , the 10 tribes could have reserved water rights ( including unresolved claims ) to divert nearly 2.8 maf per year . drought conditions throughout the basin have raised concerns about potential negative impacts on water supplies . of these water rights , approximately 2 maf per year were decreed and an additional 785,273 af ( mostly in the upper basin ) remained unresolved . the report estimated that , overall , the 10 tribes are diverting ( i.e. , making use of ) almost 1.5 maf of their 2.8 maf in resolved and unresolved claims . table 1 shows these figures at the basin and sub - basin levels . according to the study , the majority of unresolved claims in the upper basin are associated with the ute tribe in utah ( 370,370 af per year ) , the navajo nation in utah ( 314,926 af ) , and the navajo nation in the upper basin in arizona ( 77,049 af ) .