all subgroups were not examined in all evaluations . 112-10 are discussed second . as previously discussed , the evaluations were required to use the strongest possible research design for determining the effects of the dc osp . the use of lotteries in the dc osp allowed the evaluation to use the "gold standard" of evaluation , which is randomization . the lottery created two randomly selected groups: students who were selected to receive a scholarship ( treatment group ) and students who applied for but were not selected to receive a scholarship ( control group ) . for those students who received a scholarship , some students chose to use the scholarship ( scholarship use group ) and some students chose not to use the scholarship ( scholarship offer group ) . the evaluations use three groups to determine the effectiveness of the program ( two treatment groups and one control group ) : ( 1 ) students who were offered a scholarship ( scholarship offer group ) , ( 2 ) students who used a scholarship ( scholarship use group ) , and ( 3 ) students who were not offered a scholarship ( control group ) . for the purposes of the evaluation , the scholarship offer group and the scholarship use group are considered treatment groups . treatment groups and the control group were compared on the following outcome measures: ( 1 ) reading and mathematics achievement on a grade - appropriate , nationally norm - referenced standardized test ; ( 2 ) parent and student satisfaction ( surveys ) ; ( 3 ) parent and student perceptions of school safety ( surveys ) ; and ( 4 ) parental involvement ( surveys ) . the effects of each outcome measure were disaggregated by several subgroups . across the four evaluation studies , subgroups included the following: ( 1 ) students who previously attended a school in need of improvement ( sini ) , ( 2 ) students who did not attend a sini ( non - sini ) , ( 3 ) students in elementary school , ( 4 ) students in secondary school , ( 5 ) students who had lower levels of achievement ( below the median ) when entering the scholarship program , ( 6 ) students who had higher levels of achievement ( above the median ) when entering the scholarship program , ( 7 ) male students , ( 8 ) female students , ( 9 ) students in cohort 1 ( students who applied in 2004 ) , and ( 10 ) students in cohort 2 ( students who applied in 2005 ) . the following section discusses the results of the four impact evaluations , comparing the treatment groups ( scholarship offer and scholarship use groups ) to the control group ( scholarship not offered ) on the four outcome measures . appendix d provides summary tables describing the results of the four impact evaluations conducted by ed .