colombia . the act provides "not less than" $418.3 million for colombia , which is nearly $153 million more than the administration requested and $27 million more than congress appropriated in fy2018 . the joint explanatory statement notes that the additional funding for fy2019 , appropriated through the incle account , is intended to "bolster colombia's drug eradication and interdiction efforts and enhance rural security. mexico . according to the joint explanatory statement , the act provides $162.7 million for mexico . that amount is nearly $84 million more than the administration requested and $10 million more than congress appropriated for mexico in fy2018 . the additional funding for fy2019 is intended to support security and rule - of - law efforts , such as "programs to assist the government of mexico in securing its borders and reducing poppy cultivation and heroin and synthetic drug production. venezuela . the act provides "not less than" $17.5 million for programs to promote democracy and the rule of law in venezuela . the joint explanatory statement notes that the legislation also includes assistance for venezuelan refugees and migrants who have been forced to leave the country . inter - american foundation . the act provides $22.5 million for the iaf , which is the same amount congress appropriated for the agency in fy2018 . the joint explanatory statement designates an additional $10 million , appropriated through the da account , as a transfer to the iaf to carry out programs in central america . the trump administration's efforts to scale back u.s. foreign assistance could have significant implications for u.s. policy in latin america and the caribbean in the coming years . in particular , they could accelerate u.s. efforts to transition countries in the region away from traditional development assistance and toward other forms of bilateral engagement . they also could result in the department of defense ( dod ) taking on a larger role in u.s. security cooperation with the region . the fy2019 budget request would have zeroed out traditional development assistance for brazil , jamaica , and nicaragua , and would have reduced it significantly for several other countries in the region . although it appears as though many of those reductions were not enacted in the consolidated appropriations act , 2019 ( p.l . 116-6 ) , the administration may push for further cuts in the coming years . the administration's national security strategy , released in december 2017 , asserts that the united states "will shift away from a reliance on assistance based on grants to approaches that attract private capital and catalyze private sector activity. likewise , usaid has begun to reorient all of its country partnerships around the concept of "self - reliance," placing a greater emphasis on supporting countries' abilities to plan , finance , and implement solutions to their own development challenges . some development experts caution that such transitions should be done in a strategic manner to ensure that partner countries are able to sustain the progress that has been made with past u.s. investments and to prevent ruptures in bilateral relations that could be exploited by competing powers or compromise u.s. interests .