4537 as it passed the house . the house - passed version of s. 488 was not taken up by the senate in the 115 th congress . 4537 as passed by the house and s. 488 as passed by the house would have instituted a number of requirements relating to international insurance standards and insurance covered agreements . u.s. federal representatives in international fora would have been directed not to agree to any proposal that does not recognize the u.s. system as satisfying that proposal . such representatives would have been required to consult and coordinate with the state insurance regulators and with congress prior to and during negotiations and to submit a report to congress prior to entering into an agreement . with regard to future covered agreements , the bill would have required u.s. negotiators to provide congressional access to negotiating texts and to "closely consult and coordinate with state insurance commissioners. it would have placed fio specifically within the office of international affairs and narrowed its function in international issues to representing the treasury rather than all of the united states . it also would have required fio to reach a consensus with the states on international matters . section 211 of p.l . 115-174 finds that the treasury , federal reserve , and fio director shall support transparency in international insurance fora and shall "achieve consensus positions with state insurance regulators through the [naic]" when taking positions in international fora . it creates an "insurance policy advisory committee on international capital standards and other insurance issues" at the federal reserve made up of 21 members with expertise on various aspects of insurance . the federal reserve and the department of the treasury are to complete an annual report and to provide testimony on the ongoing discussions at the iais through 2022 , and the federal reserve and fio are to complete a study and report , along with the opportunity for public comment and review by the government accountability office ( gao ) , on the impact of international capital standards or other proposals prior to agreeing to such standards . unlike s. 1360 , however , the enacted law does not have specific requirements on the final text of any international capital standard . after signing s. 2155 , the president released a statement indicating that the congressional directions in the findings contravene the president's "exclusive constitutional authority to determine the time , scope , and objectives of international negotiations" but that the president will "give careful and respectful consideration to the preferences expressed by the congress in section 211 ( a ) and will consult with state officials as appropriate. international insurance standards act ( h.r . 4537 / s. 488 , title xiv ) representative sean duffy , along with seven cosponsors , introduced h.r . 4537 on december 4 , 2017 . ( a substantially similar bill , h.r . 3762 , was previously introduced and addressed in an october 24 , 2017 , hearing by the house financial services' subcommittee on housing and insurance. ) 4537 was marked up and ordered reported on a vote of 56-4 by the house committee on financial services on december 12-13 , 2017 . it was reported ( h.rept .