the constitution governs pretrial detention and bail . some of these latter restrictions have been challenged legally . in contrast , federal law creates a rebuttable presumption that favors ( but does not compel ) detention of persons charged with certain offenses when a judge or magistrate determines , on the basis of clear and convincing evidence , that the defendant has a prior conviction for an offense included in one of nine categories of detention - qualifying offenses ( crimes of violence , etc .

 ) , committed while the accused was free on pretrial release and for which the accused was convicted or released from prison within the last five years . federal law also establishes a second rebuttable presumption of detention in favor of pretrial detention when the judge or magistrate finds probable cause to believe that the accused has committed a 10-year controlled substance offense , federal crime of terrorism offense , or various kidnapping or sexual offenses committed against a child . for money - bail systems , particularly as they apply to indigent defendants , the key provisions are the eighth amendment's excessive bail clause and the fifth and fourteenth amendments' due process and equal protection clauses . in a series of cases , the court held that imprisonment solely because of indigence constitutes invidious discrimination and is constitutionally impermissible . for example , in bearden v. united states , the court held that a court could not automatically revoke a defendant's probation for failing to pay a fine and make restitution unless such nonpayment was willful . after the defendant pleaded guilty to burglary and theft by receiving stolen property , the court sentenced him to three years' probation , a $500 fine , and restitution of $250 to be repaid according to a four - month schedule . after the defendant lost his job and could not make the payments , the court revoked his probation , sentencing him to serve the rest of his sentence . in determining the revocation's constitutionality , the court analogized the equal protection concerns to the fundamental fairness issues of due process analysis and weighed factors including the "nature of the individual interest affected , the extent to which it is affected , the rationality of the connection between legislative means and purpose , [and] the existence of alternative means for effectuating the purpose ...." acknowledging the state's interest in punishment and deterrence , the court opined that this could be achieved by extending the repayment period or by the defendant performing public service . the court held that a court must determine whether nonpayment was willful before revoking a defendant's probation . as the lower court had not made such a finding , the supreme court held that "fundamental fairness requires that the petitioner remain on probation" and remanded the case . in other cases , the supreme court has not recognized indigence as a suspect class warranting strict scrutiny analysis . for example , in ma h er v. roe , the court held the following: an indigent woman desiring an abortion does not come within the limited category of disadvantaged classes so recognized by our cases .