in the case of p.l . 115-123 this value is set at 350 million barrels . determining the optimal level of oil holdings in the spr is likely to remain controversial . beyond partial or total liquidation of the reserve , analysts have developed other alternatives . inventory monetization is a generally risk - free approach , generating revenues to cover expenses by monetizing a portion of the idle oil balances in the spr . this approach uses options markets to generate revenues . if there is less oil in the spr , what might be done with the "excess capacity" inevitably created ? the government may be able to reduce the operating costs of the spr by leasing reserve capacity freed by mandated sales . if this strategy were undertaken with perhaps 100 million barrels of spr oil , the net revenue would be $300 million minus expenses and fees , an amount well in excess of yearly spr operations and maintenance costs . if , in the example , the relative prices over time were reversed , and the future price was higher than the current price the government would buy oil now and simultaneously sell oil in the future , again profiting by the amount of the spread between the two prices . these purchases and sales are all on paper , no oil is actually required to leave the reserve , and the transactions are taken at the same time , locking in a profit with essentially potentially very low risk . a drawback of this approach is that the volume of government purchases and sales might be large enough to influence the market prices , or interfere with private sector traders . the spr has met many challenges . first conceived as protection against the "weaponization" of oil in the 1970s , it later became a safeguard against the disruption caused by domestic natural disasters . most recently the reserve has served as a source of funding for a variety of programs and activities . in each case , while its range of application has expanded , it still maintained its ability to respond to its original requirements . evolving oil market conditions have raised the question of whether the spr can be further downsized , or even eliminated . even if changing market conditions have made the reserve's rationale less compelling in the current environment than in the past , the spr can provide a component of energy security policy as well as meeting other policy needs . the spr might be thought of as an insurance policy where fixed payments are made over time to avoid the large negative costs associated with low - probability events . for example , if conflict in the persian gulf resulted in the strait of hormuz being closed for a period of time , large volumes of persian gulf oil would likely be withdrawn from the world market . the reality of reduced oil supply coupled with expectations and speculation on the futures markets would likely result in an increasing and volatile oil price . significant price increases , coupled with supply shortages could result in significant disruption of consuming and importing nations' economies . reduced economic growth , rising unemployment , and inflation are likely consequences .