this is before taxes . after tax corporate profit , π t , for a firm after imposition of a percentage tax ( t ) on corporate profit , is defined as: 2 πt= ( 1-t ) ( tr - tc ) in contrast , a dst ( dst ) is levied as a percent of total , gross revenue yielding an after tax profit , π dst , of: 3 πdst= ( 1-dst ) tr - tc algebraically , equations ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) are not equivalent . to further illustrate , the following amounts can be substituted: tr = $1,000 , tc = $500 , and t = 0.03 ( or a 3% tax rate ) . using these parameters , πt based on a 3% profit tax would be: 4 πt= ( 1-0.03 ) ( $1,000-$500 ) 5 πt=$485 using these parameters , πdst based on a 3% dst revenue tax would be: 6 πdst= ( 1-0.03 ) $1,000-$500 7 πdst=$470 as shown above , after - tax profit for a corporation subject to a 3% income tax rate ( equation 5 ) is greater than after - tax profit for a corporation subject to a 3% dst ( equation 7 ) in lieu of an income tax . the two taxes are not the same . effects of a dst on supply - demand conditions in digital markets to analyze the economic effects of a dst , the different markets in which digital economy firms operate must be conceptualized . in a general sense , the consumers or buyers in these markets are those that pay money to the supplier or seller for the provision of a service . many firms in digital economies operate in "two - sided markets" in which they provide services to two different consumers: individual users and businesses . while both sides of these markets could be relevant for calculating dst liability , the markets for the latter group of services are the starting point for analyzing the economic effects of a dst , because these business - to - business transactions are where the statutory incidence of a dst is typically first imposed . for example , in the market for internet advertisements , a clothing company could be the consumer and google or facebook could be the seller or supplier . in the market for marketplace sales , a vendor could be the consumer and amazon could be the seller or supplier . in the market for user data sales , a data transfer firm could be the consumer and facebook , google , or fitbit could the supplier . from an economic perspective , there are two extremes of market structure: perfect competition and monopoly . most market structures lie somewhere in between . monopolies rarely exist , and they are typically regulated . for reasons explained below , there are specific reasons why monopolies are likely not to exist in the markets in which dsts apply . however , firms could have market power if there are barriers to entry . the following analyses examine how a dst would apply , over the long run , in the two extremes of market structure for a digital economy firm facing a downward sloping demand curve .