the last decade has been a transformative period for banking . the 2007-2009 financial crisis threatened the total collapse of the financial system and the real economy . consumers seeking loans or financial services could be vulnerable to deceptive or unfair practices . many assert only huge and unprecedented government interventions staved off this collapse . others argue that government interventions were unnecessary or potentially exacerbated the crisis . in addition , many argue the crisis revealed that the financial system was excessively risky and the regulatory regime governing the financial system had serious weaknesses . policymakers responded to the perceived weaknesses in the pre - crisis financial regulatory regime by implementing numerous changes to financial regulation , including to bank regulation . most notably , congress passed the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ; p.l . 111-203 ) in 2010 with the intention of strengthening regulation and addressing risks . in addition , u.s. bank regulators have implemented changes under their existing authorities , many of which generally adhere to the basel iii accords — an international framework for bank regulation agreed to by u.s. and international bank regulators — that called for making certain bank regulations more stringent . in the ensuing years , some observers raised concerns that the potential benefits of those regulatory changes ( eg , better - managed risks , increased consumer protection , greater systemic stability , potentially higher economic growth over the long term ) were outweighed by the potential costs ( eg , compliance costs incurred by banks , reduced credit availability for consumers and businesses , potentially slower economic growth ) . in response to these concerns , congress passed the economic growth , regulatory relief , and consumer protection act ( egrrcp act ; p.l . among other things , the law modified certain ( 1 ) regulations facing small banks ; ( 2 ) regulations facing banks large enough to be subjected to dodd - frank enhanced regulation but still below the size thresholds exceeded by the very largest banks ; and ( 3 ) mortgage regulations facing lenders including banks . in addition , federal banking regulatory agencies — the federal reserve ( the fed ) , the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , and the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) — have proposed further changes in regulation . recently , these regulators have made of number of proposals with the aim of reducing regulatory burden . a key issue surrounding regulatory relief made pursuant to the egrrcp act and regulator - initiated changes is whether regulatory burden can be reduced without undermining the goals and effectiveness of the regulations . meanwhile , market trends and economic conditions continue to affect the banking industry coincident with the implementation of new regulation . some of the more notable conditions include the development of new technologies used in financial services ( known as "fintech" ) and a rising interest rate environment following an extraordinarily long period of very low rates .