if so , what are the advantages and disadvantages of such changes ? this section describes these structural variations . the duties and structures of state and local election systems can affect the implementation of federal election administration laws . perhaps as a result , congress has specified how states and localities should distribute certain election administration duties and structure certain elements of their election systems . changes to the duties and structures of state and local election systems have sometimes also been side effects of other federal activity on election administration . congress has considered legislation — some of which has been enacted and some of which has not — that would change election rules or the state and local systems that implement them . the interactions between the duties and structures of state and local election systems and past federal actions suggest some considerations that may be relevant to future congressional consideration of proposals that would affect the administration of federal elections . the following questions may be of interest to members as they consider making changes to election administration or maintaining current rules and structures: how would any proposed change interact with the duties and structures of state and local election systems ? would the duties and structures of state and local election systems make a proposed change difficult to implement ? would the design of a proposed change need to be adjusted to accommodate variations between or within states ? which of the policy tools available to congress is best suited to achieving the purpose of a proposed change ? for example , would it be more effective to advance a proposed change with a federal requirement , or incentivize it via federal funding ? how might the nature of the state and local system inform a proposed change ? for example , if it is a federal requirement , who is charged with compliance ; who is responsible for the tasks required for compliance ; and what is the relationship between the two ? if it is federal funding , to whom should it be distributed , and who should be involved in making decisions about how to use it ? would a proposed change have the effect , either intentionally or unintentionally , of altering the duties or structures of state or local election systems ? are there complications with a proposed change that are not specifically related to election administration ? for example , could there be federalism - related issues with intervening in the relationships between states and their political subdivisions ? 107-252 ; 116 stat . 1666 ) , for example , requires states to establish a uniform standard of what counts as a vote for each voting system they use ( 52 u.s.c . §21081 ( a ) ( 6 ) ) , and bills have been introduced in recent congresses to change how voter registration is handled . other responses focus on the systems that apply election rules . in the united states , that typically means state and local systems . the administration of elections in the united states is highly decentralized . elections are primarily administered by thousands of state and local systems rather than a single , unified national system .