the president has announced these tariff actions through proclamation and presidential memorandum . presidential documents are published in the federal register: presidential proclamations on section 201 ( donald j. trump ) presidential proclamations on section 232 ( donald j. trump ) presidential documents on section 301 ( donald j. trump ) other presidential statements regarding tariff actions are posted on whitehouse.gov . notices and submitted public comments are available in the federal register and on regulations.gov . final investigation reports on section 232 investigations ( 1981-2018 ) compilation of bis documents related to the steel and aluminum investigations and imposed tariffs faq on product exclusions for section 232 steel and aluminum tariffs find objections , rebuttals , and surrebuttals for section 232 product exclusion requests commerce has published federal register notices announcing investigations , requesting public comment , and outline product exclusion procedures . itc , the agency responsible for investigating section 201 cases , has compiled lists of relevant documents concerning the investigations into imports of solar panels and washing machines . these resources include investigation documents , final reports by the commission , and the primary federal register notices . the following resources include embedded links to agency documents as well as footnotes with official links . the department of commerce is the agency responsible for investigating section 232 cases . commerce's bureau of industry and security ( bis ) has published investigation reports and relevant faqs on its website . commerce has solicited and published public comments and product exclusion requests through regulations.gov . itc documents on safeguard investigation into solar panels itc documents on safeguard investigation into washing machinesthe u.s. harmonized tariff schedule ( hts ) : chapter 9 . ustr , the agency responsible for investigating section 301 cases , has compiled relevant documents about the section 301 tariffs against chin ese intellectual property practices on its website . the following ustr resources include the official notices , hearing transcripts , final lists of products subject to additional tariffs , and information on product exclusions . findings of the investigation into china's acts , policy , and practices ( march 22 , 2018 ) section 301 investigations and related documents section 301 hearings into proposed tariffs section 301: how to request an exclusion ustr has solicited and published public comments and product exclusion requests on regulations.gov . the following dockets compile comments on proposed regulations and related documents , by trade action: stage 1 tariffs notice and comments ( docket: ustr - 2018-0005 ) product exclusions ( docket: ustr - 2018-0025 ) stage 2 tariffs notice and comments ( docket: ustr - 2018-0018 ) product exclusions ( docket: ustr - 2018-0032 ) stage 3 tariffs notice and comments ( docket: ustr - 2018-0026 ) . cbp is the agency responsible for enforcing customs laws and collecting tariff revenue . the cbp website includes guidance on recent tariff actions for importers . duty on imports of steel and aluminum articles under section 232 of the trade expansion act of 1962section 301 trade remedies – frequently asked questionsquota bulletins , which track certain imports that are subject to quotas or quantitative limits .