appendix a . legislative history other transaction authority first appeared in the national aeronautics and space act of 1958 . how are ots being used ? where and when in the acquisition lifecycle is the authority being used ? to what extent is the requirements process being circumvented when dod awards an ot follow - on production contract for a major system ? one analyst suggested that "no efficiency is lost if only the most able personnel are authorized to procure and administer" ot agreements and further argued that expanding the use of ots would increase the training costs by expanding the number of people who can "weave complex agreements in a relatively unstructured environment. congress may consider whether dod should establish an acquisition innovation lab or center of excellence responsible for overseeing , executing , and approving all ots across the department . such a lab or center could be staffed and supported by a cadre of professionals with experience across the acquisition lifecycle who have a willingness and ability to embrace new ideas and rethink existing practices . alternatively , such labs or centers could be established in the military departments . having centers in each organization could allow for consideration of the different missions and business approaches of the departments and help educate the workforce on a more systematic basis . proponents argue that such an office would help ensure that only experienced and capable officials , with the appropriate training , use ot authorities . such an office could also help protect against layering internal dod policies and bureaucracies onto ots by placing ots outside of the traditional bureaucratic acquisition process . proponents could further argue that such an office could better propagate best practices and ensure that ots are used appropriately and are consistent with guidance and legislation . having a single office responsible for executing or approving all ots could also help ensure more timely and accurate information , giving congress more visibility into dod's use of other transaction authorities . to the extent that a single , high - level official is responsible for managing and overseeing all ots , congress might wish to consider repealing or modifying existing statutory approval requirements . if such an office was able to provide timely and accurate information , congress might also consider some of the current reporting requirements unnecessary , and may choose to repeal some of the reporting requirements . opponents of such a proposal argue that centralizing ots would have the opposite effect , increasing bureaucracy by adding yet another office within dod . opponents also argue that such an office could make it more time - consuming to get a project underway and may discourage program offices from attempting or suggesting ots . some also argue that a single office may not have the resources to execute and approve agreements in a timely manner , and would inhibit spreading expertise on how to execute ot agreements more broadly across the acquisition workforce . even proponents who might in theory support establishing such an office could raise significant concerns regarding how such an office would function in practice . what specific data does congress need in these reports to effectively conduct oversight ?