and the same is true under the ada . a child who has been identified as having ( or possibly having ) a disability must be evaluated by his or her lea before receiving special education and related services under the idea or section 504 . the ada , by contrast , contains no such requirement . under the idea , individuals may qualify for an iep only if they have been determined to have a qualifying disability for which they need special education and / or related services to benefit from public education . but a child who has a disability that does not adversely affect his or her educational performance — as required to be eligible for an iep under several idea disability categories — may still qualify for a plan under section 504 . the lower federal courts were therefore left to fashion for themselves a more concrete standard for deciding whether an iep had provided an eligible child with enough of a benefit to satisfy rowley . on this point some courts took a minimalist view , requiring an iep to provide at least some educational benefit — a benefit , in other words , that is "barely more than de minimis . other courts , however , read rowley as calling for much more , demanding evidence that an iep had provided "meaningful benefit to the child. faced with this circuit split , in 2017 , the supreme court took the opportunity in endrew f. v. douglas county school district to clarify just how much of a benefit an eligible child must receive through an iep . for children with disabilities not integrated into the regular classroom , an "appropriate" iep therefore "need not aim for grade - level advancement. endrew f. clearly rejected , then , the more minimalist view of a fape . "[t]he idea demands more" from an iep than the "barely more than de minimis progress" that the lower court upheld there . a child's iep must instead be "appropriately ambitious in light of his circumstances," so that that child , like every other , "ha[s] the chance to meet challenging objectives" despite his differing goals . although the court did not explicitly compare its refined standard in endrew f. with the view from the other side of the circuit split — that an appropriate iep needed to confer a meaningful benefit on a child — several lower courts have taken endrew f. to vindicate that meaningful - benefit standard nonetheless . as the u.s. court of appeals for the first circuit explained , endrew f. appears to call for an iep of exactly the same quality that that circuit had expected all along under rowley . thus , "[a]t a bare minimum," that standard demands an iep that includes "the child's present level of educational attainment , the short - and long - term goals for his or her education , objective criteria with which to measure progress toward these goals , and the specific services to be offered. whether the other circuits will also agree on that "bare minimum" remains to be seen .