protection . it must possess requisite protection to survive on the contemporary and future battlefield . growth . it should possess sufficient size , weight , architecture , power , and cooling for automotive and electrical purposes to meet all platform needs and allow for preplanned product improvements . lethality . it should apply immediate , precise , and decisively lethal extended range medium - caliber , directed energy , and missile fires in day / night / all - weather conditions , while moving and / or stationary against moving and / or stationary targets . the platform should allow for mounted , dismount , and unmanned system target handover . embedded p latform t raining . as previously noted , the army envisions employing rcvs as "scouts" and "escorts" for manned omfvs . it should have embedded training systems that have interoperability with the synthetic training environment . sustainability . industry should demonstrate innovations that achieve breakthroughs in power generation and management to obtain increased operational range and fuel efficiency , increased silent watch , part and component reliability , and significantly reduced sustainment burden . additional requirements include the capacity to accommodate reactive armor , an active protection system ( aps ) , artificial intelligence , and directed - energy weapons and advanced target sensors . in the aftermath of the gcv program , the army embarked on a future fighting vehicle ( ffv ) effort in 2015 . army officials — described as "cautious" and "in no hurry to initiate an infantry fighting vehicle program" — instead initiated industry studies to "understand the trade space before leaping into a new program. another potential oversight question for congress could be what is the role of army futures command ( afc ) in integrating requirements between omfv and rcvs ? to some , the use of section 804 authority offers great promise in developing and fielding qualifying weapon systems quickly and cost - effectively . others note that rapid prototyping authorities under section 804 will not eliminate the complexities of technology development and that operational requirements also drive the complexity and technical difficulty of a project . in acknowledging the potential benefits that section 804 authority could bring to the army's third attempt to replace the m - 2 bradley , as well as the risks associated with its use over a more traditional acquisition approach , policymakers might decide to examine the potential costs , benefits , and risks associated with using section 804 authority for the omfv program . in general , army combat vehicle modernization efforts post - fcs have been characterized as upgrading existing platforms as opposed to developing new systems . this was due in part to reluctance of senior army leadership , but also to significant budgetary restrictions imposed on the army during this period . some in congress , however , were not pleased with the slow pace of army modernization , reportedly noting the army was "woefully behind on modernization" and was "essentially organized and equipped as it was in the 1980s. in june 2018 , in part due to congressional concerns , the army announced a new modernization strategy and designated ngcvs as the second of its six modernization priorities .