111-220 ) retroactive . the second chance reauthorization act of 2018 ( title v of the first step act ) reauthorizes many of the grant programs that were initially authorized by the second chance act of 2007 ( p.l . the second chance reauthorization act also reauthorized a bop pilot program to provide early release to elderly prisoners . in addition to correctional and sentencing reform and reauthorizing the second chance act , the first step act contained a series of other criminal justice - related provisions . the act amended 18 u.s.c . section 3624 ( b ) so that federal prisoners can earn up to 54 days of good time credit for every year of their imposed sentence rather than for every year of their sentenced served . prior to the amendment , bop interpreted the good time credit provision in section 3624 ( b ) to mean that prisoners are eligible to earn 54 days of good time credit for every year they serve . for example , this means that an offender who was sentenced to 10 years in prison and earned the maximum good time credits each year could be released after serving eight years and 260 days , having earned 54 days of good time credit for each year of the sentence served , but in effect , only 47 days of good time credit for every year of the imposed sentence . the act requires bop to provide a secure storage area outside of the secure perimeter of a correctional institution for qualified law enforcement officers employed by bop to store firearms or allow this class of employees to store firearms in their personal vehicles in lockboxes approved by bop . the act also requires bop , notwithstanding any other provision of law , to allow these same employees to carry concealed firearms on prison grounds but outside of the secure perimeter of the correctional institution . the act prohibits bop or the u.s . marshals service ( usms ) from using restraints on pregnant inmates in their custody . the prohibition on the use of restraints begins on the date that pregnancy is confirmed by a healthcare professional . the restriction ends when the inmate completes postpartum recovery . the prohibition on the use of restraints does not apply if the inmate is determined to be an immediate and credible flight risk or poses an immediate and serious threat of harm to herself or others that cannot be reasonably prevented by other means , or a healthcare professional determines that the use of restraints is appropriate for the medical safety of the inmate . only the least restrictive restraints necessary to prevent escape or harm can be used . the exception to the use of restraints does not permit bop or usms to use them around the ankles , legs , or waist of an inmate ; restrain an inmate's hands behind her back ; use four - point restraints ; or attach an inmate to another inmate . upon the request of a healthcare professional , correctional officials or deputy marshals shall refrain from using restraints on an inmate or shall remove restraints used on an inmate .