this language was initially adopted in h.res . 5 ( 115 th congress ) to apply to the first session of the 115 th congress . its applicability was extended to the second session of the 115 th congress by h.res . 787 ( 115 th congress ) , but this language is not applicable in the 116 th congress . the engrossed measure would then be transmitted to the senate for further action . this rule was first added to the standing rules of the house as rule xlix by p.l . 96-78 , although it was renumbered as rule xxviii as part of the recodification of house rules in the 106 th congress . in several instances in the 104 th - 106 th congresses the rule was suspended so that it did not provide for the automatic engrossment of legislation based on changes in the public debt in concurrent resolutions . the rule was repealed in the 107 th congress , reinstated in the 108 th congress , and repealed again in the 112 th congress . 6 established a similar requirement as house rule xxviii . this new language provides for a measure to automatically be engrossed and deemed to have been passed by the house by the same vote as the adoption by the house of the concurrent resolution on the budget setting forth a level of the public debt different from the existing statutory limit . rather than a specific level of debt , this measure would suspend the debt limit through the end of the budget year for the concurrent resolution on the budget ( but not through the period covered by any outyears beyond the budget year ) . as with the earlier version of the rule , the engrossed measure would then be transmitted to the senate for further action . although budget authority for most federal programs is provided through annual appropriations actions that allow those funds to be obligated during the ensuing fiscal year , funding for certain programs is provided with a different period of availability . the term advance appropriations is applied to funds that will become available for obligation one or more fiscal years after the budget year covered by the appropriations act . in recent years the house has adopted limits on the level of advance appropriations that may be provided as well as the programs or activities for which it may be provided . in some instances , these limits have been established in a budget resolution , as in s.con.res . 13 ( 111 th congress ) and s.con.res . 11 ( 114 th congress ) . in other instances , the house has adopted the limit as a separate order as part of the resolution adopting the chamber's rules , as in h.res . 5 ( 112 th congress ) and h.res . 5 ( 115 th congress ) .