there are no punitive consequences for not meeting these goals . 100-656 ) ; women ( p.l . 103-355 , the federal acquisition streamlining act of 1994 ) ; small businesses located within a hubzone ( p.l . 105-135 ) ; and small businesses owned and controlled by a service - disabled veteran ( p.l . 106-50 , the veterans entrepreneurship and small business development act of 1999 ) . the current federal small business procurement goals are at least 23.0% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards to small businesses for each fiscal year ; 5.0% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to small disadvantaged businesses ( including participants in the sba's 8 ( a ) program ) for each fiscal year ; 5.0% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to women - owned small businesses ; 3.0% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to hubzone small businesses ; and 3.0% of the total value of all small business eligible prime contract awards and subcontract awards to service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses . however , the sba's small business goaling report is distributed widely , receives media attention , and serves to heighten public awareness of the issue of small business contracting . for example , agency performance as reported in the sba's small business goaling report is often cited by members during their questioning of federal agency witnesses during congressional hearings . as shown in table 1 , the fy2017 small business goaling report , using fpds - ng data , indicates that federal agencies met the federal procurement goal for small businesses generally , small disadvantaged businesses , and service - disabled veteran - owned small businesses in fy2017 . table 1 also provides , for comparative purposes , the percentage of total reported federal contracts ( without exclusions ) awarded to those small businesses in fy2017 . before awarding a federal contract , the contracting officer must affirmatively determine that the business is responsible to perform the contract . if the contracting officer determines that an apparent successful small business offeror lacks certain elements of responsibility ( eg , is unable to fulfill the requirements of a specific government procurement because it lacks capability , competency , capacity , credit , integrity , perseverance , tenacity , or limitations on subcontracting ) , the officer is required to refer the matter in writing to the sba for review and a possible certificate of competency ( coc ) , even if the next acceptable offer is also from a small business . the coc certifies in writing that the small business meets all required elements of responsibility for the purpose of receiving and performing a specific government contract . the "coc program empowers the sba to certify to contracting officers as to all elements of responsibility of any small business concern to receive and perform a specific government contract . the coc program does not extend to questions concerning regulatory requirements imposed and enforced by other federal agencies.