these designations shall be published in the federal register . an affected area designated by the assistant administrator for the disaster assistance directorate includes all local government jurisdictions within its boundaries . to this end , fema uses a countywide per capita impact indicator of $3.61 per capita in infrastructure damage to assess localized impacts . in general , it is expected that a locality that meets or exceeds the $3.61 per capita threshold will be designated by fema for pa funding . insurance coverage insurance coverage is considered in pa determinations when reviewing a governor's or tribal chief executive's request for major disaster assistance . as part of the assessment of disaster related damage , fema subtracts the amount of insurance coverage that is in force or that should have been in force as required by law and regulation at the time of the disaster from the total estimated eligible cost of pa for units of government and certain private nonprofit organizations . hazard mitigation fema encourages hazard mitigation efforts by considering how previous measures may have decreased the overall damages and costs following an incident . this could include rewarding states that have a statewide building code . if the requesting state can prove , by way of cost - benefit analyses or other related estimates , that its per capita amount of infrastructure damage falls short of the statewide per capita impact threshold due to mitigation efforts , fema will consider that favorably in its recommendation to the president . in these instances , fema may also consider whether the mitigation work has been principally financed with previous fema disaster assistance funding through the hazard mitigation grant program ( hmgp ) , through the pre - disaster mitigation ( pdm ) program , or by state or local resources . recent multiple disasters if a state or tribal nation has suffered multiple disasters — whether declared or not — in the previous 12 months , fema considers the financial and human toll of those recent incidents in its consideration of whether to recommend pa. for example , if a state has responded on its own to a series of tornadoes , fema may consider a request for a declaration more favorably than they would have otherwise . programs of other federal assistance fema also considers whether other federal disaster assistance is available when reviewing a major disaster request . in some cases , other federal programs are arguably more suitable for addressing the types of damage caused by an incident . for example , damage to federal - aid roads and bridges are eligible for assistance under the emergency relief program of the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) . other federal programs may have more specific authority to respond to certain types of disasters , such as damage to agricultural areas . assistance may also be provided under authorities separate from the stafford act with or without a stafford act declaration . for example , assistance for droughts is frequently provided through authorities of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) and the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) can provide assistance to states in response to a public health threat without the president's involvement via stafford act authorities .