in conformity with the provisions of the treaty . article 2205 of nafta , which congress approved in the nafta implementation act , provides that a "party may withdraw from this agreement six months after it provides written notice of withdrawal to the other parties . if a party withdraws , the agreement shall remain in force for the remaining parties. nafta does not address whether , in the context of the united states' withdrawal from the agreement , the term "party" includes both the president and congress acting together to accomplish withdrawal . in addition , neither the other provisions of the agreement , the context in which they appear , nor the subsequent practice of the nafta parties sheds light on the issue . in the absence of language to the contrary in nafta article 2205 , the vienna convention applies . if the president sought to terminate u.s. international obligations under nafta , an injured business or other party with standing to bring a lawsuit might seek an injunction from a u.s. federal court directing the executive branch to refrain from issuing a notice terminating u.s. obligations under nafta or a declaration from the court that such issuance is unlawful . it is difficult to predict how a court might resolve such a challenge , as u.s. courts have uniformly avoided answering whether the u.s. constitution authorizes the president to terminate an international pact without express congressional approval . instead , courts have left the executive and legislative branches to resolve disagreements over the termination power through the political process . while no court has considered a case involving a trade agreement approved as a congressional - executive agreement under trade promotion authority ( tpa ) procedures , there is a significant possibility that a court would dismiss such a case for lack of jurisdiction . congress could signal that it disputes the executive's termination of u.s. nafta obligations to a court by enacting a law or resolution with a veto - proof majority opposing or purporting to block such action . if congress passed such an act or resolution and the executive still terminated nafta in direct derogation of that act or resolution , the legal paradigm governing the separation - of - powers analysis might shift . to resolve certain separation - of - powers conflicts , the supreme court typically applies the approach set forth in justice jackson's concurring opinion in youngstown sheet & tube co. v. sawyer , which states that the president's constitutional powers often "are not fixed but fluctuate , depending on their disjunction or conjunction with those of congress. justice jackson's opinion sets forth a tripartite framework for evaluating the constitutional powers of the president . the president's authority is ( 1 ) at a maximum when acting pursuant to authorization by congress ; ( 2 ) in a "zone of twilight" when congress and the president "may have concurrent authority , or in which its distribution is uncertain," and congress has not spoken on an issue ; and ( 3 ) at its "lowest ebb" when taking measures incompatible with the will of congress .