if enacted , h.r . 8 would expand background checks to capture many private transfers between non - ffls , subject to enumerated exceptions . ( a similar bill has been introduced in the senate. ) one question the bill raises is whether it may be lawfully enacted under one of congress's article i powers . a range of proposals have been in this and past congresses . some seek to ease federal firearms restrictions or facilitate state reciprocity in the treatment of persons authorized to carry firearms by another state ; others seek greater restrictions on the federal laws concerning the possession , transfer , or sale of firearms or the expansion of background checks for firearm purchases . postal service to ship concealable firearms . then , "[s]purred by the bloody 'tommy gun' era" of the 1920s and early 1930s , congress passed the national firearms act of 1934 ( nfa ) , which established a stringent taxation and registration scheme for specified weapons associated with the prohibition - fueled gang violence of the time . a few years later , congress enacted the federal firearms act of 1938 ( ffa ) , which created a licensing scheme for the manufacture , importation , and sale of firearms and established limited categories of persons who could not possess firearms . the ffa eventually was superseded , however , by the more comprehensive gun control act of 1968 ( gca ) . f irearms have a unique significance in american society . millions own or use firearms for numerous lawful purposes , such as hunting and protecting themselves in the home . still , firearms annually cause tens of thousands of injuries and deaths , including in high - profile mass shootings . the widespread lawful and unlawful uses of firearms have prompted vigorous debate over wheth er further firearm regulation would be effective or appropriate . and framing the policy debate are legal issues stemming from the existing federal framework of firearms laws and the constitutional constraints that may cabin congress's ability to legislate in this area . firearms regulation at the federal level has grown more expansive over time , setting rules for the lawful manufacture , sale , and possession of firearms at the national level . these federal firearms laws mostly serve as a baseline that states can ( and sometimes do ) supplement , and congress regularly considers legislation to address perceived gaps in these laws . proposals to modify the current federal framework for regulating firearms may be informed by numerous constitutional considerations , including the scope of the second amendment right to keep and bear arms and the need to ground legislation in one of congress's enumerated powers . this report provides an overview of the development of federal firearms laws and the major components of the current statutory regimes governing firearms . it then describes the constitutional considerations that may impact congress's ability to enact firearms laws . finally , this report describes selected topical areas where the 115 th and 116 th congresses have considered legislation to amend the existing federal framework regulating firearms , highlighting some of the constitutional issues that may arise in those areas .