treasury. according to the court , the "constitutional structure would collapse , and the role of the house would be meaningless , if the executive could circumvent the appropriations process and spend funds however it pleases. similarly , the blumenthal v. trump court concluded that the individual member plaintiffs possessed standing in part because they did not merely "disagree with the manner in which the president [wa]s administering or enforcing the law," but were instead wholly prevented from discharging their constitutionally designated role in the emoluments process . burwell and blumenthal thus suggest that congress could have a justiciable injury when the executive branch violates the constitution in a way that specifically undermines congress's authority in a particular governmental process . it is unclear whether the supreme court or the federal appellate courts would ultimately endorse the broad conceptions of congressional standing that the burwell and blumenthal courts adopted . because the parties in burwell ultimately settled their dispute , neither the d.c . circuit nor the supreme court ever determined whether the district court's standing conclusions were correct . circuit resolved whether the district court correctly concluded that the plaintiffs in blumenthal possess standing to pursue their emoluments clause challenges . some ( though not all ) academics have argued , however , that the burwell and blumenthal courts' expanded conception of standing may be unsound , as these decisions would appear to authorize congressional litigants to hale executive branch entities into the federal courts in a fairly broad array of factual circumstances that implicate separation - of - powers principles . burwell , for instance , contains language suggesting that at least some congressional litigants possess standing to sue the executive branch whenever it spends unappropriated funds . blumenthal likewise contains language suggesting that legislative litigants — including individual members — could very well possess standing to sue the president in a variety of contexts in which the constitution offers congress ( or a house thereof ) an opportunity to provide prior approval to a particular executive action , such as appointments . future judicial decisions may provide further guidance on whether , how , and under what circumstances this sort of freestanding congressional authority to summon executive branch entities before a federal judge is consistent with the supreme court's admonition that the "standing inquiry" is "especially rigorous when reaching the merits of the dispute would require [a court] to decide whether an action taken by one of the other two branches of the federal government was unconstitutional. the fact that standing is a constitutional requirement circumscribes congress's ability to alter the aforementioned standing rules by enacting legislation . the supreme court has repeatedly reaffirmed "that congress cannot erase article iii's standing requirements by statutorily granting the right to sue to a plaintiff who would not otherwise have standing. at the same time , however , the court has also recognized "that congress may 'elevat[e] to the status of legally cognizable injuries concrete , de facto injuries that were previously inadequate in law.' it is therefore possible that , even though congress may not "abrogate the art[icle] iii minima," congress may under presently undefined circumstances enact a statute that grants it standing to pursue a claim in federal court that it could not pursue in that statute's absence .