as enacted , h.r . 6197 , as amended , on august 23 , 2018 , by a vote of 85-7 . a house - senate conference committee reported a version of the bill on september 13 , 2018 . the senate approved the conference report on september 18 by a vote of 93-7 and the house did likewise on september 26 by a vote of 361-61 . president donald j. trump signed the bill into law ( p.l . 115-245 ) on september 28 , 2018 . ( see table 2 . ) the total amount requested for dod that falls within the scope of the annual defense appropriations bill and amounts provided in p.l . 115-245 as enacted are relatively close . within those gross totals , however , there are differences between the amounts requested and the amounts provided for hundreds of specific elements within the sprawling dod budget . many of these individual differences reflect congressional judgements about particular issues . however , there also are patterns of differences that reflect congressional views on broad policy or budgetary questions: title i of the act , that funds military personnel accounts , provides $2.2 billion less than was requested for pay and benefits . house - senate conferees said the reduction should have no adverse impact on the force . according to the conference report , revised estimates of the budgetary impact of recent changes in the military retirement system were the basis for a net reduction from the request of $1.54 billion . other reductions totaling $430 million were justified by conferees on the basis of "historical unobligated balances," that is , an accumulation of funds in certain accounts that were appropriated in prior years but were not spent . base budget funding provided by the operation and maintenance ( o&m ) title of the act ( title ii ) amounts to a net reduction of $5.2 billion from the request . in part , the apparent cut reflects a transfer of nearly $2.0 billion to title ix of the act , which funds oco . the conferees justified additional reductions totaling $1.34 billion on the basis of either large unobligated balances or "historical underexecution," ( i.e. , a pattern of repeatedly spending less on military personnel in a given fiscal year than had been appropriated ) . on the other hand , total procurement funding for the base budget ( title iii ) is $4.8 billion higher than the request . while the act makes hundreds of additions and cuts to the funding requested for particular items , three broad themes all push the act's procurement total upward: $2.48 billion is added to buy aircraft and other equipment for national guard and reserve forces ; $2.31 billion is added to fully fund or acquire major components for additional six ships ( see table 9 ) ; and $2.13 billion is added to the $8.49 billion requested for procurement of f - 35 joint strike fighters ( see table 10 ) .