the images act of 2018 ( h.r . 4905 ) introduced in the 115 th congress would have directed fema to work with usgs to modernize hardware and increase the speed of data transmittal , but the legislation did not specify funding amounts . some stakeholders have suggested a figure of $112 million as the amount needed to upgrade the enterprise data management systems , information technology infrastructure , and real - time data delivery capabilities . streamgages are vulnerable to hazards if not properly hardened . the secure water act directed the usgs to ensure all fpss were flood hardened by fy2019 . according to the usgs , structural restoration is usually funded because of emergencies ; for example , disaster supplemental appropriations may provide funds for hardening streamgages , or funds are diverted from operational budgets to repair affected streamgages . the 2017 hurricane season resulted in damage to more than 100 streamgages . much of the usgs streamgaging network is funded cooperatively . these methods require more observational data , particularly for reference river basins , than that provided by the current streamgage network . interested parties sign funding agreements with the usgs to share the cost of streamgages and data collection . the usgs cooperative matching funds program ( cmf ) provides up to a 50% match with tribal , regional , state , and local partners ( see section on " cooperative matching funds program " ) . other federal agencies , nonfederal governments , and nongovernmental entities may provide reimbursable funding for streamgages in the usgs streamgaging network without contributed funds from the usgs . under budget constraints , increases in congressional appropriations are often prioritized to maintain or expand the network instead of restoration . congress might consider investments in new technologies for the usgs streamgaging network . while regarded as reliable , many of the current streamgage operations are based on labor - intensive and more expensive techniques . some stakeholders suggest that investing in modern technological and computational capabilities could provide enhanced streamflow information with reduced costs . others raise that these approaches may not provide the quality and consistency of data expected of usgs streamgages and may reduce funds available for existing operations . the secure water act of 2009 directed the usgs to equip all fpss with modernized telemetry systems by fy2019 . according to stakeholders , the current u.s. streamgage telemetry and information infrastructure may be vulnerable to failure , and the existing data collection platforms and computer networks might eventually be inefficient for real - time and detailed data . in september 2018 , an error in telemetry equipment resulted in an outage of 11% of the network . the usgs stated that redundancy in telemetry using cellular signals or camera streaming could have alleviated the problem , which affected the network for weeks . past increases of appropriations for streamgages have prioritized continued operation and network expansion over technological improvements . to mitigate costs for such upgrades , federal science agencies are considering cloud computing that could also benefit cloud providers if other users develop applications on the cloud network using the data already hosted there .