fish and wildlife service . within fs's and doi's respective wildland fire management ( wfm ) account , funding is provided to the suppression operations program to fund the control of wildfires that originate on federal land . this includes firefighter salaries , equipment , aviation asset operations , and incident support functions in direct support of wildfire response , plus personnel and resources for post - wildfire response programs . if their suppression funding is exhausted during a fiscal year , fs and doi are authorized to transfer funds from their other accounts to pay for suppression activities ; this is often referred to as fire borrowing . overall appropriations to fs and doi for wildland fire management have increased considerably since the 1990s . a significant portion of that increase is related to rising suppression costs , even during years of relatively mild wildfire activity , although the costs vary annually and are difficult to predict . fs and doi frequently have required more suppression funds than have been appropriated to them . this discrepancy often leads to fire borrowing , prompting concerns that increasing suppression spending may be detrimental to other agency programs . in response , congress has typically enacted supplemental appropriations to repay the transferred funds and / or to replenish the agency's wildfire accounts . wildfire spending — like all discretionary spending — is currently subject to procedural and budgetary controls . in the past , congress has sometimes — but not always — effectively waived some of these controls for certain wildfire spending . this situation prompted the 115 th congress to explore providing wildfire spending outside of those constraints , as discussed below . forest restoration activities seek to establish or reestablish the composition , structure , pattern , and ecological processes and functioning necessary to facilitate resilience and resistance to disturbance events ( eg , insect or disease infestation , catastrophic wildfire , ice or windstorm ) . for example , forest restoration may include activities such as removing small - diameter trees ( called thinning ) to reduce tree density , potentially mitigating against the spread of some insect or disease infestations . or , forest restoration may include prescribed fire to reduce the building up of understory vegetation or biomass , to mitigate the potential for a wildfire to increase in intensity and severity , and to facilitate post - fire recovery . blm's authority to conduct restoration projects is derived primarily from flpma . fs's authority is derived primarily from its responsibilities to: protect the nfs from destruction as specified in the organic administration act of 1897 ; manage the national forests for multiple use and sustained yield as specified in musy ; and maintain forest conditions designed to secure the maximum benefits and provide for a diversity of plant and animal communities as specified in the forest and rangeland renewable resources planning act of 1974 , as amended by nfma . congress also has authorized specific forest restoration programs for fs and blm , or has authorized forest restoration to be one of many activities or land management objectives for other programs .