both agencies conduct timber harvesting for various purposes . both plan long - term timber management by designating areas that can support sustainable timber harvest and calculating yields that can be taken without permanent impairment . the united states has 57.0 million acres of woodland . timber harvesting is the physical cutting and removal of trees or parts of trees from a given forested site . harvested timber , or cut and removed trees , is the raw material for items made of wood , such as lumber , plywood , paper , and other products . timber harvesting may occur on private , federal , or non - federal publicly owned lands , and may be conducted by the landowner or by another entity they allow to do so . most timber harvesting in the united states is conducted on private lands: in 2011 , 88% of timber harvests were conducted on private lands , and in 2012 , 90% of wood and paper products in the united states originated on private lands . fs and blm conduct timber sales as the most general way to allow timber harvesting on their respective lands , although they may allow harvesting in other ways . a timber sale is a formal process whereby an entity may purchase a contract to cut and remove specified timber . fs and blm receive revenue from the sale of the contract . information on timber harvesting in this report , such as harvested volume , harvested value , and other statistics , derives from fs and blm data and may include timber harvested through timber sales or other means . both fs and blm timber sale planning and implementation proceed under similar principles of achieving multiple use and sustained yield . in the short term , both agencies create plans for timber sales , determine the value of offered timber and specify what timber may be cut , and conduct sales in a competitive manner open to the public . timber harvesting may also occur on two other federal land systems , the national park system , managed by the national park service , and the national wildlife refuge system ( nwrs ) , managed by the fish and wildlife service ( both agencies are within doi ) . in the case of the national park system , the secretary may dispose of timber to control insects and diseases or to conserve natural or historic resources . in the case of the nwrs , the secretary of the interior may permit timber harvesting to achieve desired fish and wildlife habitat conditions . on both systems , timber harvesting is rare , and harvested volumes are small . this report provides an overview of timber harvesting on fs and blm lands . the report describes general statutory authorities and regulations , planning activities , timber sales , and trends in the volume and value of timber harvested , first from fs lands , and then for blm lands . the oregon and california ( o&c ) lands , which comprise approximately 2.6 million acres , contain 2.4 million acres of forest ( see " statutory authorities for harvesting timber ," below , for a description of the o&c lands ) .