these laws vary considerably in their purpose and scope . most impose data protection obligations on specific industry participants — such as financial institutions , health care entities , and communications common carriers — or specific types of data , such as children's data . other laws , however , supplement the constitution's limited privacy protections and apply similar principles to private entities . further , to the extent congress wants to allow individuals to enforce data protection laws and seek remedies for the violations of such laws in court , it must account for article iii's standing requirements . under the supreme court's 2016 spokeo inc. v. robins decision , plaintiffs must experience more than a "bare procedural violation" of a federal privacy law to satisfy article iii and to sue to rectify a violation of that law . americans now transmit their personal data on the internet at an exponentially higher rate than the past . along with the increased connectivity , a growing number of "consumer facing" actors ( such as websites ) and "behind the scenes" actors ( such as data brokers and advertising companies ) collect , maintain , and use consumers' information . while this data collection can benefit consumers — for instance , by allowing companies to offer them more tailored products — it also raises privacy concerns , as consumers often cannot control how these entities use their data . as a consequence , the protection of personal data has emerged as a major issue for congressional consideration . despite the increased interest in data protection , the legal paradigms governing the security and privacy of personal data are complex and technical , and lack uniformity at the federal level . inadequate corporate privacy practices and intentional intrusions into private computer networks have exposed the personal information of millions of americans . at the same time , internet connectivity has increased and varied in form in recent years , expanding from personal computers and mobile phones to everyday objects such as home appliances , "smart" speakers , vehicles , and other internet - connected devices . the supreme court has recognized that the constitution provides various rights protecting individual privacy , but these rights generally guard only against government intrusions and do little to prevent private actors from abusing personal data online . at the federal statutory level , while there are a number of data protection statutes , they primarily regulate certain industries and subcategories of data . the federal trade commission ( ftc ) fills in some of the statutory gaps by enforcing the federal prohibition against unfair and deceptive data protection practices . but no single federal law comprehensively regulates the collection and use of personal data . in contrast to the "patchwork" nature of federal law , some state and foreign governments have enacted more comprehensive data protection legislation . some analysts suggest these laws , which include the european union's ( eu's ) general data protection regulation ( gdpr ) and state laws such as the california consumer privacy act ( ccpa ) , will create increasingly overlapping and uneven data protection regimes .