figure 1 . common conservation program abbreviationssource: crs . the conservation title of the agriculture improvement act of 2018 ( 2018 farm bill ; p.l . 115-334 , title ii ) reauthorized and amended many of the largest conservation programs and created a number of new pilot programs , carve - outs , and initiatives . the house - and senate - passed farm bills ( h.r . 2 ) each included a number of amendments to existing conservation programs , many of which did not overlap . this generally resulted in the inclusion of a mix of amendments from each chamber being in the enacted bill . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projects that total mandatory spending for the title will increase by $555 million during the first five years of the 2018 farm bill ( fy2019-fy2023 ) , compared to a continuation of funding levels authorized in the agricultural act of 2014 ( 2014 farm bill ; p.l . mandatory spending for the title over 10 years ( fy2019-fy2028 ) is projected by cbo to be reduced by $6 billion , relative to the 2014 farm bill authorized levels . generally , the bill reallocates funding within the conservation title among the larger programs and pays for increases in the short term with reductions in the long term . the 2018 farm bill reauthorized and amended all of the major usda agricultural conservation programs . generally , farm bill conservation programs can be grouped into the following types based on similarities: working lands , land retirement , easement , conservation compliance , and partnership and grants ( see figure 1 and figure 2 for a list of conservation programs ) . most of these programs are authorized to receive mandatory funding ( i.e. , they do not require an annual appropriation ) , and include funding authorities that expire with most other farm bill programs at the end of fy2023 . other types of conservation programs — such as watershed programs , emergency programs , and technical assistance — are authorized in legislation other than the farm bill . most of these programs have permanent authorities and receive appropriations annually through the discretionary appropriations process . these programs are not generally addressed in the context of a farm bill and are not covered in detail in this report , except for cases where the 2018 farm bill made amendments to the program . this section provides a general discussion of programmatic - specific amendments made to various conservation programs and subprograms . for a detailed section - by - section analysis of amendments in the 2018 farm bill , including statutory and u.s. code citations , see appendix . unless otherwise noted , conservation programs discussed in this section are authorized to receive mandatory funding through the borrowing authority of the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) . for additional analysis of conservation program funding , see the " budget and baseline " section . beginning with the agriculture and food act of 1981 ( 1981 farm bill ; p.l . 97-98 ) , agricultural conservation has been a stand - alone title in all farm bills . the breadth of the conservation title has grown with each passing omnibus farm bill .