likewise , legislation could distinguish between harassment by teachers from that between students . title ix applies to federal - funded schools at all levels of education . for instance , all public school districts receive some federal financial assistance , as do most institutions of higher education through participation in federal student aid programs . notably , when any part of a school district or institution of higher education receives federal funds , all of the recipient's operations are covered by title ix . the text of title ix does not expressly mention sexual abuse or harassment , while current regulations implementing the statute also do not explicitly address sexual harassment ( although the regulations do require schools to designate at least one employee to function as a title ix coordinator ) . in each of the last several presidential administrations , however , the department of education ( ed ) has issued guidance documents that instruct schools regarding their responsibilities under title ix when addressing allegations of sexual harassment . when violations of the statute are found through these means , the office can seek informal resolution through a resolution agreement . according to ocr , if negotiations do not reach a resolution agreement , it may then take more formal enforcement measures , including seeking to suspend or terminate an institution's funding . notably , neither title ix's text nor ed's current regulations directly address sexual harassment . in the administrative context , ed's ocr has issued a series of guidance documents that have interpreted title ix to bar sexual harassment and define distinct responsibilities for educational institutions with regard to such allegations . these documents — while sometimes subject to change — generally reflect a different analysis for assessing a school's title ix liability for harassment than the supreme court case law addressing private rights of action for damages for sexual abuse or harassment . in particular , ed has applied a constructive notice requirement that prompts a school's title ix responsibility to respond , rather than "actual notice" to "an appropriate person" as required in the context of suits for damages . in addition , while the supreme court has explained that a school's response will result in liability only where "clearly unreasonable," ed has articulated baseline standards for how schools must respond to comply with title ix . finally , while the supreme court rejected holding schools responsible for sexual harassment under theories of vicarious liability , ed has held schools responsible for sexual harassment under title ix where a teacher commits misconduct in the scope of their employment . in response to the foregoing guidance from ed , as well as increased oversight from ocr between 2011 and 2016 , schools developed a variety of procedures to ensure that their responses to allegations of sexual assault complied with title ix . generally speaking , the specific type of procedures for investigating allegations of sexual harassment vary considerably across educational institutions .