successive u.s . administrations have sought to keep u.s. involvement and investment minimal relative to the 2003-2011 era , pursuing u.s. interests through partnership with various entities in iraq and the development of those partners' capabilities , rather than through extensive u.s. military deployments . u.s. economic assistance bolsters iraq's ability to attract lending support and is aimed at improving the government's effectiveness and public financial management . the united states is the leading provider of humanitarian assistance to iraq and also supports post - is stabilization activities across the country through grants to united nations agencies and other entities . the trump administration has sustained a cooperative relationship with the iraqi government and has requested funding for fy2020 to support iraq's stabilization and continue security training for iraqi security forces . the size and mission of the u.s. military presence in iraq have evolved as conditions on the ground have changed since 2017 ; they could change further if iraqi officials revise their current requests for continued u.s. and international security assistance . the 116 th congress has appropriated funds to provide security assistance , humanitarian relief , and foreign aid for iraq ( p.l . 116-6 ) , and is considering appropriations and authorization requests for fy2020 that would largely continue u.s. policies and programs on current terms . it remains to be seen whether iraq and the united states will be able to pursue opportunities to build a bilateral relationship that is less defined by conflict and its aftermath . to do so , leaders on both sides will likely have to continue creatively managing unusually complex political and security challenges . since the u.s. - led ouster of saddam hussein in 2003 , iraq's shia arab majority has exercised greater national power both in concert and in competition with the country's sunni arab and kurdish minorities . while intercommunal identities and rivalries remain politically relevant , competition among shia movements and coalition building across communal groups are now major factors in iraqi politics . notwithstanding their ethnic and religious diversity and political differences , many iraqis advance similar demands for improved security , government effectiveness , and economic opportunity . some iraqi politicians have broadened their political and economic narratives in an attempt to appeal to disaffected citizens across the country . years of conflict , poor service delivery , corruption , and sacrifice have strained the population's patience with the status quo , adding to the pressures that leaders face from the country's uncertain domestic and regional security environment . although the islamic state's exclusive control over distinct territories in iraq has now ended , the u.s. intelligence community assessed in 2018 that the islamic state "has started — and probably will maintain — a robust insurgency in iraq and syria as part of a long - term strategy to ultimately enable the reemergence of its so - called caliphate. in january 2019 , director of national intelligence dan coats told congress that the islamic state "remains a terrorist and insurgent threat and will seek to exploit sunni grievances with baghdad and societal instability to eventually regain iraqi territory against iraqi security forces that are stretched thin. the legacy of the war with the islamic state strains security in iraq in two other important ways .