circuit . similar to kloeckner , the court's opinion hinged on its interpretation of the statutory language in 5 u.s.c . ยง 7702 , under which district court review of a mixed case applies only when an employee " ( a ) has been affected by an action which the employee . may appeal to the [mspb] and " ( b ) alleges . discrimination. while the federal government had argued for purposes of this section that a case constitutes a mixed case only if the employee "may appeal to the board," the court rejected this argument . instead , the court declared that under this language , what matters is not what the mspb determined about its ability to hear an appeal , but rather "the nature of an employee's claim that he had been "'affected by an action [appealable] to the [mspb]'" ( in this case , suspension and removal ) . the court also relied on its decision in kloe c kner and found that when it comes to mixed cases , there was nothing in the statutory language that demonstrated congress's intent to treat jurisdictional dismissals differently from other types of mspb dismissals . accordingly , the kloe c kner and perry decisions both arguably demonstrate that despite mspb's grounds for dismissing a mixed case , if an employee ( or a former employee ) "complains of serious adverse action prompted . by the employing agency's violation of federal antidiscrimination laws," the appropriate forum for judicial review is the district court . in recent years , congress has passed legislation that , for some types of cases , expressly extends judicial review of mspb decisions beyond the federal circuit . the department of veterans affairs accountability and whistleblower protection act of 2017 addressed mspb appeal rights for veterans affairs department employees who have been suspended , demoted , or removed from federal service for performance or misconduct . among other things , the act specifies that employees may appeal a decision of the mspb to the federal circuit or any court of appeals of competent jurisdiction . additionally , in 2018 , congress passed the all circuit review act , which extends judicial review of mspb decisions in certain whistleblower and other retaliation cases not only to the federal circuit , but also to federal circuit court of appeals . this act is a permanent extension of the whistleblower protection enhancement act , as amended , which provided for this expanded jurisdiction for a period that terminated on november 26 , 2017 . according to the office of special counsel , the new act will , among other things , promote more "robust implementation of whistleblower protection laws. the special counsel further maintained that given the number of district and appellate courts that will now be hearing these cases , "[d]iffering interpretations may result in 'circuit splits,' which make it more likely that the u.s. supreme court will take up questions that arise regarding how these important laws are applied . this expanded judicial accountability is precisely the outcome congress intended and will strengthen whistleblower protections. the mspb currently has no sitting members .