it does not cover domestic trophy hunting . international sport hunting is largely regulated through laws of the range country , the country importing trophies , and international agreements . hunters generally must consider regulations of all three entities and apply for applicable permits to hunt and transport trophies . this section will discuss the regulations associated with each category . the controversies surrounding international trophy hunting are rooted in the ecological , ethical , and economic considerations of the practice . numerous factors affect a species , and teasing out the effects of trophy hunting is challenging due to a lack of long - term monitoring of hunted populations . most studies also report that with appropriate and consistent management , trophy hunting can be potentially beneficial for species ; however , with poor management , trophy hunting can be detrimental for species . as congress debates whether international trophy hunting is a benefit or a detriment to wildlife conservation , it might consider promoting alternative forms of trophy hunting in the wild . some contend that trophy hunting in enclosed ranges could give hunting operations greater control over wildlife populations . the practice of hunting animals that are enclosed within a private game ranch is referred to as captive hunting or , in some cases , canned hunting . the species in captive hunts usually are larger megafauna , such as lions , and typically are bred in captivity for game ranches . proponents of captive hunting contend that it guarantees hunting success for the hunter , allows hunts to be shorter and less expensive , produces better trophies , drives conservation through economic incentives , and allows for easier management of populations , because they are in a contained environment where hunting can be limited . critics of captive hunting have a different perspective that drives the controversy behind the practice ; they contend that killing animals in a contained environment with no chance of escape is unethical and detracts from the sport of hunting . this concept is termed fair chase and is considered the "ethical , sportsmanlike , and lawful pursuit and taking of any free - ranging wild , big game animal in a manner that does not give the hunter an improper or unfair advantage over the game animals. they argue that animals bred in captivity are not equivalent to wild animals and therefore do not have conservation value or enhance the long - term survival of the wild population . in addition , animals bred in captivity can suffer from limited genetic diversity , and fenced game ranches fragment habitat and limit the free range of wild animals . central to the controversy behind captive hunting are lion populations in south africa . captive hunting is prevalent in south africa , where over 80% - 90% of the lions hunted are believed to be captive . consumers of these hunts are largely from the united states ( approximately 60% of captive lion trophies are exported to the united states ) and the eu ( approximately 40% of captive lion trophies are exported to the eu ) .