appendix a . reports , plans , and regulations in awia ( p.l . these appropriations are available until expended . initiated by epa in 2006 , watersense is a voluntary labeling program that identifies and promotes water - efficient products , buildings , and services . prior to the enactment of awia , watersense was not explicitly authorized in law . it is similar to the department of energy's ( doe ) energystar voluntary labeling program to promote energy efficiency . section 4306 of awia amends the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-58 ) to establish the watersense program at epa . section 4306 authorizes epa to establish specifications that products and services must meet to earn a watersense label , some of which differ from the original program . awia stipulates that products and services earning the watersense label must reduce water use , decrease strain on water systems , conserve energy , and preserve water resources . section 4306 requires epa to set detailed performance criteria for water efficiency . every six years , epa must review the water efficiency criteria and update them as necessary . awia authorizes epa to establish the watersense performance criteria based on technical specifications and testing protocols of relevant voluntary consensus standards organizations . it also requires epa to consider reviewing and revising watersense performance criteria established prior to january 1 , 2012 , by december 31 , 2019 . section 4306 establishes epa's oversight responsibilities for the watersense program . these responsibilities include auditing the use of the watersense label , testing protocols , and managing the accreditation process for watersense certification bodies . this section directs epa and doe to coordinate to prevent duplicative or conflicting requirements in the watersense and energystar programs . awia explicitly requires the inclusion of certain products and services in the watersense program . these include irrigation technologies and services , point - of - use water treatment devices , plumbing products , water reuse and recycling technologies , various landscaping and gardening products and services , whole house humidifiers , and water - efficient buildings . section 2007 of awia directs epa to administer a competitive grant program to accelerate the development of innovative water technology that addresses drinking water supply , quality , treatment or security . among the selection criteria for grants , epa must prioritize projects that provide additional drinking water supplies with minimal environmental impact . eligible grant recipients include research institutions , regional water organizations , nonprofit organizations , and institutions of higher education , which can partner with private entities . the maximum single grant award for any one recipient is $5.0 million . grant recipients may use these grants for developing , testing , or deploying water technologies or providing technical assistance to deploy existing innovative water technologies . epa must submit a report to congress that details advancements in water technology associated with this grant program . this section authorizes $10.0 million to be appropriated each year for fy2019 and fy2020 to support this grant program . with awia , the 115 th congress passed an omnibus water infrastructure and project authorization bill that affects several federal agencies .