the causes are diverse . south africa also faces criminal justice system capacity challenges . although the country has a relatively well - resourced national police force , there are periodic reports of vigilante mob justice , and police sometimes use heavy - handed , abusive tactics to respond to crime and public unrest . several police leaders have been implicated in professional misconduct inquiries or corruption . south africa also faces broad challenges to social cohesion linked to grievances and fractures stemming from socioeconomic inequality and marginalization , social biases , and criminal activity . examples include periodic xenophobic mob attacks on african immigrants and their businesses , crime - motivated attacks on white farmers , and frequent de facto residential racial and socioeconomic segregation . while many of the poor live in townships , the wealthy , including many whites , often live in gated , highly secured communities . another key challenge is south africa's high hiv prevalence . statistics south africa , a state agency , estimates that 18.99% of adults were hiv - positive in 2018 , up from 2017 ( 18.88% ) . despite this moderate increase , which is partially attributable to increased survival rates due to improved access to anti - retroviral treatment , there has been a steady decline in the annual growth rate of hiv prevalence ( total cases ) and incidence ( new infections ) . national efforts to counter hiv have received considerable international support , notably under u.s. pepfar programs . citizens' expectations and their demands for rapid socioeconomic transformation have exceeded what the south african state has been able to provide , due to fiscal , technical , and governance shortfalls . despite large investments in housing , services , infrastructure , and state technical capacities , public goods and services delivery rates and quality have often been inadequate . this has spurred frequent , sometimes violent demonstrations . while known as service protests , they center on many issues , including local public corruption and cronyism , and can have political repercussions . in april 2018 , president ramaphosa cut short an overseas trip to address a spate of interrelated unrest that featured service delivery protests , attacks on foreigners , anger over alleged corruption by the affected province's then - premier ( governor ) , and clashes between local rival anc members . in 2015 and 2016 , south africa also experienced mass student protests , some violent , over university education costs and alleged institutional racism in higher education . the current government is implementing a pledge , made just before the end of the zuma administration , to fund free higher education for the poor and freeze certain other fees . despite such challenges , and indications of an increased politicization of the state bureaucracy under zuma , many national state agencies ( eg , the central bank , the statistical agency , the courts , some ministries , and the treasury ) possess substantial institutional and technical capacity . south africa ranked second globally on the international budget partnership's 2017 open budget index , a measure of public budget transparency .