the hearing typically is held for more than one judicial nominee at a time . from 1977 through 2018 , the median length of time from when an individual was first nominated to a circuit court judgeship to when he or she received a hearing by the judiciary committee was 63.0 days ( or 2.1 months ) . as shown by figure 4 , however , using roll call votes to confirm nominees has become much more common during recent presidencies . a relatively small percentage of circuit court nominees were confirmed by roll call vote during the carter , reagan , and george h. w. bush presidencies . specifically , 7.1% , 6.0% , and 2.4% of circuit court nominees were confirmed by roll call during each of these three presidencies , respectively . additionally , only one district court nominee was confirmed by roll call vote during each of the carter and reagan presidencies , and no district court nominees were confirmed by roll call vote during george h. w. bush's presidency . confirmation by roll call vote became more common during the clinton presidency , with nearly one - quarter , 24.6% , of circuit court nominees and 10.5% of district court nominees receiving roll call votes at the time of senate confirmation . it was not , however , until the george w. bush presidency that a majority of lower court nominees were approved using roll call votes , with 80.3% of circuit court nominees and 54.0% of district court nominees confirmed in this way . this trend continued under president obama , with 89.1% of circuit court nominees and 64.6% of district court nominees being confirmed by roll call vote . during the first two years of the trump presidency , all u.s. circuit court nominees were confirmed using roll call votes , representing an increase from recent years in the frequency of using roll call votes to confirm circuit court nominees . in contrast , 50.9% of district court nominees were confirmed by roll call vote , representing a decrease from recent years in the frequency of using roll call votes to confirm district court nominees . this section provides data related to the gender and race of u.s. circuit and district court nominees confirmed by the senate during each presidency since the carter administration . these particular demographic characteristics of judicial nominees are of ongoing interest to congress . such interest is demonstrated especially at the time circuit and district court nominations are considered by the senate . for example , floor statements by senators in support of circuit or district court nominees frequently emphasize the particular demographic characteristics of nominees who would enhance the diversity of the federal judiciary . as shown by figure 6 , for completed presidencies , the percentage of confirmed u.s. circuit court nominees who were women ranged from a low of 7.2% during the reagan presidency to a high of 43.6% during the obama presidency . for district court nominees , the percentage of confirmed nominees who were women ranged from a low of 8.3% during the reagan presidency to a high of 41.0% during the obama presidency .