farm payments flow down through these arrangements to individual recipients . much of this information is summarized in table 1 . this report also discusses several issues related to farm program payment limits , including policy design issues , that may be of interest to congress . finally , an appendix contains a history of the evolution of annual payment limits for major commodity programs ( table a - 1 ) . not all farm businesses are eligible to participate in federal farm programs . a number of statutory and regulatory requirements govern federal farm program eligibility for benefits under various programs . some farm businesses , although eligible to participate , are restricted from receiving certain benefits or may be limited in the extent of program payments that they may receive . over time , program eligibility rules have evolved , expanding to more programs and including more limitations . cross - cutting methods of determining program eligibility — such as agi thresholds — are relatively new . discussed below are cross - cutting eligibility requirements that affect multiple programs , including participant identification , foreign ownership , nature and extent of participation ( i.e. , aef criteria ) , means tests , and conservation requirements . the process of tracking payments to an individual through various levels of ownership in single and multiperson legal entities is referred to as "direct attribution. several types of legal entities may qualify for farm program payments . however , ultimately every legal entity represents some combination of individuals . for example , a joint operation can be made up of a combination of individuals , partnerships , and / or corporate entities . a particular individual may be part of each of these three component entities , as well as additional subentities within each of these components . congress defines legal entity as an entity created under federal or state law that ( 1 ) owns land or an agricultural commodity or ( 2 ) produces an agricultural commodity . this broad definition encompasses the multiperson legal entities discussed earlier such as family farm operations , joint ventures , corporations , and institutional arrangements . ownership shares in a multiperson legal entity are tracked via a person's social security number or ein as reported in ccc - 901 and ccc - 902 . identification at the individual payment recipient level is critical for assessing the cumulative payments of each individual against the annual payment limit . direct attribution was originally authorized in the 2008 farm bill ( §1603 ( b ) ( 3 ) ) . all farm program payments made directly or indirectly to an individual associated with a specific farming operation are combined with any other payments received by that same person from any other farming operation — based on that person's pro rata interest in those other operations . it is this accumulation of an individual's payments — tracked through four levels of ownership in multiperson legal entities — that is subject to the annual payment limit ( see text box below ) . the first level of attribution is an individual's personal farming operation . subsequent levels of attribution are related to those legal entities in which an individual has an ownership share .