this report focuses on the income of the undergraduate student population . the report will explore the relationship between student income and certain student demographics such as race and dependency status , and explore how the income distribution of the undergraduate population compares with that of the national population of persons who do not have a postsecondary degree . this same income level represents more than 300% of the poverty threshold for a single individual and for a family of two . the data presented thus far suggest differences in the trends in enrollment of undergraduate students from different income groups . to further explore the current population of students , crs examined certain demographic characteristics of the undergraduate student population and how those characteristics are related to income using the most recent npsas . the npsas data suggest that low - income students have enrolled in postsecondary education at higher levels in more recent years . to explore the extent to which the influx of students is related to changes in the income distribution of the national population , this section uses the cps asec to compare the income distribution of the national population with that of the undergraduate population . however , in 2011 and 2015 low - income persons in this age range constituted similar shares of the national and undergraduate populations . for purposes of this report , "low - income students" are considered to have income that falls within the first two poverty bands ( below 200% of the poverty guidelines ) . this characterization of low - income status is consistent with standards used in some education and social service programs that use the poverty guidelines to determine eligibility for assistance . it is used here primarily as a descriptor of lower - income categories in the populations being examined , and no suggestion is being made with regard to whether the first two poverty bands should be used as thresholds in "low - income" determinations for the receipt of means tested assistance . as previously mentioned , one advantage of using the poverty guidelines is that they are indexed for inflation , which is useful when looking at trends in income over time . another advantage is that they account for families of different sizes . for example , 200% of the poverty threshold for a family of four is $47,700 . given that the data suggest noteworthy trends for low - income students , the discussion in this section generally focuses on persons with income below 200% of the poverty guideline . figure 6 provides a comparison of the income distribution of the national population aged 15 to 65 and the postsecondary population over three time periods . the data suggest that while the low - income national population grew from 2007 to 2011 , the population of low - income undergraduate students grew at a higher rate than the national population of low - income persons . specifically , from 2007 to 2011 the number of persons with income below 200% of the poverty guidelines grew from 58.5 million to 71.0 million , an increase of 22%.during the same time , the number of low - income students enrolled as undergraduates grew from 8.2 million to 11.7 million , an increase of 44% .