suspicious activity. while such figures represent only a fraction of both global money laundering and virtual currency transaction volume , government officials have identified virtual currencies as a growth industry for money launderers that presents regulators and law enforcement with unique challenges . this report provides a general overview of the application of federal anti - money laundering ( aml ) law to virtual currencies . first , the report outlines the basic architecture of federal aml law . second , the report discusses administrative guidance concerning the application of federal aml law to virtual currencies . third , the report reviews a number of prominent criminal prosecutions and administrative enforcement actions involving federal aml law and virtual currencies . finally , the report discusses a number of legislative proposals to reform certain elements of the federal aml regime surrounding virtual currencies and further investigate the use of virtual currencies in criminal activities . the federal aml regime consists of two general categories of laws and regulations . first , federal law requires a range of "financial institutions" to abide by a variety of aml compliance program , reporting , and recordkeeping requirements . second , federal law criminalizes money laundering and various forms of related conduct . because neither congress nor fincen has formally amended the bsa regulatory regime in response to the advent of virtual currencies , prosecutors and regulators have been required to analyze whether virtual currency transactions and business models fall within some of the preexisting legal categories discussed above . in 2013 , fincen attempted to clarify certain aspects of this analysis by issuing administrative guidance addressing the circumstances in which participants in virtual currency transactions qualify as msbs . in its 2013 guidance , fincen took the position that "users" of virtual currencies do not qualify as msbs subject to federal registration requirements , while "administrators" and "exchangers" of virtual currencies may qualify as msbs . specifically , the guidance explained that users of virtual currencies — that is , persons who obtain virtual currencies to purchase goods or services — are not msbs because they are not involved in money transmission . by contrast , fincen indicated that virtual currency administrators ( persons "engaged as a business" in putting a virtual currency into circulation and who have the authority to withdraw such currency from circulation ) and exchangers ( persons "engaged as a business in the exchange of virtual currency for real currency , funds , or other virtual currency" ) may be "money transmitters" and , by extension , msbs . specifically , fincen explained that virtual currency administrators and exchangers qualify as msbs ( unless they fall within a specific exemption ) when they ( 1 )  "accept[] or transmit[] a convertible virtual currency," or ( 2 ) "buy[] or sell[] convertible virtual currency for any reason. accordingly , under fincen's guidance , virtual currency issuers and exchangers will generally qualify as msbs unless they fall within a specific statutory or regulatory exemption . over the past decade , federal prosecutors and regulators have pursued a number of cases involving the application of federal aml law to virtual currencies .