whether the court will turn that suggestion into a holding remains to be seen . until then , however , federal agencies like ocr will likely continue to enforce title vi consistent with constitutional standards that the court has since read into the statute . in ocr's case , that enforcement work is already considerable , involving thousands of complaints every year culminating in significant resolutions across a wide range of schools and institutions of higher education . and in the background remains ed's ultimate authority under title vi — to withdraw its financial support from any program or institution that refuses to comply with the statute's command that all individuals be treated equally , regardless of their race . plainly that prohibition outlaws racial "discrimination" in all federally funded programs . it does not define , however , the sorts of practices title vi thereby excludes . and with the legislative history on this point inconclusive at best , the task of providing a workable definition has been left to the agencies charged with enforcing title vi and , ultimately , to the courts . as explained below , however , with its 2001 decision in alexander v. sandoval , the supreme court appears to have put the basic interpretive question to rest: section 601 directly prohibits only intentional discrimination . in sandoval the court appeared to resolve the basic ambiguity in title vi: the statute's central nondiscrimination mandate — section 601 — outlaws only intentional discrimination . but saying that much , the sandoval majority also acknowledged , did not speak to whether policies with a disparate impact might still be barred by regulations issued under the rulemaking grant found in section 602 of title vi . section 602 , as noted , directs agencies to promulgate regulations "to effectuate" the antidiscrimination prohibition of section 601 "consistent with achievement of the objectives of the statute. that doctrinal story has accordingly centered on one agency in particular: the office for civil rights ( ocr ) in the u.s. department of education ( ed ) . as this report explains , title vi continues to play a central part in ocr's mission of protecting civil rights on campuses at all educational levels , and in institutions both public and private . this report begins by briefly tracing title vi to its historical and conceptual roots in the federal spending power , and explains how the early understanding of that power shaped the various legislative proposals that ultimately became title vi . the report then examines the central doctrinal question behind the statute: what exactly title vi outlawed by prohibiting "discrimination" among federally funded programs , and what agencies are therefore allowed to do in order to enforce that prohibition . the report then turns to ed's ocr , briefly reviewing how that agency goes about the day - to - day work of enforcing title vi in schools , and concludes by surveying two recent developments related to title vi , along with some considerations should congress wish to revisit this landmark civil rights law .