, political ) appointees . ses positions are also not in the competitive service . the ses includes senior managerial , supervisory , and policy positions that are subject to a different pay scale , as well as different hiring and removal standards . this report examines the three service classifications , and reviews some of the central features and notable differences among these classifications . the competitive service consists of all civil service positions in the executive branch , except the following: positions that are specifically excepted from the competitive service by or under statute ; positions to which appointments are made by presidential nomination for confirmation by the senate , unless the senate otherwise directs ; and positions in the ses . the ses is a cadre of high - level government administrators who manage major programs and projects within most federal agencies . while they are considered federal employees within the civil service system , the ses is governed by a regulatory structure separate from the competitive and excepted services . as defined in statute , ses positions are generally managerial or supervisory positions that are classified above the gs - 15 grade ( or certain equivalent positions ) and need not be appointed by the president and confirmed by the senate . in these leadership roles , ses members may serve as intermediaries between top - level political appointees of an agency who seek to carry out the objectives of a particular president and career civil servants with institutional experience relating to relevant issues . according to a 2018 report , there are currently more than 7,000 permanent ses positions . there are two types of ses positions: ( 1 ) career reserved and ( 2 ) general . career reserved positions must be filled with career appointees to shield certain ses roles from political influence . generally , agency heads are to determine whether a particular ses position warrants a career reserved designation , to "ensure impartiality , or the public's confidence in the impartiality , of the government. opm regulations reflect the types of ses roles in which this designation is appropriate , including those involving adjudication and appeals , auditing , and law enforcement duties . a career appointee receiving a single unsatisfactory performance rating may be reassigned or transferred within the ses or removed from the ses . a career ses member who receives two unsatisfactory ratings in any period of five consecutive years , or twice in any period of three consecutive years receives less than fully successful ratings , must be removed from the ses . a majority of these employees work in the competitive service of the executive branch . applicants for competitive service positions compete with other applicants and are evaluated according to objective standards . ses career appointees are also generally entitled to be placed in a civil service position at gs - 15 or above ( or an equivalent position ) . the ses mainly consists of "career appointees" chosen through a merit - based competitive hiring process . positions in the excepted service are specifically excepted from the competitive service by statute , by the president , or by the office of personnel management ( opm ) .