, drugs and biological products ) . exclusivities are granted only to certain pharmaceutical products such as innovative products ( eg , a new active ingredient or new indication for an existing drug ) or those that serve a specific need ( eg , treating rare diseases ) . thus , congressional proposals related to ip rights are merely one potential means to reduce drug prices that is currently under consideration in congress . other legislative proposals seeking to reduce drug prices would , for example , permit the secretary of hhs ( the secretary ) to negotiate drug prices for medicare part d , allow consumers to import ( often cheaper ) pharmaceuticals from canada under certain circumstances , or reform health insurance requirements to institute a cap on consumers' out - of - pocket costs for prescription drugs . because these and other similar proposals relate only indirectly to ip rights in pharmaceuticals , they are outside the scope of this report . in part due to the complexity of the legal regimes governing ip rights in pharmaceutical products , there are many different approaches that legislators seeking to reduce drug and biologic prices might take . these approaches include efforts to facilitate generic and biosimilar market entry , curtail practices perceived to be anticompetitive , limit ip rights based on pricing behavior , and increase patent transparency . this section surveys some of the specific means used in existing legislative proposals . concerns about perceived high prices for prescription drugs and other pharmaceutical products implicate a complex set of legal regimes , including patent law , fda law , and specialized patent dispute procedures for drugs and biological products . much of the debate over allegedly high pharmaceutical prices is fundamentally a matter of public policy: in particular , finding the appropriate balance between providing incentives to create innovative new medicines versus the costs those incentives may impose on the public in the form of higher prices . nonetheless , knowledge of the workings of the existing legal regimes governing ip rights in pharmaceutical products is necessary to fully understand the implications of the variety of legislative approaches to reduce pharmaceutical prices . depending on the type of pharmaceutical product at issue and other factors , regulatory exclusivities may last anywhere from six months to 12 years . in overlapping ways , both patent rights and regulatory exclusivities can operate to deter or delay the market entry of a generic drug or biosimilar . the department of health and human services ( hhs ) has found that national spending on pharmaceutical products has been rising in recent years , predicting that these expenditures would continue to rise faster than overall health spending . understanding the interplay between several complex legal regimes is necessary in order to fully make sense of this debate . ip law comprises a set of exclusive rights that prevent others from making , copying , or using certain intangible creations of the human mind . federal law contains several different varieties of ip , depending on the type of intellectual creation at issue .