the first is the federal cost . refundable tax credits typically result in a large revenue loss because they may be fully utilized regardless of tax liability , whereas nonrefundable credits may be claimed only to the extent there is a tax liability , which can result in a portion of nonrefundable credits ultimately going unused . this concern is likely less of an issue with lihtc and nmtc , since few of these tax credits currently go unclaimed . this implies that converting these to refundable credits would likely not result in a significant increase in federal revenue loss . making the energy credits ( ptc and itc ) refundable could result in considerable federal revenue loss . itcs and ptcs that are currently carried forward and ultimately go unused under current law could instead be claimed immediately by taxpayers . for energy tax credits , many are claimed without the involvement of tax equity investors . tax equity investors typically require projects to be of a certain size ( i.e. , generate a certain amount of tax benefits ) to invest . as a result , there are many ptc - and itc - eligible projects that are not able to monetize tax benefits using tax equity investors . making energy tax credits refundable could ( 1 ) make the tax credits more attractive to developers that are not currently participating in tax equity markets ; and ( 2 ) reduce the cost of tax equity for developers that are participating . without a cap on the amount of itcs or ptcs that can be claimed , if policy changes were made that increased demand for credits , the cost associated with delivering those credits would increase . one option to address concerns about the potential cost associated with an unlimited tax credit would be to limit the amount of tax credits that could be claimed . there is some experience with refundable energy tax credits . the energy tax credits enacted for wind and solar in the late 1970s were refundable , although legislation was enacted to make the credits nonrefundable in 1980 . also , several states offer tax credits designed to promote renewable energy that are refundable . the second concern is allowing businesses to claim a refundable tax credit generally . for example , allowing credits to be sold to anonymous investors with no formal ties to the underlying project potentially removes the tax equity investors' oversight incentives , which are a crucial feature of the current approach . additionally , procedures would need to be implemented to track who has the right to claim the credits and prevent credits from being claimed ( or from being recaptured ) in instances of noncompliance or project failure . refundable tax credits are a useful tool for providing income support via the tax code . for this reason , refundable tax credits have generally been reserved for households , and mostly for lower - income households . some may take issue with allowing businesses to access an income - support tax incentive . unsophisticated investors may not fully understand the risks or how to properly scrutinize these investments . some of these issues may be resolved by the market itself if direct transfers were permitted .