see table notes for details . the right - hand column of the table provides additional comments for some of the emission sources . in some cases the comments discuss potential opportunities for additional ghg emissions coverage at a particular source . in other cases , the comments address potential limitations of covering all of the emissions from a particular source . a carbon tax would generate a new revenue stream . the magnitude of the revenues would depend on the scope and rate of the tax and multiple market factors , which introduce uncertainty in the revenue projections . this type of approach is commonly called a carbon tax or a ghg emissions fee ( see "terminology issues: a carbon tax or an emissions fee ? " this report does not compare and analyze the multiple policy tools available to congress that could address climate change ( see text box "other policy options for addressing ghg emissions" ) . this report focuses on the policy considerations and potential impacts of using a carbon tax or ghg emissions fee to control ghg emissions . the key human - related ghg is co 2 , which is generated primarily through the combustion of fossil fuels: coal , oil , and natural gas . in 2016 , fossil fuel combustion accounted for 94% of u.s. co 2 emissions and 76% of u.s. ghg emissions . a carbon tax could apply either directly to ghg emissions or to the materials — based on their carbon contents — that ultimately generate the emissions ( i.e. , "emissions inputs" ) . a carbon price on emissions or their emissions inputs — mainly fossil fuels — would increase the relative price of the more carbon - intensive energy sources , particularly coal . this result could spur innovation in less carbon - intensive technologies ( eg , renewable energy , nuclear power , carbon capture and sequestration [ccs] ) and stimulate other behavior that may decrease emissions , such as efficiency improvements . the energy price increases could also have both economy - wide impacts and negative effects on specific industries and particular demographic groups . a carbon tax approach has received some attention and debate in recent years . in the 115 th congress , members introduced nine carbon tax or fee proposals . outside of congress , the climate leadership council — a bipartisan group of former policymakers and industry leaders — published a conceptual carbon tax approach in 2017 that generated some interest . some of the industry leaders on the council represent major energy companies , including shell , bp , and exxonmobil . on the other hand , many members have expressed their opposition to a carbon tax . starting in the 112 th congress and going through the 115 th congress , members have introduced resolutions in both the house and senate expressing the view that a carbon tax is not in the economic interests of the united states . in 2018 , the house passed a resolution "expressing the sense of congress that a carbon tax would be detrimental to the united states economy" ( h.con.res . an analogous resolution was not introduced in the senate in the 115 th congress .