appendix a . state characteristics appendix b . annual pittman - robertson wildlife restoration act apportionments by state and territory , fy2015-fy201 . these proposals would remove this prohibition . proponents of this type of legislation have argued that these bills would provide states with flexibility to use pittman - robertson apportionments to support recruitment efforts that would promote participation in hunting and shooting sports . they contend there is a need to attract and retain hunters and recreational shooters , which , in turn , could increase excise tax revenues that support pittman - robertson . stakeholders also point out that wildlife restoration would remain the primary purpose of the act even if amended . other stakeholders have raised the concern that these bills would diminish wildlife restoration activities by allowing states to use funds currently apportioned for wildlife restoration purposes for recruitment and retention . other legislation has been introduced , including in the 115 th and 116 th congresses , that would change the terms under which states may use pittman - robertson allocations for projects related to the construction and expansion of public target ranges . currently , pittman - robertson allows states to use funds apportioned under the basic hunter education and safety program ( section 4 ( c ) ) for the "construction , operation , and maintenance of public target ranges. funds apportioned under the enhanced hunter education and safety grants program ( section 10 ) may be used for "enhancement of construction or development of firearm shooting ranges and archery ranges , and the updating of safety features of firearm shooting ranges and archery ranges. however , both programs have a 75% cap for the federal share of projects supported by pittman - robertson funding . all of the proposals in the 115 th and 116 th congress to amend the eligibility of activities related to shooting ranges would allow states and territories to use their basic hunter education and safety program apportionments for land acquisition , expansion , and construction related to a target range , rather than solely for construction , operation , and maintenance of a range ; allow states and territories to use up to 10% of funds apportioned to them through the wildlife restoration program to supplement apportionments for the enhanced hunter education and safety grants program to be used for land acquisition , expansion , and construction related to a target range ; allow states and territories to use their apportionments to pay for up to 90% of the total cost of a project related to a shooting range , instead of the current 75% federal cost - share cap ; and extend the obligation and expenditure window of enhanced hunter education and safety grants program apportionments used for shooting ranges to up to five fiscal years from the current window ( the fiscal year for which they were apportioned ) . according to their authors , these bills would address a stated decline in the availability of public target ranges and would provide increased opportunity for target practice at public shooting ranges .