service to minority individuals . these reports include information on the participation and outcomes of minorities for each grantee . nationwide quarterly progress . these reports include total participation as well as data on demographics and participants' demonstrated barriers to employment . the reports are required under section 515 of the oaa . 3056 et seq. ) since enactment of the oaa , congress has reauthorized and amended the act numerous times . most recently , the older americans act reauthorization act of 2016 ( p.l . 114-144 ) authorized appropriations for oaa programs for fy2017 through fy2019 , and made other changes to the act . prior to the 2016 oaa reauthorization , the oaa amendments of 2006 ( p.l . 109-365 ) reauthorized all programs under the act through fy2011 . although the authorizations of appropriations under the oaa expired at the end of fy2011 , congress continued to appropriate funding for oaa - authorized activities through fy2016 . grants under the program are administered by the employment and training administration ( eta ) at the department of labor ( dol ) . ( references to the secretary in this report refer to the secretary of labor , unless otherwise specified. ) scsep is the only oaa program administered by dol . other oaa programs are administered by the administration for community living ( acl ) at the department of health and human services ( hhs ) . scsep is supported by discretionary appropriations under the dol - hhs appropriations bill . scsep programs operate on dol's program year ( py ) , which operates nine months behind the fiscal year . activities in a given program year are supported by funding from the corresponding fiscal year . for example , py2017 ran from july 1 , 2017 , through june 30 , 2018 , and was supported by fy2017 appropriations . programs administered under title v of the oaa may also be referred to as the community service employment for older americans ( cseoa ) programs . dol uses the cseoa and scsep terminology interchangeably . from its total appropriation , the oaa establishes three reservations: ( 1 ) up to 1.5% for dol - selected pilots , demonstration , and evaluation projects ; ( 2 ) a fixed percentage of 0.75% for the territories of guam , american samoa , the u.s. virgin islands , and the northern mariana islands ; and ( 3 ) a portion determined by the secretary for activities that support eligible individuals who are american indian and pacific islander / asian american . the remaining funds are allocated to formula grants . title v supports formula grants to both national organizations ( "national grantees" ) and state agencies ( "state grantees" ) . national grantees are typically nonprofit organizations that operate in more than one state . state grantees are state government agencies . state grantee agencies are typically housed in a state's workforce unit or aging unit . in py2018 , approximately 78% of funds for formula grants ( $298 million ) were distributed among national grantees . there are about 15-20 national grantee organizations , including aarp and the national council on aging . about 22% of py2018 funds for grants ( $84 million ) were allocated to state agencies .