provoking russia . successive u.s . administrations have viewed u.s. leadership of nato as a cornerstone of u.s. national security strategy , bringing benefits ranging from peace and stability in europe to the political and military support of 28 allies , including many of the world's most advanced militaries . for almost as long as nato has been in existence , it also has faced criticism . one chief concern of critics in the united states , including some members of congress , has been that european allies' reliance on u.s. security guarantees have fostered an imbalanced and unsustainable "burdensharing" arrangement by which the united states carries an unfair share of the responsibility for ensuring european security . president donald trump has amplified these concerns , and his assertions that nato is a "bad deal" have caused some analysts and policymakers to reassess the costs and benefits to the united states of its long - standing leadership of the alliance . although successive u.s. presidents have called on the allies to increase defense spending , none has done so as stridently as president trump . he is also the first u.s. president to publicly suggest that the united states could modify its commitment to nato should the allies fail to meet agreed defense spending targets . trump administration officials stress that the united states remains committed to nato , as articulated in the administration's national security and defense strategies . they highlight the administration's successful efforts in 2017 and 2018 to substantially increase funding for the u.s. force presence in europe . president trump's supporters , including some members of congress , also argue that trump's forceful statements have succeeded in securing defense spending increases across the alliance that were not forthcoming under his predecessors . nevertheless , many supporters of nato , including some allied governments , continue to question the president's commitment to the alliance and worry that his condemnations could damage nato cohesion and credibility . in the face of these concerns , congress has demonstrated significant bipartisan support for nato and u.s. leadership of the alliance . in january 2019 , following reports that the president has considered seeking to withdraw the united states from nato , the house of representatives passed legislation reaffirming u.s. support for the alliance and limiting the president's authority to withdraw ( h.r . 676 , passed by a vote of 357-22 ) ; similar legislation has been introduced in the senate ( s.j.res . many analysts view the bipartisan , house - senate invitation to nato secretary general jens stoltenberg to address a joint session of congress on april 3 , 2019 , as an additional sign of continued congressional support . at the same time , congress continues to assess nato's utility and value to the united states and some members are concerned about several key challenges that continue to face the alliance , including burdensharing , managing relations with russia , and divergent threat perceptions within the alliance . this report provides context for ongoing discussions about nato's value to the united states and the extent to which nato serves u.s. strategic interests . a historical overview focuses on the perceived benefits to the united states of nato membership from nato's founding to the present day .