neither house has ever met to do so . in response to concerns over the scale and scope of the emergency economic powers granted by ieepa , supporters of the status quo would argue that congress has implicitly and explicitly expressed approval of the statute and its use . in 2018 , congress passed the export control reform act ( ecra ) . the legislation repealed the expired export administration act of 1979 , the regulations of which had been continued by reference to ieepa since 2001 . the ecra became the new statutory authority for export administration regulations . nevertheless , several export controls addressed in the export administration act of 1979 were not updated in the export control reform act of 2018 ; instead , congress chose to require the president to continue to use ieepa to continue to implement the three sections of the export administration act of 1979 that were not repealed . going forward , congress may wish to revisit these provisions , which all relate to deterring the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction . appendix a. nea and ieepa us . at least one scholar has recommended such an amendment . alternatively , congress could amend ieepa to provide for a review mechanism that would give congress an active role . in the senate during the 115 th congress , for example , senator mike lee introduced the global trade accountability act of 2017 required the president to report to congress on any proposed trade action ( including the use of ieepa ) , including a description of the proposal together with a list of items to be affected , an economic impact study of the proposal including potential retaliation . congress , using expedited procedures , would need to approve the president's action through a joint resolution within a 60-day period . the legislation would have provided for a temporary one - time unilateral trade action for a 90-day period . similarly , in the 116 th congress , senator lee introduced s. 764 , a bill to provide for congressional approval of national emergency declarations , and for other purposes , which would amend the nea to require an act of congress within 30 days to allow a national emergency to continue . another approach would establish a means for congress to pass a resolution of disapproval if ieepa authorities are invoked . an example of this approach is the trade authority protection act ( h.r . after the submission of similar reporting requirement to s. 177 ( above ) , congress could , under congressional review act ( cra ) - style procedures , pass a joint resolution of disapproval . congress does have the authority to pass a joint resolution under ieepa , as noted above , but the use of cra procedures would allow for certain expedited consideration . alternatively , congress could use any of these mechanisms to amend the current disapproval resolution process in ieepa or the nea itself . in testimony before the house committee on international relations in 1977 , professor harold g. maier summed up the main criticisms of twea: section 5 ( b ) 's effect is no longer confined to "emergency situations" in the sense of existing imminent danger .