however , the new u.s . ambassador to bosnia stated in february 2019 that the u.s. will continue to be "guarantor of bosnia and herzegovina's sovereignty and territorial integrity. on the other hand , many observers also note that u.s. engagement in bosnia ( and the western balkans ) decreased under the administrations of president george w. bush and president barack obama . during this time u.s. policymakers turned their focus to geopolitical crises and challenges in other parts of the globe while ceding the regional lead to the eu . they identify several key challenges . initially viewed as a "european problem," the bosnian conflict eventually helped shape the post - cold war role of the united states and nato in european security . when the united states assumed greater responsibilities in resolving the conflict , its role was considerable: leading nato airstrikes , garnering diplomatic support from russia and european allies , persuading warring parties to agree to a ceasefire , brokering the dayton peace agreement , and deploying 20,000 troops to bosnia . according to richard holbrooke , the u.s. official who brokered the talks , the bosnian war was a pivotal period in u.s. foreign policy in europe: "the three main pillars of [policy] — u.s. - russian relations , nato enlargement into central europe , and bosnia — had often worked against each other . now they reinforced each other: nato sent its forces out of area for the first time in its history , and russian troops , under an american commander , were deployed alongside them. some analysts and policymakers believe that the united states' strong hand in resolving the conflict and in shaping bosnia's political system have made it a stakeholder in bosnia's future . u.s. officials , often in cooperation with the eu , have intervened to defuse crises and broker reform talks . the united states also has imposed sanctions against bosnian officials: in addition to dodik ( see above ) , the u.s. state department publicly designated bosnian serb politician nikola špirić ( dodik's associate ) for "significant corruption or gross violation of human rights. u.s. policymakers attach strategic importance to bosnia's stability ; many analysts believe turbulence in bosnia could reverberate in the balkans and potentially draw in croatia and serbia , while instability in other parts of the region could spill over into bosnia . when the trump administration indicated in 2018 that it would consider supporting a potential serbia - kosovo agreement to "adjust borders" between the two — a major break with the long - standing eu and u.s. policy to oppose redrawing borders in the balkans along ethnic lines — some analysts expressed concern that the administration could reshape long - standing u.s. policy toward bosnia . indeed , some analysts have urged the united states to assume a greater role in bosnia , arguing that bosnia's current crises warrant it , and that the eu and the united states are more effective in the region when they work together . congressional interest in bosnia dates back to the 1992-1995 war . many members featured prominently in foreign policy debates over u.s. intervention in the conflict .