abridging the freedom of speech. once state action is established , the next consideration is to what extent the first amendment protects social media platforms' content moderation decisions . stated another way , the relevant question is when social media providers can assert that government regulation infringes on their own speech . perhaps most obviously , if a social media site posts content that it has created itself , the site may raise first amendment objections to a law expressly regulating that speech . social media providers may also argue that they are exercising protected speech rights when they are choosing whether to publish content that was originally created by users and when they make decisions about how to present that content . however , the fact that a law affects speech protected by the first amendment does not necessarily mean that it is unconstitutional . as explained below , the first amendment allows some regulation of speech and does not prohibit regulation of conduct . the permissibility of federal regulation of social media sites will turn in large part on what activity is being regulated . to the extent that federal regulation specifically targets communicative content — that is , speech — or social media platforms' decisions about whether and how to present that content , that regulation may raise constitutional questions . while the supreme court has not yet weighed in on the question , lower courts have held that when search engines make decisions regarding the presentation of search results , they are exercising editorial functions protected as speech under the first amendment . if this reasoning were to be extended to social media sites' decisions regarding the presentation of users' content , congress's ability to regulate those decisions would be relatively limited . however , even assuming that congress were to regulate the protected speech of social media companies , this would not necessarily doom a regulation . if , for example , the particular speech being regulated is commercial speech , such as advertisements , the regulation would likely be evaluated under a lower level of scrutiny . in addition , the court has recognized certain , relatively limited categories of speech that can be more readily regulated: "for example , speech that is obscene or defamatory can be constitutionally proscribed because the social interest in order and morality outweighs the negligible contribution of those categories of speech to the marketplace of ideas. but even with respect to these categories of speech , the government may violate the first amendment if it engages in further content or viewpoint discrimination within that category . thus , the supreme court has said as an example that while "the government may proscribe libel," "it may not make the further content discrimination of proscribing only libel critical of the government. in addition , if the law imposes criminal liability , the court may require a mental state requirement , so that , for example , the government has to prove that the defendant knew the speech was obscene . courts will also apply a lower level of scrutiny to content - neutral regulations .