fy2018 grants included in this report were calculated by ed . the percentage share of funds allocated under each of the title i - a formulas was calculated by crs for each state by dividing the total grant received by the total amount allocated under each formula . title i - a is designed to provide supplementary educational and related services to low - achieving and other students attending elementary and secondary schools with relatively high concentrations of students from low - income families . the u.s. department of education ( ed ) determines title i - a grants to local educational agencies ( leas ) based on four separate funding formulas: basic grants , concentration grants , targeted grants , and education finance incentive grants ( efig ) . this report provides estimated fy2018 state grant amounts under each of the four formulas used to determine title i - a grants . wyoming received the smallest total title i - a grant amount ( $35.9 million ) and , as a result , the smallest percentage share ( 0.23% ) of title i - a grants . in general , grant amounts for states vary among formulas due to the different allocation amounts for the formulas . for example , the basic grant formula receives a greater share of overall title i - a appropriations than the concentration grant formula , so states generally receive higher estimated grant amounts under the basic grant formula than under the concentration grant formula . among states , title i - a grant amounts and the percentage shares of funds vary due to the different characteristics of each state . for a general overview of the title i - a formulas , see crs report r44164 , esea title i - a formulas: in brief . for a more detailed discussion of the title i - a formulas , see crs report r44461 , allocation of funds under title i - a of the elementary and secondary education act . under title i - a , funds are allocated to leas via state educational agencies ( seas ) using the four title i - a formulas . annual appropriations bills specify portions of each year's title i - a appropriation to be allocated to leas and states under each of the formulas . in fy2018 , about 41% of title i - a appropriations were allocated through the basic grants formula , 9% through the concentration grants formula , and 25% each through the targeted grants and efig formulas . once funds reach leas , the amounts allocated under the four formulas are combined and used jointly . for each formula , a maximum grant is calculated by multiplying a "formula child count," consisting primarily of estimated numbers of school - age children living in families in poverty , by an "expenditure factor" based on state average per pupil expenditures for public elementary and secondary education . in some of the title i - a formulas , additional factors are multiplied by the formula child count and expenditure factor to determine a maximum grant amount . these maximum grants are then reduced to equal the level of available appropriations for each formula , taking into account a variety of state and lea minimum grant provisions .