it must also be ratified by canada and mexico . the timeline for congressional approval of usmca would likely occur under the trade promotion authority ( tpa ) timeline established under the bipartisan congressional trade priorities and accountability act of 2015 ( p.l . at various times , president trump has stated that he intends to withdraw from nafta . some observers have suggested that delays in congressional action on usmca could make it harder for canada to consider usmca approval this year because of upcoming parliamentary elections in october 2019 . under the scenario of a u.s. withdrawal from nafta without usmca ratification , tariffs on u.s. exports to canada and mexico would be expected to return to the higher wto most - favored - nation ( mfn ) rates , the highest level of applied tariffs rates under wto commitments . in this circumstance , the study finds that u.s. agricultural and food exports to canada and mexico would decline by about $12 billion , or 30% of the value of u.s. agricultural exports to these markets in fy2018 . this loss is expected to be partially offset by an increase of $2.6 billion in u.s. exports to other countries for a net loss in export revenues of $9.4 billion . a loss of this order would represent a decline of 24% compared with the total value of u.s. agricultural exports to these countries in fy2018 . to date , similar studies assessing the effect of usmca on u.s. agriculture as a whole are not available . the proposed usmca would have to be approved by congress and ratified by mexico and canada before entering into force . on august 31 , 2018 , pursuant to tpa , president trump provided congress a 90-day notification of his intent to sign a free trade agreement with canada and mexico . on january 29 , 2019 — 60 days after an agreement was signed , and as required by tpa — u.s . trade representative robert lighthizer submitted to congress changes to existing u.s. laws that would be needed to bring the united states into compliance with the proposed usmca . a report by the usitc on the possible economic impact of tpa is not expected to be completed until april 20 , 2019 , due to the 35-day government shutdown . the report has been cited by some members of congress as key to their decisions on whether to support the agreement . some policymakers have stated that the path to ratifying usmca by congress is uncertain partially because the three countries have yet to resolve disputes over tariffs on u.s. imports of steel and aluminum , as well as retaliatory tariffs that canada and mexico have imposed on u.s. agricultural products . the conclusion of the proposed usmca did not resolve these tariff disputes . on january 30 , 2019 , senator chuck grassley called on the trump administration to lift tariffs on steel and aluminum imports from canada and mexico before congress begins considering legislation to implement the usmca . representatives of the u.s. business community , agriculture interest groups , other congressional leaders , and canadian and mexican government officials have also stated that these tariff issues must be resolved before the usmca enters into force .