the executive branch has been skeptical about the tria program in the past . bills to expand tria were resisted by then - president george w. bush's administration , and previous presidential budgets under then - president obama called for changes in the program that would have had the effect of scaling back the tria coverage . the current administration has not called for specific changes to tria , but has indicated that it is "evaluating reforms…to further decrease taxpayer exposure. the insurance industry largely continues to support tria , as do commercial insurance consumers in the real estate and other industries that have formed a "coalition to insure against terrorism" ( ciat ) . however , not all insurance consumers have consistently supported the renewal of tria . for example , the consumer federation of america has questioned the need for the program in the past . although the united states has suffered attacks deemed "terrorism" since the passage of tria , no acts of terrorism have been certified and no payments have occurred under tria . for example , although the april 2013 bombing in boston was termed an "act of terror," by the president , the insured losses in tria - eligible insurance from that bombing did not cross the $5 million statutory threshold to be certified under tria . ( see precise criteria under the tria program below. ) the original tria legislation's stated goals were to ( 1 ) create a temporary federal program of shared public and private compensation for insured terrorism losses to allow the private market to stabilize ; ( 2 ) protect consumers by ensuring the availability and affordability of insurance for terrorism risks ; and ( 3 ) preserve state regulation of insurance . although congress has amended specific aspects of the original act , the operation of the program generally usually follows the original statute . the changes to the program have largely reduced the government coverage for terrorism losses , except that the 2007 amendments expanded coverage to domestic terrorism losses , rather than limiting the program to foreign terrorism . the tria statute does not specifically include or exclude property and casualty insurance coverage for terrorist attacks according to the particular methods used in the attacks , such as nuclear , biological , chemical , and radiological ( nbcr ) and cyber terrorism risks . such nonconventional means , however , have the potential to cause losses that may or may not end up being covered by tria and have been a source of particular concern and attention in the past . table 1 presents a side - by - side comparison of selected provisions from the original tria law , along with the reauthorizing laws of 2005 , 2007 , and 2015 . table a - 1 contains illustrative examples of how the recoupment for the government portion of terrorism losses under tria might be calculated in the aggregate for various sizes of losses . the total amount of the combined deductibles in the table is simply assumed to be 30% of the insured losses for illustrative purposes . ( the actual deductible amount is , as detailed above , based on the total amount of premiums collected by each insurer. )