personnel . approximately 19,500 border patrol agents were stationed nationwide , with most ( 16,600 ) at the southern border in fy2017 . subject to available appropriations , executive order 13767 calls on cbp to take appropriate action to hire an additional 5,000 border patrol agents . however , cbp continues to face challenges attaining statutorily established minimum staffing levels for its border patrol positions despite increased recruitment and retention efforts . southern border security may be improved by changes to tactical infrastructure , surveillance technology , and personnel . a challenge facing policymakers is in determining the optimal mix of border security strategies given the difficulty of measuring the effectiveness of current efforts . while the number of apprehensions of illegal entrants has long been used to measure u.s. border patrol performance , it does not measure illegal border crossers who evade detection by the border patrol . when apprehensions decline , whether it is due to fewer illegal entrants getting caught or fewer attempting to enter illegally is not known . other difficulties include measuring the contribution of any single border security component in isolation from the others , assessing the extent to which enforcement actions deter illegal crossing attempts , and evaluating ongoing enforcement efforts outside of border - specific actions and their impact on border security . section 1092 of the fy2017 national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) directs the secretary of homeland security to provide annual metrics on border security that are intended to help address some of the challenges of measuring the impact of border security efforts . dhs has produced baseline estimates that go beyond apprehensions statistics to measure progress towards meeting the goals contained in executive order 13767 . congress , through cbp appropriations — and appropriations to its predecessor agency , the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) — has invested in tactical infrastructure , surveillance technology , and personnel since the 1980s . given the changing level of detail and structure of appropriations for border infrastructure over time , it is not possible to develop a consistent history of congressional appropriations specifically for border infrastructure . however , cbp has provided the congressional research service ( crs ) with some historical information on how it has allocated funding for border barrier planning , construction , and operations and support . between fy2007 and fy2018 , cbp allocated just over $5.0 billion to these activities , including almost $1.4 billion specifically for border barrier construction and improvement through a new "wall program" activity in its fy2018 budget . the 116 th congress is considering a mix of tactical infrastructure , including fencing , surveillance technologies , and personnel to enhance border security between u.s. poes . some experts have warned that the northern border may need more resources and oversight than it is currently receiving in light of potential national security risks . other border security priorities that may be considered during the 116 th congress include improvements to existing facilities and screening and detection capacity at u.s. poes .