russia . prospects for further u.s. - european cooperation on russia , especially in the context of deliberations on imposing additional sanctions or employing other foreign policy tools to address concerns about russia's activities , may be of interest to congress . european vulnerabilities to hostile russian measures and the degree to which russia could benefit from transatlantic divisions may be issues for congressional oversight . brexit . congress may wish to consider brexit's implications for u.s. - uk and u.s. - eu relations , as well as for nato and the northern ireland peace process . congress may also examine possible options and prospects for a future u.s. - uk trade agreement following brexit . china . previous u.s . administrations have been anxious about csdp's potential implications for nato . in a december 2018 speech in brussels , belgium , u.s. secretary of state mike pompeo asserted that "the european union and its predecessors have delivered a great deal of prosperity to the entire continent" and that "we [the united states] benefit enormously from your success," but he also criticized multilateralism and asked , "is the eu ensuring that the interests of countries and their citizens are placed before those of bureaucrats here in brussels ? " secretary pompeo's comments were widely interpreted as an implicit rebuke of the eu . others point out that the trump administration is not the first u.s. administration to be skeptical of multilateral institutions or to be charged with preferring unilateral action . this was a key european criticism of the george w. bush administration as well . in addition , many in the eu are uneasy with elements of the trump administration's "america first" foreign policy . several administration decisions have put the united states into direct conflict with the eu and experts suggest they could endanger u.s. - eu political cooperation . these include , in particular , the trump administration's decisions to withdraw from the 2015 multilateral nuclear deal with iran and the paris agreement on climate change ( see " key foreign policy and security challenges " for more information ) . eu officials also view the administration's recognition of jerusalem as israel's capital as undermining prospects for resolving the israeli - palestinian conflict . at the same time , administration officials contend that certain eu policies are damaging relations with the united states . among other issues , such officials express frustration with the eu's refusal to discuss agricultural products in planned u.s. - eu trade negotiations , and they argue that that the eu does not sufficiently understand the extent of the threat posed by iran . some u.s. policymakers voice concern that renewed eu defense initiatives could compete with nato . in 2017 , 25 eu members launched a new eu defense pact ( known as permanent structured cooperation , or pesco ) aimed at enhancing european military capabilities and bolstering the eu's common security and defense policy ( csdp ) . the eu has bristled at the trump administration's criticisms , however , given its strident calls for greater european defense spending and burdensharing in nato , as well as administration suggestions that pesco could become a "protectionist vehicle for the eu" that impedes u.s. - european defense industrial cooperation and u.s. defense sales to europe .