historically , poland has had a difficult relationship with russia . poland's view of russia remains affected by the experience of soviet invasion during world war ii and soviet domination during the communist era . members of congress may have an interest in monitoring political developments in relation to the polish parliamentary election due to occur in october or november 2019 . the united states strongly supported poland's accession to nato in 1999 . ambassador georgette mosbacher to prime minister morawiecki reportedly angered some polish officials by raising concerns about media freedom . a liquefied natural gas ( lng ) terminal on the baltic sea coast near the german border ( åšwinoujå›cie ) became operational in 2015 , and in october 2018 the polish state energy company signed a 20-year contract to purchase lng from a u.s. supplier . the polish government also has been a leading advocate for a stronger eu energy policy that reduces collective dependence on russia . poland has been active in projects that enhance regional energy security by interconnecting national gas networks through the construction of new pipelines . the construction of new connectors with slovakia and the czech republic is underway , and the planned gas interconnection poland - lithuania ( gipl ) , expected to become operational by 2022 , would link the natural gas grid of the baltic countries to the rest of the eu . many u.s. officials and members of congress have regarded european energy security as a u.s. interest . in a visit to the united states in september 2018 , polish president duda suggested that a permanent u.s. military base in poland might be named "fort trump. on february 13-14 , 2019 , poland and the united states co - hosted the "ministerial to promote a future of peace and security in the middle east," a conference attended by vice president mike pence and secretary of state michael pompeo . president trump earlier delivered a speech in warsaw on july 6 , 2017 . 1270 ) , a bill that would reauthorize the united states - poland parliamentary exchange program . in more recent years , polish leaders have consistently expressed warnings about the nature of vladimir putin's government in russia , tending to view russia as a potential threat to poland and its neighbors . this perception predates russia's invasion of georgia in 2008 , but events in ukraine since 2014 have sharpened polish concerns about russia's intentions and have put security at the top of poland's national agenda . the law and justice - led government has maintained a hard line in its approach to russia and entrenched poland's position as one of the eu's most hawkish countries on russia policy . poland has been one of the leading advocates for adopting and maintaining robust eu sanctions against russia in response to its actions in ukraine , although it has been one of the countries most affected by russian retaliatory sanctions . one area of particular relevance to poland's security is kaliningrad , a 5,800-square - mile russian exclave wedged between poland and lithuania ( see figure 1 ) .