the budget resolution does not become law . therefore , no money is spent or collected as a result of its adoption . there is no consensus on what is meant by long term . for example , advocates of biennial budgeting ( i.e. , two - year budget resolutions , two - year appropriations legislation ) sometimes characterize a two - year cycle as long - term budgeting . members of congress , the administration , and outside groups have expressed concern over projected levels of deficits and debt . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) recently stated that federal deficits and debt held by the public , which are higher than average , are projected to increase sharply over the next 30 years . cbo states that deficits would rise from 4.2% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) in 2019 to 8.7% in 2049 . according to cbo , federal debt held by the public is currently 78% of gdp , significantly higher than the 50-year average of 42% . under current law , budget deficits would cause the debt to be 92% of gdp by 2029 and 144% of gdp by 2049 , which "would be the highest in the nation's history by far. if policymakers want debt in 2049 to equal its current share of gdp ( 78% ) , the deficit would need to be reduced by $400 billion every year until then , cbo has projected . some have argued that the current congressional budget process has created , or at least exacerbated , the projected long - term deficit and debt challenges . one recurring criticism is that the process does not encourage or require the consideration of long - term budgetary outcomes . some argue that the lack of a formal requirement for congress to consider long - term budget outcomes discourages long - term planning and encourages policy outcomes that are desirable in the short term at the expense of the long - term budget situation . further , they argue that the current process does not even deter or prohibit congress from enacting legislation that worsens the long - term deficit and debt projections . they argue that congress needs to adopt a long - term budget focus . this report provides information on existing resources and congressional rules related to a long - term budget focus . there are potential challenges or obstacles associated with the adoption of a long - term budget focus within the current congressional budget process . many think of the budget as being decided annually , but most policies that dictate how much will be spent and collected are fixed . mandatory spending makes up 70% of total spending , is generally set by laws enacted years or decades ago , and remains in effect without the need for annual congressional approval . ( mandatory spending includes medicare , social security , medicaid , and interest on the debt. ) likewise , the collection of revenue as prescribed by the tax code continues without the need for legislative action . these mandatory spending and revenue policies change only if congress and the president enact legislation making such changes .