the united states is a participating country . ifnec working groups focus on issues related to nuclear infrastructure development , reliable fuel services and spent fuel management , and nuclear supply chains and supplier - customer relationships . the generation iv international forum ( gif ) is a collaborative international initiative to promote the development of the next generation of nuclear energy systems through shared r&d . gif was created in 2000 with nine original members: argentina , brazil , canada , france , japan , south korea , south africa , the united kingdom , and the united states . switzerland , the european union , china , russia , and australia joined subsequently . in 2002 , after reviewing 130 advanced reactor designs , the gif identified 6 nuclear energy systems for further development . collectively , these are known as generation iv reactors . the six generation iv reactor technologies are: gas - cooled fast reactor , lead - cooled fast reactor , molten salt reactor , sodium - cooled fast reactor , supercritical water - cooled reactor , and very high temperature reactor . factors used in selecting the designs include safety , sustainability , economics , physical security , proliferation resistance , and waste minimization , and they represent a range of technologies . the gif has suggested that commercialization of some of these technologies may occur as early as 2030 , with demonstration of some technologies possibly occurring within the next decade . each of these technologies is at a different level of technical maturity . of these , sodium - cooled fast reactors are considered to be the most mature . gas - cooled fast reactors , lead - cooled fast reactors , and molten salt reactors are not expected to reach commercialization until 2050 under current rates of development , although some vendors and academics have put forth more optimistic timelines . testing and demonstration would be required to determine the validity of advocates' claims . many environmental advocates contend that nuclear power would not be necessary to decarbonize world energy supplies , and that public policy should instead focus on renewable energy and efficiency . the u.s. advanced nuclear industry has expanded in recent years to encompass an array of developers , suppliers , and supporting institutions . by one count , there were 35 u.s. companies developing advanced nuclear reactor technologies as of november 2018 . some have projected that the first u.s. advanced reactor could be providing electricity to the grid by the mid - 2020s . for example , the advanced reactor company nuscale predicts that its first nuclear plant will "achieve commercial operation in 2026. . this report discusses the history of advanced reactor technologies , briefly describes major categories of advanced reactors , provides an overview of federal programs on advanced nuclear technology , and discusses current issues and legislation . advanced or unconventional reactor designs seek to use combinations of new and existing technologies and materials to improve upon earlier generations of nuclear reactors in one or more of the following areas: cost , safety , security , waste management , and versatility .