this section answers questions on the nature of the opioid epidemic in the united states . the answers provide background on the types of opioids that are being abused , the associated harm to the abusers of these substances , and the extent of the abuse . heroin , fentanyl , and prescription opioids are significant drug threats in the united states—in 2017 , approximately 44% of domestic local law enforcement agencies responding to the national drug threat survey ( ndts ) reported heroin as the greatest drug threat in their area . it does not provide a comprehensive overview of opioid abuse and the criminal justice response . this faq report answers questions about the opioid epidemic and federal efforts to control the supply of opioids . in november 2017 , the president's commission on combating drug addiction and the opioid crisis stated that doj should urge states to establish drug courts in every county . over the last several years , the national governors association has sponsored various activities to assist states in combatting the opioid epidemic , including learning labs to develop best practices for dealing with opioid abuse treatment for justice - involved populations—such as the expansion of opioid addiction treatment in drug courts . in recent years , several states have also enacted legislation increasing access to medication - assisted treatment ( mat ) for drug - addicted offenders who are incarcerated or have recently been released . in march 2019 , samhsa released guidance to state governments on increasing the availability of mat in criminal justice settings . instead , it answers common questions that have arisen due to rising drug overdose deaths and the availability of illicit opioids in the united states . while the percentage of ndts respondents reporting high availability of controlled prescription drugs ( cpds ) , which include some opioids , has declined over the last several years ( 75% of ndts respondents reported high availability in 2014 , compared to 52% in 2017 ) , the reported availability of heroin has increased ( 30% reported high availability in 2014 , compared to 49% in 2017 ) . further , there has been a rise in the availability of illicit fentanyl—the primary synthetic opioid available in the united states . across the country , states have adapted elements of their criminal justice responses—including police , court , and correctional responses —in a variety of ways due to the opioid epidemic . while this section does not provide a state - by - state analysis , it highlights several examples of how states' justice systems have responded to the opioid crisis . these examples were selected because they are some of the more common state policy approaches to confronting the opioid epidemic . many states are increasing law enforcement officer access to naloxone , an opioid overdose reversal drug , in an effort to reduce the number of overdose deaths . officers receive training on how to identify an opioid overdose and administer naloxone , and they carry the drug so they can respond immediately and effectively to an overdose . as of november 2018 , over 2,400 police departments in 42 states reported that they had officers that carry naloxone —this figure more than doubled over two years .