other criteria. — the other criteria that the secretary shall use in making recommendations for the closure or realignment of military installations inside the united states under this part in 2005 are as follows: ( 1 ) the extent and timing of potential costs and savings , including the number of years , beginning with the date of completion of the closure or realignment , for the savings to exceed the costs . ( 2 ) the economic impact on existing communities in the vicinity of military installations . ( 3 ) the ability of the infrastructure of both the existing and potential receiving communities to support forces , missions , and personnel . ( 4 ) the environmental impact , including the impact of costs related to potential environ mental restoration , waste management , and environmental compliance activities . the transfer and disposal of dod real property made available following the implementation of a brac round is a complex process that may extend for years beyond the initial six - year implementation window . disposal may be delayed or otherwise affected by the participation of local and state communities and the degree to which environmental remediation by federal authorities is necessary . the graph below shows the total acreage from previous brac rounds yet to be disposed . the base closure act authorizes a variety of conveyance mechanisms not otherwise available for the transfer and disposal of federal property , a process typically performed by the general services administration ( gsa ) . under a brac , conveyance authority is delegated from gsa , through the secretary of defense to the various military departments , which receive special approval to supersede gsa regulations with brac specific regulations . the primary difference between the routine disposal of federal property and real property conveyed under a brac is the role of local communities . under normal ( non - brac ) circumstances , the general services administration ( gsa ) is directly responsible for disposing of any surplus federal real property , which includes defense property . a military department in possession would , for example , declare property as excess to its needs and turn over the administration of a site to the gsa . the gsa would then follow a number of consecutive steps for disposal of federal property laid out in statute . it would first offer the excess property to other federal agencies . if none expressed an interest , the excess property would be declared surplus . the gsa would then offer the surplus property to state or local governments and non - profits that might use it for a public benefit ( public benefit conveyance ) , such as a homeless shelter or medical center . finally , if the property has neither been transferred nor conveyed in the previous steps , the surplus property would be offered for sale to the public . under a brac , local communities can significantly affect the brac property transfer and disposal decisions , which are managed by the secretary of the responsible military department . once approved for closure , communities around an installation typically organize a local redevelopment authority ( lra ) for the purpose of creating and executing a redevelopment plan for the property .