to address "concerns . about the integrity and solvency of the public fisc and the impact that extensive litigation might have on the ability of government officials to focus on and perform their other duties," the ftca affords the united states "important protections and benefits . not enjoyed by other tort defendants" that are explained extensively below . moreover , to limit the fora in which a plaintiff may permissibly litigate a tort suit against the united states , congress vested the federal district courts ( as well as a small number of territorial courts ) with exclusive jurisdiction over ftca cases . furthermore , because congress believed "that juries would have difficulty viewing the united states as a defendant without being influenced by the fact that it has a deeper pocket than any other defendant," ftca cases that proceed to trial are generally "tried by the court without a jury. notably , the ftca only authorizes tort lawsuits against the united states itself ; it expressly shields individual federal employees from personal liability for torts that they commit within the scope of their employment . furthermore , with limited exceptions , an ftca plaintiff may not recover any damages that exceed the amount he initially requested when he submitted his claim to the applicable agency to satisfy the ftca's exhaustion requirement , which this report discusses below . "[t]he underlying purpose of" requiring the plaintiff to specify the maximum amount of damages he seeks "is to put the government on notice of its maximum potential exposure to liability" and thereby "make intelligent settlement decisions. critically , however , a plaintiff can potentially recover damages in excess of the amount he initially requested if the plaintiff can demonstrate "intervening facts" or "newly discovered evidence not reasonably discoverable at the time of presenting the claim to the federal agency" that warrant a larger award . in addition to the aforementioned substantive limitations on a plaintiff's ability to pursue a tort lawsuit against the united states , congress has also established an array of procedural requirements a plaintiff must satisfy in order to validly invoke the ftca . most significantly , the ftca contains statute - of - limitations and exhaustion provisions that limit when a plaintiff may permissibly file a tort lawsuit against the united states . for one , with certain exceptions , a plaintiff may not institute an ftca action against the united states unless ( 1 ) the plaintiff has first "presented the claim to the appropriate federal agency" whose employees are responsible for the plaintiff's alleged injury , and ( 2 ) that agency has "finally denied" the plaintiff's claim . these administrative exhaustion requirements afford federal agencies an opportunity to settle disputes before engaging in formal litigation in the federal courts . "[e]ncouraging settlement of tort claims within administrative agencies" in this manner arguably "reduce[s] court congestion and avoid[s] unnecessary litigation. because litigation can be costly and time - consuming , "the settlement of claims within administrative agencies" arguably not only "benefits ftca claimants by permitting them to forego the expense of full - blown litigation," but also "frees up limited [governmental] resources for more pressing matters.