however , in recent years , the federal budget has bucked this trend . these cyclical fluctuations in revenue and spending are often referred to as automatic stabilizers . therefore , when examining fiscal policy , it is often beneficial to estimate the budget deficit excluding these automatic stabilizers , referred to as the structural deficit , to get a sense of the affirmative fiscal policy decisions made each year by congress . as shown in figure 1 , budget deficits tend to increase during and shortly after recessions ( denoted by grey bars ) as policymakers attempt to buoy the economy by applying fiscal stimulus . this can be seen explicitly by viewing the structural deficit / surplus , as this only shows affirmative changes in fiscal policy made by congress . the budget deficit then tends to shrink as the economy enters into recovery and fiscal stimulus is less necessary to support economic growth . after the structural deficit peaked in 2009 at roughly 7.5% of gdp , it began to decline through 2014 , falling to about 2.0% of gdp . beginning in 2016 , in spite of relatively strong economic conditions , the structural deficit has started to rise again , nearing 4.0% of gdp in 2018 . given that the economy is arguably at or exceeding full employment currently , the increase in fiscal stimulus since 2016 is notable . as discussed earlier , expanding fiscal stimulus when the economy is not depressed can result in rising interest rates , a growing trade deficit , and higher inflation . as of publication of this report , interest rates and inflation do not appear to have been affected by the additional fiscal stimulus ; interest rates are at historic lows and inflation shows no signs of acceleration . the trade deficit has been growing in recent years ; however , it is not clear that this growth in the trade deficit is a result of increased fiscal stimulus . decreased tax revenue via tax cuts indirectly increases aggregate demand in the economy . for example , an individual income tax cut increases the amount of disposable income available to individuals , enabling them to purchase more goods and services . this suggests that the federal government has been applying some level of fiscal stimulus to the economy for much of the past three decades , although the level of stimulus has increased and decreased over time . however , simply examining the overall budget deficit to judge the level of fiscal stimulus can be misleading , as the levels of federal spending and revenue differ over time automatically due to changes in the state of the economy , rather than deliberate choices made each year by congress . during economic expansions , tax revenue tends to increase and spending tends to decrease automatically , as rising incomes and employment result in higher average incomes and therefore greater individual and corporate income tax revenues . federal spending on income support programs , such as food stamps and unemployment insurance , tends to fall as fewer people need financial assistance and unemployment claims fall during economic expansions . the combination of rising tax revenue and falling federal spending tends to improve the government's budget deficit .