the poverty rate ( i.e. , the percentage who were in poverty ) among the aged fell from 28.5% in 1966 to 9.2% in 2017 . several government programs have contributed to older americans' increased incomes , including old age , survivor and disability insurance ( oasdi , commonly known as social security ) and supplemental security income ( ssi ) . however , certain groups of older americans , such as widows , divorced women , and never married men and women , are still vulnerable to poverty . congress may be interested in the effect of existing programs that reduce poverty , as well as potential proposals aimed at improving income among vulnerable groups of older americans . this report presents the time trends and current status of poverty rates among americans aged 65 and older , as well as poverty rates among different demographic groups of the aged . this report also summarizes federal programs that may provide income to the aged poor . over the past several decades , criticisms of the official poverty measure have led to the development of an alternative research measure called the supplemental poverty measure ( spm ) , which the census bureau also computes and releases . this report compares the official aged poverty measure with the spm and provides statistics measuring the impact of federal cash benefits ( mainly social security and ssi ) , taxes , and in - kind benefits ( such as housing , energy , and food assistance ) on aged poverty . the official poverty measure is of limited value for analyzing various federal programs' effects on poverty status among the aged population , but the supplemental poverty measure ( spm ) , discussed in the following section , addresses some of those impacts . the official poverty measure was developed in the 1960s and was established by the bureau of the budget ( later the office of management and budget , omb ) for measuring the official poverty rate in the united states . under the official poverty measure , an individual is counted as poor if his or her family's pretax money income falls below the poverty threshold . one of the main criticisms of the official poverty measure is that pretax money income excludes the value of government noncash benefits ( such as health insurance , snap , or housing assistance ) provided either privately or publicly . it also does not consider taxes paid to federal , state , or local governments , or tax benefits ( such as the earned income tax credit ) that families might receive . the census bureau's spm was designed to address the official poverty measure's limitations and has been published since 2011 . the spm poverty thresholds measure a standard of living based on expenditures for food , clothing , shelter , and utilities ( fcsu ) and "a little more" for other expenses . its thresholds—dollar amounts related to the level of need for a family—vary by whether the family rents , owns a home with a mortgage , or owns a home without a mortgage ( the latter of which is more common among the aged population than it is among younger populations ) .