marijuana is a more complex substance than alcohol . it is absorbed in the body differently from alcohol ; it affects the body in different ways from alcohol ; tests for its presence in the body produce more complicated results than tests for the presence of alcohol ; and correlating its effects with its levels in the body is much more complicated than for alcohol . it involves piloting a multiton vehicle at relatively high speeds , usually surrounded by many other such vehicles , and often bicyclists and pedestrians as well . driving is among the most dangerous activities the average person engages in . a moment's inattention can , but usually does not , result in a crash . crashes are usually not serious: the vast majority of crashes result only in damage to the vehicles involved . but in a significant percentage of crashes , one or more people are injured ( 29.3% ) , and in a fraction of crashes , people die ( 0.5% ) . among the roughly 12 million transportation workers whose safety - sensitive status subjects them to federally mandated drug testing , federal regulations provide no opportunity for legal use of marijuana , regardless of the status of marijuana under state law . as previously discussed , regulations that apply to safety - sensitive employees do provide an avenue for an employee who has tested positive to regain a safety - sensitive position . crs could not identify any data on how many safety - sensitive transportation employees have lost their jobs as a result of positive tests for marijuana use . considering the length of time that marijuana is detectable in the body after usage , and the uncertainty about the impairing effect of marijuana on driving performance , congress and other federal policymakers may elect to reexamine the rationale for testing all safety - sensitive transportation workers for marijuana usage . alternatively , congress and federal policymakers may opt to maintain the status quo until more research results become available . the fact that alcohol reduces a user's ability to think clearly and to perform physical tasks has been known for decades . extensive research has established correlations between the extent of alcohol consumption and impairment , including drivers' reaction times . much less research has been done on marijuana . that marijuana usage increases a driver's risk of crashing is not clearly established . to improve the handling of drug - impaired driving cases , the governors highway safety association has recommended that prosecutors and judges assigned to drug - impaired driving cases receive training in the issue . studies of marijuana's impact on a driver's performance have thus far found that , while marijuana usage can measurably affect a driver's performance in a laboratory setting , that effect may not translate into an increased likelihood of the driver being involved in a motor vehicle crash in a real - world setting , where many other variables affect the risk of a crash . some studies of actual crashes have estimated a small increase in the risk of crash involvement as a result of marijuana usage , while others have estimated little or no increase in the likelihood of a crash from using marijuana .