other recommendations may be forthcoming . â§1621 et seq. ) to require that meat packers report prices and other information on purchases of cattle , swine , and boxed beef ( wholesale cuts of beef ) to the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) . lamb and lamb meat were added through initial rulemaking , and the act was amended to include wholesale pork in 2010 . in september 2015 , congress reauthorized lmr until september 30 , 2020 , in the enacted agriculture reauthorizations act of 2015 ( p.l . in past reauthorizations , most livestock industry stakeholders have supported reauthorization of the act and put forward proposals amending mandatory reporting . this report provides an overview of lmr and its legislative and rulemaking history ; a description of the lmr program ; and issues that the cattle , swine , and lamb industries have raised with usda that could be considered during possible reauthorization . information on house and senate bills that would reauthorize lmr will be added should they become available . before congress enacted lmr in 1999 , the usda agricultural marketing service ( ams ) collected livestock and meat price and related market information from meat packers on a voluntary basis under the authority of the agricultural marketing act of 1946 . ams market reporters collected and reported prices from livestock auctions , feedlots , and packing plants . the information was disseminated through hundreds of daily , weekly , monthly , and annual written and electronic usda reports on sales of live cattle , hogs , and sheep and wholesale meat products from these animals . the goal was to provide all buyers and sellers with accurate and objective market information . by the 1990s , the livestock industry had undergone many changes , including increased concentration in meat packing and animal feeding , production specialization , and vertical integration ( firms controlling more than one aspect of production ) . fewer animals were sold through negotiated ( cash or "spot" ) sales , while an increasing number of purchases were made under alternative marketing arrangements ( eg , formula purchases based on a negotiated price established in the future ) . these formula purchases were based on prices not publicly disclosed or reported . some livestock producers , believing that such arrangements made it difficult or impossible for them to assess "fair" market prices for livestock going to slaughter , called for mandatory price reporting for packers and others who process and market meat . usda had estimated in 2000 that the former voluntary system was not reporting transactions of the order of 35% - 40% of cattle , 75% of hogs , and 40% of lambs . during initial debate in congress on lmr , opponents , including some meat packers and other farmers and ranchers , argued that a mandate would impose costly new burdens on the industry and could cause the release of confidential company information . nonetheless , some of these early opponents ultimately supported an lmr law . livestock producers had experienced low prices in the late 1990s and were looking for ways to strengthen market prices .