under one such separate order , h.res . 6 , previous house action on similar procedures "made it unclear" if a member could then offer a motion to table the motion to discharge . the separate order is intended "to provide certainty for all members , delegates , and the resident commissioner on this procedure. these separate orders have the same force and effect as house rules . 6 clarifies that the house may not table a motion to discharge a measure introduced pursuant to section 6 or section 7 of the war powers resolution ( p.l . the war powers resolution is an act that governs house consideration of joint resolutions , bills , and concurrent resolutions that are introduced after the u.s. armed forces engages "in hostilities" without a prior declaration of war . measures introduced in compliance with the resolution are referred to the house foreign affairs committee . the committee is to report such legislation within a time frame delineated in the resolution . the war powers resolution does not provide an automatic discharge process if the committee does not report . the amendment added the phrase non - religious headdress to clause 5 in order to specify that the hat prohibition did not include religious headwear . clause 5 now states , "during the session of the house , a member , delegate , or resident commissioner may not wear non - religious headdress or a hat. the 116 th congress rules package included a section on "separate orders," which are provisions that affect house procedures but are not codified in the standing rules of the house . should the measure not be reported , a member may offer a motion to discharge the committee from further consideration in order to allow it to reach the floor . according to the rules committee summary for h.res . 6 amended clause 5 of rule xvii to clarify that members may wear religious headdress in the house chamber . in january 2019 , the house agreed to h.res . 6 , a resolution adopting the rules of the house of representatives for the 116 th congress . this report summarizes amendments to house rules affecting floor proceedings in the 116 th congress ( 2019-2020 ) , as provided for in h.res . in the 116 th congress , rules changes affected the consideration of legislation on the floor , voting in the house and the committee of the whole , and procedures related to delegates and the resident commissioner of puerto rico . 6 also clarified that religious headdress may be worn in the house chamber at any time , and it included a separate order specifying that , during the 116 th congress , the house may not table motions to discharge certain measures related to the war powers resolution .