115-174 and some before it was enacted . 115-174 , the application of epr remains mainly based on asset size and charter type . broadly speaking , only three types of financial charters allow financial institutions to accept insured deposits — banks , thrifts , and credit unions . banks operating in the united states can be u.s. or foreign based . depository institutions are regulated much differently than other types of financial institutions . this section discusses whether or not epr is applied to each of those types of institutions , as well as other types of financial firms . a detailed discussion of which provisions apply at which size threshold is discussed in the " higher , tiered thresholds " section below . all bhcs are subject to long - standing prudential ( safety and soundness ) regulation conducted by the fed . the novelty in the dodd - frank act was to create a group of specific prudential requirements that apply only to large banks . some of these requirements related to capital and liquidity overlap with parts of the basel iii international agreement . under title i of the dodd - frank act , the fed is responsible for administering epr . it promulgates regulations implementing the regime ( based on recommendations , if any , made by fsoc ) and supervises firms subject to the regime . the dodd - frank regime is referred to as enhanced or heightened because it applies higher or more stringent standards to large banks than it applies to smaller banks . it is a prudential regime because the regulations are intended to contribute toward the safety and soundness of the banks subject to the regime . the cost to the fed of administering the regime is financed through assessments on firms subject to the regime . some epr provisions are intended to reduce the likelihood that a bank will experience financial difficulties , while others are intended to help regulators cope with a failing bank . several of these provisions directly address problems or regulatory shortcomings that arose during the financial crisis . as of the date of this report , no bank has experienced financial difficulties since epr came into effect , but the economy has not experienced a downturn in which financial difficulties at banks become more likely . thus , the risk mitigation provisions that have shown robustness in an expansion have not yet proven to be robust in a downturn , while the provisions intended to cope with a failing bank remain untested . finally , some parts of enhanced regulation cannot be evaluated because , as noted below , they still have not been implemented through final rules . the following sections provide more detail on the requirements that title i of the dodd - frank act ( which will be referred to hereinafter as title 1 ) and basel iii place on banks subject to epr . subsequent to initial implementation , numerous regulatory changes over the years have tailored the individual provisions discussed in this section to reduce their regulatory burden ; this report does not provide a comprehensive catalog of those subsequent changes .