like h.r . 2513 , s. 1889 's requirements would be limited to small corporations and llcs . specifically , s. 1889 would allow states to exempt various regulated entities , in addition to any company that ( 1 ) employs more than 20 full - time employees , ( 2 ) files income tax returns reflecting more than $5 million in gross receipts , ( 3 ) has an operating presence at a physical office within the united states , and ( 4 ) has more than 100 shareholders . the bill would also impose civil and criminal penalties on persons who knowingly provide states with false beneficial ownership information or willfully fail to provide complete or updated information . finally , s. 1889 would amend the bsa to include "any person engaged in the business of forming corporations or [llcs]" in its definition of a regulated "financial institution," and would direct fincen to issue a proposed rule requiring such persons to establish aml programs . figure a - 1 demonstrates hypothetically how hidden foreign or u.s. buyers might purchase real estate in the united states with minimal disclosure of their identities as hidden beneficial owners . first , foreign or u.s. individuals might establish a foreign - incorporated llc , subject to that foreign jurisdiction's laws , which could present particular challenges to a u.s. law enforcement agency seeking to investigate the purchase . alternately , foreign or u.s. individuals could create a u.s. llc incorporated in a u.s. state with only a "registered agent" required to be disclosed under various states' laws . a foreign llc might pay for the property through a wire transfer from a foreign bank account . if the foreign llc or the u.s. llc were to open a u.s. bank account to pay for the purchase , then , if this were a new account opened since may 2018 , the u.s. - regulated bank would look for beneficial owners owning more than 25% of the llc , and keep records of that information . currently , however , that information would not be reported to fincen automatically , and law enforcement would most likely require a subpoena to procure that information from the bank's records . to create additional layers that could obscure the actual buyers of the property , the llc , whether u.s. or foreign , could route the payment to the title company , which handles the real estate closing , through a law firm . payments and wire transfers routed through law firms present an extra layer of information a prosecutor or law enforcement agent must go through to try to obtain details of individuals who own the llc and are purchasing a property . often the u.s. attorney - client privilege can make it more difficult to exercise this subpoena authority , without at least the possibility that a legal challenge may arise . finally , the payment is routed to the title company , which processes the property sale and distributes payment , normally to the seller's account . if the seller obscures his or her identity through an llc as well , natural persons involved on both sides of the transfer may be hidden .