that may soon change . on december 4 , 2017 , president trump issued two proclamations modifying the grand staircase - escalante national monument ( established by president clinton ) and the bears ears national monument ( established by president obama ) . this was the first time since president kennedy that a president has diminished a national monument . president trump's proclamations explained that each of the monuments contained objects that were "not  . of any unique or distinctive scientific or historic significance" and were not in danger of being damaged or destroyed . the proclamations explained that other federal laws enacted after the antiquities act's passage protected many of these objects , such as the archaeological resources protection act and the endangered species act . on these grounds , the proclamations concluded that the lands reserved for these monuments were "greater than the smallest area compatible with the protection of the objects for which the lands were reserved. during the house debate , representative john lacey — chairman of the house committee on the public lands — responded to an inquiry from representative john stephens of texas as to "[h]ow much land will be taken off the market in the western states by the passage of the bill ? representative stephens was particularly concerned that the bill provided authority similar to the forest reserve act of 1891 , under which presidents had set aside tens of millions of acres of land . "not very much," was representative lacey's reply , pointing to the language in the proposed legislation requiring that the amount of land reserved be "the smallest area necessary" to preserve designated objects . this assurance mirrored that found in the house report on the bill , which explained that "[t]he bill proposes to create small reservations reserving only so much land as may be absolutely necessary for the preservation of these interesting relics of prehistoric times. the house passed the senate bill on june 5 , unanimously and without amendment . president theodore roosevelt signed the bill into law on june 8 , 1906 . the president has clear authority under the antiquities act to establish national monuments . less clear , however , is the president's authority to diminish a previously established monument or to abolish a monument altogether . the remainder of this report discusses the central arguments made by the plaintiffs and the united states in this litigation . there are viable arguments on both sides of the debate over the president's authority to diminish monuments . both parties purport to rely on the text of the antiquities act , and both have marshalled historical sources and practice to support their respective interpretations . as one scholar has concluded , "[r]isk is present all around," as "the legal authorities are mixed and none are clearly controlling. however , though the president's authority to diminish monuments may reasonably be questioned , it appears clear that congress has authority to codify or repeal a presidential proclamation . the property clause of the constitution gives congress the "[p]ower to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the united states. the supreme court has long held that "the power over the public land thus entrusted to congress is without limitations.