115-123 ) in the 115 th congress . that law extended the exclusion for canceled mortgage debt and the ability to deduct mortgage insurance premiums through the end of 2017 ( each had previously expired at the end of 2016 ) . as of the date of this report , these provisions had not been extended beyond 2017 . in the 116 th congress , s. 617 , the tax extender and disaster relief act of 2019 , would extend each of these provisions through calendar year 2019 . for more information on tax extenders in general , see crs report r45347 , tax provisions that expired in 2017 ( "tax extenders" ) . these funds become general revenues . several issues related to fannie mae and freddie mac could be of interest to the 116 th congress . these include the potential for legislative housing finance reform , new leadership at fhfa and the potential for administrative changes to fannie mae and freddie mac , and certain issues that could affect fannie mae's and freddie mac's finances and mortgage standards , respectively . for more information on fannie mae and freddie mac , see crs report r44525 , fannie mae and freddie mac in conservatorship: frequently asked questions . since fannie mae and freddie mac entered conservatorship in 2008 , policymakers have largely agreed on the need for comprehensive housing finance reform legislation that would resolve the conservatorships of these gses and address the underlying issues that are perceived to have led to their financial trouble and conservatorships . such legislation could eliminate fannie mae and freddie mac , possibly replacing them with other entities ; retain the companies but transform their role in the housing finance system ; or return them to their previous status with certain changes . in addition to addressing the role of fannie mae and freddie mac , housing finance reform legislation could potentially involve changes to the federal housing administration ( fha ) or other federal programs that support the mortgage market . while there is generally broad agreement on certain principles of housing finance reform — such as increasing the private sector's role in the mortgage market , reducing government risk , and maintaining access to affordable mortgages for creditworthy households — there is disagreement over how best to achieve these objectives and over the technical details of how a restructured housing finance system should operate . since 2008 , a variety of housing finance reform proposals have been put forward by members of congress , think tanks , and industry groups . proposals differ on structural questions as well as on specific implementation issues , such as whether , and how , certain affordable housing requirements that currently apply to fannie mae and freddie mac would be included in a new system . previous congresses have considered housing finance reform legislation in varying degrees . in the 113 th congress , the house committee on financial services and senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs considered different versions of comprehensive housing finance reform legislation , but none were ultimately enacted . the 114 th  congress considered a number of more - targeted reforms to fannie mae and freddie mac , but did not actively consider comprehensive housing finance reform legislation .