cole . when the case , al bahlul v. united states , first reached the full u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit ( d.c . circuit ) , the court ruled on a different legal question and remanded the case for consideration of the first amendment challenge . however , judge kavanaugh authored a separate opinion , in part to address the first amendment's applicability . he stated that "although non - u.s. citizens arguably may have some first amendment rights at [a u.s. military base in] guantanamo or in other u.s. territories for any speech they engage in there , non - u.s. citizens have no first amendment rights abroad in foreign countries. the supreme court has applied the constitution to aliens in the united states and in u.s. territories , but has not extended constitutional rights to aliens in foreign countries . see boumediene v. bush , 553 u.s. 723 , 768-71 ( 2008 ) ( applying article i , section 9 to u.s . naval base at guantanamo , which was "[i]n every practical sense . not abroad" ) ; united states v. verdugo - urquidez , 494 u.s. 259 ( 1990 ) ( declining to apply fourth amendment to search and seizure of alien's property in mexico ) ; johnson v. eisentrager , 339 u.s. 763 ( 1950 ) ( declining to apply habeas corpus right to u.s. - controlled military prison in germany ) ; see also al maqaleh v. hagel , 738 f.3d 312 ( d.c. cir . 2013 ) ( declining to apply habeas corpus right to u.s. military base in afghanistan ) ; al maqaleh v. gates , 605 f.3d 84 ( d.c. cir . therefore , [the defendant] had no first amendment rights as a non - u.s. citizen in afghanistan when he led bin laden's media operation . two years later , the full d.c . circuit took up the al bahlul case again following remand . this time , the court squarely rejected the defendant's first amendment challenge , citing the concurring opinions of judge kavanaugh , judge patricia millett , and judge robert wilkins , who all concluded that the defendant could not avail himself of the first amendment's protections . thus , as the d.c . circuit phrased it in a prior decision , "aliens beyond the territorial jurisdiction of the united states are generally unable to claim the protections of the first amendment. nevertheless , "[i]n a variety of contexts th[e] court has referred to a first amendment right to 'receive information and ideas.' in order to preserve this right , the court has largely rejected governmental attempts to control information because of how the government views that information . for example , in lamont v. postmaster gen eral , the court held that a federal statute requiring the postal service to withhold foreign mailings classified as "communist political propaganda" from addressees unless they requested delivery of the mailings in writing amounted "to an unconstitutional abridgment of the addressee's first amendment rights. the court concluded that the "regime of this act is at war with the 'uninhibited , robust , and wide - open' debate and discussion that are contemplated by the first amendment.