research . the traditional path toward adding an indication ( reason for use ) to the labeling of a drug already approved for other uses has been for the sponsor of the drug to conduct clinical trials and submit a supplemental new drug application ( nda ) to fda . the widespread extent of off - label use suggests that relying on that model is not helping prescribers get better information . congress could consider assigning responsibility ( and funding ) to the national institutes of health and the patient - centered outcomes research institute for safety and effectiveness evaluations of off - label uses ; or requiring , for a drug that has substantial ( to be defined ) off - label sales , that the manufacturer fund studies , such as clinical trials , to assess the safety and effectiveness of the drug for the off - label use and submit evidence to the hhs secretary . depending on the secretary's assessment of the evidence , the secretary could request that the manufacturer amend the drug's labeling either to add the off - label use to the label as an approved use or to add a statement that clinical evidence does not support the safety and effectiveness of the drug for the off - label use . research transparency . fda regulations describe standards for the design and analysis of clinical trials that a sponsor uses in an nda . what concerns , if any , does congress have about such prescriptions ? two key reasons: to protect patients and to encourage research in a competitive pharmaceutical industry . by statute and regulation , fda now approves a drug for a specific use once its sponsor ( usually the manufacturer ) has provided sufficient evidence that the drug is safe and effective for that use . fda has developed procedures for the review of that evidence . the fda - approved labeling , which informs the clinician about dosing and likely and unlikely adverse events , helps protect the individuals for whom the drug is prescribed . labeling also helps protect the interests of the manufacturers who invest in the clinical trials that demonstrate safety and effectiveness . for new drugs and new uses of already approved drugs , the sponsor receives a period of market protection , in the form of regulatory exclusivity for the sale of the drug for those uses . payors—such as private health insurers or medicare—benefit from fda - approved labeling in their evaluation of whether to pay for a drug's use . but use of a drug evolves as clinicians ( and the manufacturer ) share their experiences regarding off - label uses , which , by definition , were not part of the premarket clinical studies used to obtain fda approval . off - label use can benefit patients . in some instances , such as in the treatment of rare diseases , clinical practice may use drugs approved for other indications . a manufacturer may choose not to invest in trials for such a small patient group .