similar approval. the court inferred this purpose from the principle that "normally congress would not want states to forbid , or to impair significantly , the exercise of a power that congress explicitly granted. lower courts have followed barnett bank 's rule that absent indications to the contrary , federal statutes and regulations that grant national banks the power to engage in specific activities preempt state laws that prohibit or "significantly interfere" with those activities . in wells fargo bank of texas n.a . v. james , for example , the fifth circuit held that an occ rule granting national banks the power to "charge [their] customers non - interest charges and fees" preempted a state statute prohibiting banks from charging a fee for cashing checks in certain circumstances . similarly , in monroe retail , inc. v. rbs citizens , n.a . , the sixth circuit held that this rule preempted state law conversion claims brought against a class of national banks based on fees they charged for processing garnishment orders . specifically , the sixth circuit reasoned that under barnett bank , "the level of 'interference' that gives rise to preemption under the nba is not very high," and that the relevant conversion claims "significantly interfere[d]" with national banks' ability to collect fees . finally , the ninth circuit employed similar reasoning in rose v. chase bank usa , n.a . , where it held that an nba provision granting national banks the power to "loan money on personal security" preempted a state statute imposing various disclosure requirements on credit card issuers . in arriving at this conclusion , the ninth circuit reasoned that "[w]here . congress has explicitly granted a power to a national bank without any indication that congress intended for that power to be subject to local restriction , congress is presumed to have intended to preempt state laws. federal courts have also adopted broad interpretations of an nba provision authorizing national banks to dismiss officers "at pleasure. in schweikert v. bank of america , n.a . , the fourth circuit held that this provision preempted a state law claim for wrongful discharge brought by a former officer of a national bank . similarly , the ninth circuit has held that this provision preempted a claim brought by a former officer of a national bank for breach of an employment agreement , reasoning that "[a]n agreement which attempts to circumvent the complete discretion of a national bank's board of directors to terminate an officer at will is void as against [federal] public policy. finally , in wiersum v. u.s. bank , n.a . , the eleventh circuit relied on barnett bank and the fourth circuit's reasoning in schweikert to conclude that this "at pleasure" provision preempted a wrongful - termination claim brought by a former officer of a national bank under a state whistleblower statute . while federal courts have accordingly adopted expansive views of the circumstances in which state laws "significantly interfere" with national banks' powers , they have also recognized certain general limits on the preemptive scope of federal banking statutes and regulations .