the resolution was privileged for immediate consideration . the chair of the judiciary committee called up the resolution and asked unanimous consent that instead of being recognized for the normal one hour , his time be extended to two hours , half of which he would yield to the ranking member of the judiciary committee for purposes of debate only . after debate under the terms of this unanimous consent agreement , the house ordered the previous question on the resolution by voice vote , ending further debate of the resolution . a minority - party representative offered a motion to recommit , and , pursuant to a unanimous consent agreement , the motion was debated for 10 minutes before being defeated on a roll call vote . as noted , absent this unanimous consent agreement , the motion to recommit would not have been debatable . disqualification requires only a majority vote . the procedures the house has developed for accomplishing this constitutional responsibility are described below . the judiciary committee chair moved the previous question before any other member was recognized to control time under the hour rule , and the house ordered the previous question 342-70 . the house has used this process mostly to impeach federal judges , although the house has also impeached two presidents and one cabinet official . the senate has voted to remove eight of these officials , and all of them were federal judges . the summary of the rules and procedures the house might use to impeach a federal official presented here is drawn from published sources of congressional rules and precedents , as well as the public record of past impeachment proceedings . it relies as well upon in - depth research conducted by betsy palmer and susan navarro smelcer , formerly of crs , on the practice in both chambers with respect to the impeachment of federal judges . this report provides an overview of the procedures and should not be treated or cited as an authority on congressional proceedings . consultation with the parliamentarian of the house is always advised regarding the possible application of rules and precedents . for more information on impeachment , including a discussion of which federal officers are subject to impeachment and possible grounds for impeachment , see crs report r44260 , impeachment and removal , by jared p. cole and todd garvey . the impeachment process may be initiated as the result of various actions and events , including the receipt and referral of information from an outside source , investigations by congressional committees under their general authority , or the introduction of articles of impeachment in the form of a house resolution . regardless of what might instigate an inquiry into whether impeachment is warranted , there are normally three formal stages of congressional action . first , an impeachment inquiry is authorized , and this is most often accomplished through the adoption of a simple resolution ( h.res.___ ) directing the judiciary committee to investigate an official . second , the committee conducts its investigation , prepares articles of impeachment , and reports them to the house .