yes . there is no general exemption for nonprofits in the flsa or the eap overtime regulations . coverage for workers in nonprofits , like other entities , is determined by the enterprise and individual coverage tests . it is important to note , however , that charitable activities often associated with nonprofits do not count as ordinary commercial activities and thus do not count toward the $500,000 threshold for enterprise coverage under the flsa . only the commercial activities of nonprofits ( eg , gift shops , fee for service activities ) count toward that threshold . on the other hand , even if a nonprofit does not meet the enterprise test for coverage , individual employees in an otherwise exempt nonprofit may be covered by the flsa and the overtime rules if they engage in interstate commerce ( eg , regularly making out of state phone calls , processing credit card transactions ) . yes . both the flsa and the eap overtime regulations apply to institutions of higher education ( ihes ) . due to other provisions of the flsa , however , many personnel at ihes are not eligible for overtime on the basis of the duties test alone and thus are unaffected by changes in the eap standard salary level for exemption . for example , in general , bona fide teachers are exempt regardless of salary level and thus are not eligible for overtime . similarly , academic administrative personnel are exempt from overtime pay if they are paid at least the eap salary level threshold or are paid at least equal to the entrance salary for teachers at the same institution . on the other hand , some ihe workers would be affected by changes in the eap salary level for exemption , including postdoctoral researchers who are employees , nonacademic administrative employees , and other salaried workers who are not covered by another exemption . finally , like some public sector employers , but unlike private sectors employers , public ihes may have the option of using compensatory time ( i.e. , a rate of 1.5 hours for each hour of overtime ) , rather than cash payment , to meet the obligation of providing overtime compensation . yes . there is no blanket exemption from flsa and overtime rule coverage for state and local governments . in general , employees of state and local governments are covered by the overtime provisions of the flsa and thus are affected by eap rulemaking updating the salary level threshold for the eap exemptions . that said , other flsa provisions apply to state and local governments that affect the applicability of overtime rules to these public sector employees . one way in which flsa overtime rules apply differently in the public sector relates to the mode of compensation . state and local governments may have the option of using compensatory time , at a rate of 1.5 hours for each hour of overtime , rather than cash payment to meet the obligation of providing overtime compensation — an alternative not available to private sector employers . additionally , some public sector employees are not covered by the flsa .