building on the requirements of h.res . 6 , the select committee by a unanimous vote agreed to additional rules of procedure at its first meeting , held on march 12 , 2019 . the committee established its regular meeting day ( the first tuesday of each month ) , quorum requirements for various committee activities , and how the committee intends to conduct its questioning of invited witnesses . it takes two members to make a quorum for a hearing , one - third for a markup ( for instance , of any report the committee might release ) , and a majority "actually present" to issue a report . committee rules also incentivize on - time arrival at a hearing with "early - bird" rules allowing members present at the start to question witnesses before late - arrivers . the chair ( representative kilmer ) and vice chair ( representative graves ) are provided five minutes each to make opening statements , and the chair may recognize others to make opening statements as well . committee rules place an overall time limit of 10 minutes for opening statements . questioning witnesses occurs under the five - minute rule , and any committee member may submit to the chair "questions for the record" ( written questions to witnesses who appeared ) within 10 business days of a hearing . although the committee is not authorized to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses or the production of documents , it "may recommend subpoenas and depositions and submit such recommendations to the relevant standing committee. on march 26 , 2019 , the committee on house administration reported h.res . 245 , a resolution to fund house standing and select committees during the 116 th congress , which the house agreed to the following day . this resolution authorized $487,500 for expenditures of the select committee during the course of its investigation . with operations of the select committee scheduled to end on february 1 , 2020 , all but $37,500 of this amount has been reserved for use during the first session of the 116 th congress ( 2019 ) . prior to the adoption of h.res . 245 , the select committee was provided with interim funding . in addition , pursuant to h.res . 6 , the select committee may use the services of house staff . consistent with its mandate , the committee's first hearing ( march 12 ) was held for the purpose of receiving testimony from members themselves regarding any suggested improvements to congressional operations . thirty - five members testified before the committee to present their own reform ideas spanning a wide range of subjects — for instance , changes to the standing rules , family - friendly adjustments to the house schedule , additional resources to support the work of congress , and ways to delegate more policymaking responsibilities to individual members . the committee's next three hearings ( held on march 27 , may 1 , and may 10 ) included testimony from capitol hill practitioners , former members , scholars , and others on a number of proposals the committee might consider in making its own recommendations .