cgcs and mfp are special cases . the united states has yet to notify spending under either of these programs to the wto , so their exact wto spending classification is currently unknown . however , because their payments are coupled directly to specific commodities , they could well be included with other market - distorting payments subject to the spending limit . to the extent that producers expect payments under these programs to recur , they can become market distorting and subject to potential wto challenge . secretary perdue has , however , stated that mfp was a one - time assistance and would not be extended beyond the package announced in july 2018 . cgcs outlays were $326 million in 2016 and $216 million in 2018 . actual outlays under mfp are estimated at $5.2 billion in 2018 and $3.5 billion in 2019 . the u.s. sugar program does not rely on direct payments from usda . instead , usda provides indirect price support via mal loans to processors at statutorily fixed prices ( which were raised slightly by the 2018 farm bill ) while limiting the amount of sugar supplied for food use in the u.s. market . in its 2015 notification of domestic support to the wto ( the most recent notification year ) , usda notified the implicit cost of the sugar program at $1.5 billion . the federally subsidized crop insurance program was largely unchanged by the 2018 farm bill . annual usda premium subsidies — which have averaged $6.4 billion per year since 2011 — count against the u.s. trade - distorting spending limit of $19.1 billion . payments under u.s. conservation programs are deemed generally non - market distorting and are notified as "green box" payments , which are not subject to any spending limit . status: most recent studies suggest that , for u.s. program spending to exceed the $19.1 billion cumulative spending limit , even with the addition of large mfp payments and higher mal and dmc support levels , a combination of events would have to occur that would broadly depress commodity prices . perhaps more relevant to u.s. agricultural trade is the concern that , because the united states plays such a prominent role in most international markets for agricultural products , any distortion resulting from u.s. policy would be both visible and potentially vulnerable to challenge under wto rules . the united states was a major force behind the establishment of the wto in 1995 and the rules and procedures governing its dsu . the united states has frequently used dsu , often successfully . since the summer of 2017 , the united states has blocked the appointment of new dsu appellate body ( ab ) jurists , which has limited the ability of the system to hear dispute cases . the ab currently has three jurists ( the minimum number to hear a case ) out of a total of seven positions . in december 2019 , the terms of two of the three will expire , potentially leaving the ab unable to function if no new jurists are appointed . status: since the inception of the wto in 1995 , the united states has brought to it 46 cases on agriculture .