( figure 1 ) . memorials with "high" federal involvement typically are located on federal land ; receive federal funds for design , construction , and maintenance ; and are managed by federal agencies . these include memorials established by congress as units of the national park system or under the administration of another agency . memorials with "medium" federal involvement typically either are located on federal land but do not receive federal funding , or are located on nonfederal land but receive assistance from a federal agency . examples include a number of memorials designated as nps affiliated areas , which remain under nonfederal management but receive assistance from nps . memorials with "low" federal involvement are those for which congress provides statutory recognition , but which are not located on federal land or affiliated with a federal agency , and do not receive federal funds . memorials with no federal involvement are those that receive no federal recognition , are located on nonfederal land , and for which nonfederal resources were used to design and build the memorial . federal involvement with memorials outside of washington , dc , currently takes a wide variety of forms . congress has established national memorials that are entirely federally funded and managed , often as units of the national park system . congress has also provided for more limited types of federal involvement , such as funding assistance to a nonfederally located memorial or hosting of a nonfederally funded memorial on federal land . also , congress has provided statutory recognition to numerous nonfederal memorials without any additional federal involvement . beyond these federally endorsed memorials , a wide variety of other entities have established and maintained memorials throughout the country with no federal connection , including some titled as "national memorials. for certain types of commemorations , congress has taken a more systematized approach . for example , the cwa governs the establishment of memorials on federal lands in the district of columbia , with provisions for the creation , design , construction , and maintenance of such works . if congress wished to consider a more systematized approach to the establishment and / or funding of national memorials outside the district of columbia , there are a number of potential options . for example , congress could establish a statutory definition of a "national memorial" to guide decisionmaking as new proposals for commemoration arise . congress might consider applying criteria similar to those of the cwa , or to those used by individual agencies for non - cwa memorials , that relate to the types of people and events that may be commemorated , and the amount of time that must pass between an event or individual's death and the commemoration . congress could potentially limit the number of memorial designations that would be appropriate in a given time period , similar to current limits on the number of commemorative coins the u.s. mint can issue in a year . for commemorative coins , committee rules have also required a minimum number of cosponsors before a bill might be considered .