title ii of h.res . 6 establishes a select committee on the modernization of congress to recommend improvements to the work and operation of congress . the select committee's "sole authority" is to "investigate , study , make findings , hold public hearings , and develop recommendations on modernizing congress. such recommendations could include new rules to "promote a more modern and efficient congress ; " new scheduling procedures ; policies to "develop the next generation of leaders ; " policies to recruit , retain , and provide for a diverse staff ; policies to make congressional administration more efficient ; policies on technology and innovation ; and new procedures regarding the house commission on congressional mailing standards ( commonly known as the "franking commission" ) . the select committee's membership is to include two members , delegates , or the resident commissioner appointed by the speaker . at least two members must be serving in their first term , at least two members must be members of the committee on rules , and at least two members must be members on the committee of house administration . the select committee is bipartisan in composition . half of the members are appointed on the recommendation of the minority leader . the speaker designates the chair and , on the recommendation of the minority leader , the vice chair . the select committee does not have legislative jurisdiction or authority to take legislative action on bills or resolutions , and it does not have subpoena or deposition authority . however , it may submit legislative , subpoena , and deposition recommendations to the relevant standing committees . and , like standing committees , the committee was required to have a member day hearing at the start of 116 th congress . 6 requires the select committee to provide an interim status report every 90 days . this interim report must include transcripts of committee proceedings , itemized expenditures , and a proposed plan of activity for the next 90 days . with the "votes of not fewer than 2 / 3 of its members," the select committee is also authorized to submit additional reports from "time to time" that provide the results of investigations , detailed findings , and policy recommendations . the select committee is to submit its final report , with the "votes of not fewer than 2 / 3 of its members," at the end of the first session of the 116 th congress . this report is to include detailed findings and policy recommendations . the select committee is also to submit policy recommendations to the relevant standing committees . all committee reports are to be made available to the general public within 30 calendar days of their submittal to congress or a committee . the select committee is to terminate on february 1 , 2020 . upon its termination , the select committee's records are to be transferred to relevant standing committees , as determined by the speaker . separate orders have the same force and effect as house rules and are commonly included in the house rules package resolution .