other initiatives in transformation . transformation was initially launched with several other priorities that do not feature prominently in recent media on the initiative . for example , usaid operational flexibility in nonpermissive environments and programmatic effectiveness in countering violent extremism were core features of transformation at launch . it is unclear whether these and other priorities have fallen in prominence because they require more interagency coordination , because solutions have been fairly straightforward , because the challenges in those sectors are too intractable to address , or because of other reasons . congress may also consider seeking additional information on how transformation would align with the administration's planned prosper africa trade and investment initiative , which is expected to focus , in part , on usaid's three trade hubs in africa and elements of its trade capacity - building programs . alignment with state department . the state department's office of foreign assistance resources ( f ) has maintained a comprehensive database of indicators to quantify the results of u.s. foreign assistance programs since 2006 . it is unclear how these indicators , or those used by the millennium challenge corporation , will be used in conjunction with usaid's new self - reliance indicators , if at all . also unclear is the extent to which the state department has been engaged with transformation at usaid , and whether these reforms are aligned with secretary pompeo's vision for the future of u.s. diplomatic engagement . congress may consider whether certain reforms should be broadened to include state department policies and structure , or elsewhere in government . impact on food for peace programming . the proposed merger of the offices of u.s. foreign disaster assistance and food for peace into the bureau of humanitarian assistance has raised questions about the future of food for peace act title ii programming . the office of food for peace is currently dual - funded , receiving approximately half of its funding through the agriculture appropriations bill and its authorization from regular farm bills . new positions from r estructuring . the transformation proposal to add two new associate administrator positions at usaid would increase the number of political appointees at the agency , potentially raising concerns about the politicization of usaid's development decisions . given the challenges some administrations have faced in filling existing high - level positions , some observers are concerned that the new positions could sit vacant for months or even years—possibly further hamstringing future administrations' policy crafting and implementation . impact on existing usaid activities . overall , transformation focuses on the new—new strategies , new indicators , and new hiring mechanisms . there is less discussion of what , if anything , may fall away . for example , in staffing , the agency is creating a hiring mechanism to "streamline" the workforce—it discusses plans to eventually phase out one hiring mechanism . this means that as the new hiring mechanism is getting off the ground , the agency would still be managing more than 20 others . congress may consider asking the agency what other strategies , structures , and processes the agency may plan to phase out or integrate as a result of transformation . self - r eliance goals versus c ongressional p riorities .