emissions . the power demands of autonomous vehicle equipment and computers will reduce the fuel economy of gasoline and diesel vehicles and increase emissions . it has been estimated that increased power requirements will increase emissions from combustion vehicles by over 60 grams of co 2 equivalent per mile , equal to reducing fuel economy of a 35 mpg vehicle to 29 mpg . switching to electricity would diminish the direct emissions . acceptance of electric vehicles and related infrastructure is affected by legislation , regulations , and policies adopted by state agencies and electric utilities . incentives vary widely from state to state . the national conference of state legislatures tracks vehicle and charger incentives on a state - by - state basis . forty - five states and the district of columbia currently offer incentives for certain hybrid or electric vehicles , or both . those incentives include permitting solo drivers of electric and hybrid vehicles to use high - occupancy ( carpool ) lanes , income tax credits and rebates for the purchase of an electric vehicle , reduced registration fees , parking fee exemptions , excise tax and emission test waivers , and income tax credits for installation of a home or business charger . lack of clarity about how operators will be regulated is seen by some as an impediment to the spread of the technology in these states . in some cases , ev service providers have avoided regulation as a utility by providing charging services for free , or by charging customers by the minute rather than by the amount of electricity used . whether public utilities or private companies may operate electric vehicle charging stations and whether station operators are subject to regulation as a utility may affect deployment of ev charging infrastructure . these incentives have been found to vary in their effectiveness . several analyses have shown that tax incentives for electric vehicles and infrastructure are the "dominant factors in driving pev adoption. rebates—which happen at the point of sale or within a short time after a vehicle purchase—have been identified as the most effective incentive because their value is clear to buyers at the time of a vehicle transaction . the california air resources board ( carb ) adopted low - emission vehicle regulations in 1990 , requiring automakers to sell light vehicles in that state that meet progressively cleaner emissions standards . as part of these emission regulations , carb also established the zero - emission vehicle ( zev ) program , which requires automakers to offer for sale the lowest - emission vehicles available , with a focus on battery electric , plug - in hybrid electric , and hydrogen fuel cell vehicles . the number of zevs each automaker is required to sell is based upon its total light - vehicle sales in california . carb has set zev sales percentages through a vehicle credit system , increasing annually to 2025 . nine other states have adopted the california zev regulations . the states affected by the regulations represent over one - third of all u.s. new light vehicle sales .