appendix a . select reports and recommendations several foreign policy think tanks and the multilateral development banks have published analyses over the past three years examining broad corruption scandals in latin american and caribbean countries and the outpouring of civil society response . some of these studies contend that donor assistance aimed at anti - corruption in recent times did not go far enough , or produce a measurable and enduring change in practices . for example , in november 2018 , the inter - american development bank ( idb ) published a report by an expert advisory group on anti - corruption , transparency and integrity in the countries of latin america and the caribbean . the idb authors proposed a more aggressive and integrated approach to combating corruption . the report describes earlier interventions encouraged by the idb as well as the united states and several multilateral donors as "uneven and partial," and focused more on enacting reforms and making pronouncements , rather than on implementation and enforcement . it maintains that only an integrated and across - the - board framework for fighting corruption can actually transform the culture and practice of public corruption that pervades too much of the region . calling for a transformative approach , the ibd authors maintain that it is essential that both supply and demand sides of corruption be understood and addressed . they call for public and private sector participation at the national , regional , and international level to replace weak or dysfunctional institutions and practices . the americas program at the center for strategic and international studies ( csis ) , recommends key targets for reform in the region , which are: ( 1 ) political party and campaign financing ; ( 2 ) public financial sector management ; ( 3 ) government contracting and procurement , especially for critical infrastructure ; ( 4 ) civil service reform and effective vetting of public officials ; and ( 5 ) internal strengthening and oversight of public security and justice institutions . csis advocates peer exchanges to tap the knowledge and skills of veterans of reining in public corruption from countries such as uruguay , chile , and colombia . their transferable experiences can assist struggling nations in the northern triangle countries of central america and elsewhere . the emergence and persistence of civil society activism to fight corruption may be attributed to several conditions . one is the region's expanded middle class , which grew to nearly 35% in 2015 from about 21% of latin america's population in 2001 . the middle class is a bulwark against corruption according to the theory that the costs and inefficiencies of corruption take on greater salience when basic needs have been fulfilled . an analysis of the 2016 / 2017 americas barometer study found that those individuals most apt to rank corruption as their nation's top problem were better educated , male , and more affluent . however , when the link between corruption and economic problems and insecurity is made clear , citizens of any background may become energized to combat it . some analysts identify illicit campaign finance as the root of corruption .