similar to h.r . 535 , multiple sdwa bills would require epa to establish final or interim drinking water regulations for some or all pfas , require monitoring for more of these substances , or authorize grants to assist communities in treating pfas in drinking water . ( see table 1 . ) pfas are a large , diverse group of fluorinated compounds , some of which have been used for decades in a wide array of commercial , industrial , and u.s. military applications . since the 1940s , more than 1,200 pfas compounds have been used in commerce , and about 600 are still in use today . the chemical characteristics of pfas have led to the widespread use of these substances for beneficial purposes ( such as firefighting ) and in the processing and manufacture of many commercial products , such as nonstick cookware , food wrapper coatings , stain - resistant carpets , waterproof clothing , and food containers . in coordination with epa , manufacturers completed the phase - out of pfoa production by 2015 . epa reports that food and consumer products represent a large portion of exposure to pfoa and pfos , while drinking water can be an additional source in the small percentage of communities with contaminated water supplies . among the thousands of different pfas , few have sufficient health effects studies for determining a threshold at which adverse effects are not expected to occur . sdwa provides epa with several authorities to address emerging contaminants in public water supplies and drinking water sources . these include the authority to ( 1 ) issue health advisories , ( 2 ) regulate contaminants in water provided by public water systems , and ( 3 ) issue enforcement orders in certain circumstances . for more than a decade , epa has been using sdwa authorities to evaluate several pfas—particularly pfoa and pfos—to determine whether national drinking water regulations may be warranted . to date , epa has not promulgated drinking water regulations for any pfas but has taken a number of related actions . in february 2019 , epa issued a pfas action plan , which identifies and discusses the agency's current and proposed efforts to address pfas through several statutory authorities , including sdwa . these actions range from potential regulatory actions to public outreach on pfas . many of these actions support epa's evaluation of pfas for potential regulation under sdwa . these include research and development of analytical methods needed to accurately measure substances in drinking water , development of additional toxicity information to increase understanding of potential health risks associated with exposures to different pfas , and research on drinking water treatment effectiveness and costs for various pfas . epa also plans to generate occurrence data for more pfas to determine their frequencies and concentrations in public water supplies . further , epa is working with federal , state , and tribal partners to develop risk communication materials on pfas and plans to develop an interactive map on potential pfas sources and occurrence . table a - 1 includes epa's selected actions and associated timelines relevant to addressing pfas in drinking water .