the unexploded ordnance removal act ( h.r . are these agencies utilizing the appropriated funds efficiently and effectively ? focus on clearance —most of the appropriated funds have been for humanitarian demining projects and technical support , with less funding for assistance to uxo victims . the focus on clearance , rather than assistance on uxo victims , may in part be due to a concern about possible post - conflict liability issues . in light of past practices , should the u.s. government increase its support for uxo victims in cambodia , laos , and vietnam beyond those being currently provided via the leahy war victims fund ? implications for bilateral relations —has the amount and types of u.s. uxo assistance to cambodia , laos , and vietnam been a significant factor in bilateral relations with each of those nations ? in vietnam , work on war legacy issues formed an early part of building normalized relations in the post - war period—ties that have broadened into closer strategic and economic linkages . in cambodia and laos , uxo - related assistance has been one of the broadest areas for substantive cooperation between the united states and two countries with which the united states has had relatively cool relations . would a change in the amount or type of assistance provided be beneficial to u.s. relations with cambodia , laos , or vietnam ? should the u.s. government use uxo assistance to pressure other entities , such as vietnam's mnd , to be more cooperative in the uxo decontamination effort ? uxo p revention —the department of defense has implemented a policy that is to eventually replace all cluster munitions with ones whose failure rate is below 1% . should the u.s. government undertake additional efforts to reduce the amount of post - conflict uxo from u.s. munitions , including prohibiting the use of u.s. funding for certain types of submunitions that may leave uxo ? the act also provides $13.5 million for global health and rehabilitation programs under the leahy war victims fund . precedents and lessons for other parts of the world —are there lessons that can be drawn from u.s. assistance for uxo clearance and victim relief in southeast asia that may be applicable to programs elsewhere in the world , including afghanistan and iraq ? have the levels of assistance the united states has offered in southeast asia signaled a precedent for other parts of the world ? during the 115 th congress , legislation was introduced that would have addressed some of these general issues associated with uxo , though none directly addressed the current situation in southeast asia . 2097 ) would authorize $50 million each year for fiscal years 2020 to 2024 for address the uxo issue in cambodia , laos , and vietnam . the cluster munitions civilian protection act of 2017 ( h.r . 1975 and s. 897 ) would have prohibited the obligation or expenditure of u.s. funds for cluster munitions if , after arming , the unexploded ordnance rate for the submunitions was more than 1% .