the united states has more nuclear power reactors than any country worldwide . the 98 operable nuclear generating units provide approximately 20% of the electrical generation in the united states . uranium is the fundamental element used to fuel nuclear power production . the front - end of the nuclear fuel cycle comprises the industrial stages starting with uranium extraction from the earth and ending with power production in a nuclear reactor . congressional interest in the front - end of the nuclear fuel cycle is associated with many factors , including ( 1 ) domestic uranium production and supply , ( 2 ) concerns about increasing reliance on uranium imports , and ( 3 ) the economic viability of u.s. nuclear power reactors . historically , the u.s. atomic energy commission ( aec ) , a predecessor federal agency to the department of energy ( doe ) and the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) , promoted uranium production in the united states through federal procurement contracts between 1947 and 1971 . the majority of domestic uranium concentrate production prior to 1971 supported the development of nuclear weapons and naval propulsion reactors . uranium producers asserted that a heavy reliance on foreign uranium constitutes a national security risk and threatens the viability of domestic uranium production . conversely , nuclear utilities and reactor operators contended that increased fuel costs from trade restrictions would place additional financial burdens on nuclear utilities , potentially causing the premature shutdown of economically marginal nuclear power plants . stakeholders on both sides of the debate generally agreed that the proposed quotas would increase fuel costs for nuclear utilities and increase revenues for domestic uranium mining . for example , a report sponsored by the nuclear energy institute ( nei ) concluded that a 25% quota could increase fuel costs by $500 million to $800 million annually and potentially higher in the years immediately following implementation . an economic study funded by the petitioners estimated uranium mining revenues from a 25% quota would increase by $551 million to $690 million per year and would increase fuel costs by $0.41 per megawatt - hour ( mwh ) . another study estimated that the $0.41 per mwh increase in fuel costs for nuclear generators would translate to approximately $317 million per year . the uranium section 232 investigation also raised policy questions about congress's role under section 232 . under current federal law , trade actions imposed by the president under section 232 do not require congressional approval apart from actions related to petroleum imports . as a broad policy matter , congress may consider the federal role in issues associated with the front - end of the nuclear fuel cycle . the uranium materials and service industry delivers fuel for commercial nuclear power reactors , which is largely traded and purchased under private contracts in a global marketplace . similar to other energy markets , uranium supply is an issue on which congress may or may not elect to intervene . as discussed previously , the united states ceased production of heu for weapons in 1964 , due to the determination of sufficient stockpiles . fuel for nuclear naval propulsion is supplied by government heu stockpiles , and the production of heu for naval propulsion ended by 1992 .