109-59 ) , enacted in 2005 . that law apportioned 13 programs using funding formulas . for example , funds under the highway safety improvement program were apportioned according to three equally weighted factors: ( 1 ) each state's share of lane miles of federal - aid - highways ; ( 2 ) vehicle miles traveled on federal - aid highways ; and ( 3 ) number of fatalities on the federal - aid system . the federal aid road act of 1916 ( 39 stat . 355 ) , which created the first ongoing federal program to fund road construction , used three factors to apportion federal highway funds among the states . after setting some funds aside to cover administrative costs , the law apportioned the remaining authorization to the states according to three factors . these factors were selected , in part , because they were not difficult to compile and seemed relevant to individual states' costs to build and maintain a highway system . the three factors , which were weighted equally , were 1. land area: the ratio which the area of each state bore to the total area of all states ; 2. population: the ratio which the population of each state bore to the total population of all the states , as shown by the latest available census ; and 3. postal road mileage: the ratio which the mileage of rural free delivery routes and star routes in each state bore to the total mileage of such in all the states at the close of the preceding year . the selection of these factors had much to do with disagreement between urban and rural interests about the goals of the road program and with constitutional concerns regarding the appropriateness of federal spending on road construction . the population and land area factors were proxies for the rural and urban state interests . 105-178 ) reestablished apportionment formula factors for individual programs within the federal - aid highway program , often using new factors designed to act as proxies for the needs a program was intended to address . the population factor was seen as protecting the interests of the more densely populated eastern states and the land area factor as protecting the interests of large but less populated western states . the use of a postal road mileage factor helped allay any constitutional qualms , as article i , section 7 of the constitution specifically grants congress the power "to establish…post roads," but the factor also garnered favor from less populous states . the 1916 act also set the maximum federal share of the cost of any highway project at 50% . the urban system formula apportioned funds to the states based on one formula factor: each state's share of the national population living in urban areas of 5,000 or more residents . although the act still favored rural areas , it was the first significant programmatic shift away from what had been essentially a rural road program . during the 1970s and 1980s , as congress created many narrowly targeted programs within the federal - aid highway program , it frequently adopted formula factors specific to those programs . by fy1977 , there were 35 separate authorized programs .