one example is the smartphone . a smartphone integrates several independent technologies — such as telephone , computer , camera , music player , television ( tv ) , and geolocating and navigation tool — into a single device . the smartphone has become its own , identifiable category of technology . currently , over 35% of the global population are smartphone users and over 3 billion active devices are in circulation . in the united states , about 80% of the u.s. population are smartphone users , and over 280 million active devices are in circulation . the technological convergence has resulted in establishing a new and prominent smartphone industry sector , worth over $350 billion globally , according to some estimates . technological convergence may present a range of issues where congress may take legislative and / or oversight actions . three selected issue areas associated with technological convergence are regulatory jurisdiction , digital privacy , and data security . first , merging and integrating multiple technologies from distinct functional categories into one converged technology may pose challenges to defining regulatory policies , roles , and responsibilities . determining oversight jurisdictions and regulatory authorities for converged technologies may become complicated as the boundaries that once separated single - function technologies are blended together . in other words , delineating which policy authorizes which government agency to apply which standards to regulate which industry is no longer simple and straightforward . how congress chooses to oversee certain industries and government agencies may also become complicated due to converging technologies that blur and blend existing categorical boundaries . second , digital privacy concerns stem from converged technologies' collection and usage of personal and machine data . technological convergence facilitates increasing consumption and collection of data , which poses potential digital privacy concerns for consumers . data collection and usage are tied to digital privacy issues because a piece or aggregation of information could identify an individual or reveal patterns in their activities . converged technologies leverage large volumes of data to try to improve the user experience by generating more tailored and anticipatory results . this data can also potentially be used to identify , locate , track , and monitor an individual without the person's knowledge . the same data can potentially be sold to third - party entities without an individual's awareness . as the use of converged technologies continues to propagate , digital privacy issues will likely remain central to the policy debate . third , data security concerns are often associated with smart devices . as devices are able to interconnect , the convenient ubiquitous features may create vulnerabilities that could be exploited by malicious actors . data security , a component of cybersecurity , protects data from unauthorized access and use . along with digital privacy , data security is a pertinent issue for converged technologies , which generate and consume large volumes of data . technological convergence poses three potential data security concerns: increased number of access points susceptible to cyberattacks , linkage to physical security , and theft of data . the first section of this report describes technological convergence along with closely associated media convergence and network convergence .