the fy2019 ndaa ( p.l . 115-232 ) required dod to contract with a scientific organization to perform an independent assessment of dod - related ew plans and programs . according to the legislation , this assessment identified u.s. programs , orders of battle and doctrine ; analyze adversary programs , orders of battle and doctrine ; and make recommendations for how the u.s. military might counteract adversary plans and programs . the center for strategic and budgetary assessments delivered the ndaa mandated study in december 2019 ; however , the fy2020 ndaa required a similar study to be performed . in addition to requesting an independent assessment of ew programs and plans , the fy2019 ndaa required dod to update its electronic warfare strategy from 2017 and submit it to congress . congress has expressed concern that dod has not synchronized its efforts to ensure its dominance in the electromagnetic spectrum . these procurements were excluded so as not to artificially inflate the funding profile . based on the rdt&e profiles and program element searches , crs did not identify disa , joint staff , osd , and darpa programs with procurement appropriations . dod has stated that it has prioritized ew funding above other programs . this report compares funding requests between the three fiscal years to assess if dod seeks to increase funding of the ew portfolio ( by increasing funding ) , decrease funding , or keep the portfolio relatively unchanged . to assess these changes , the percentage change from fy2019 to fy2020 is calculated for each appropriations category , and then compared to an overall dod percentage change . figure 6 , above , shows the relationship between rdt&e and procurement . some might be concerned looking exclusively at the planned funding levels for rdt&e since this appropriation declines over the fydp . this represents a 7.3% increase in the portfolio from fy2019 projections but a 5.7% decrease compared to projections from the fy2020 projections . one potential issue for congress is the overall funding level for ew programs . as a result , there is potentially insufficient unclassified information to assess how much dod is currently spending on ew . this limitation of data presents a potential oversight issue for congress . some have argued that dod has not adequately prioritized ew over the past several years . the budget projections described above may support the argument that dod is now prioritizing investment in ew funding . congress may consider whether dod uses research and development funding to procure new electronic components . congress might consider requiring dod to report all ew - related funding for procurements , as well as ensuring that dod is not procuring new or advanced electronics through other appropriations . the ew excom has stated that many procurement programs have ew - related spending , and it is difficult and complex to differentiate among them . as a result , this report does not include all ew - related procurement programs , and therefore does not account for all ew funding . if congress maintains interest in ew procurement , it may consider requiring dod to report all ew - related procurement programs , as well as to break out specific ew - related initiatives within a larger procurement program .