most are bilateral . the relationship with the united kingdom is among the oldest and the best known . the ic also has multilateral relationships , with nato member states , five eyes partners ( united states , united kingdom , canada , australia , and new zealand ) , and the intelligence organizations supporting coalition partners in operational theaters such as iraq and afghanistan . u.s. ic relationships with foreign intelligence partners have developed in parallel with global ic coverage , as well as the growing number of interests the u.s. shares with foreign partners ; it is also generally recognized that intelligence partnerships can provide mutual benefits for national security . ic foreign partnerships have developed as consequences of the most pressing challenges for u.s. national security over the past century: two world wars , the cold war , and post - 9 / 11 counter - terrorism operations . although the u.s. has periodically shared intelligence with adversaries involving a narrow range of mutual interests , this type of exchange represents the exception to the norm . more typically , most intelligence sharing takes place with allied countries or u.s. affiliated non - state actors within relationships that have been shaped by decades of shared experience in war and peace . u.s. intelligence exchange relationships with foreign partners , therefore , often reflect the high level of trust and professional confidence the u.s. ic places in partnerships with particular foreign allies' intelligence services , involving a broad range of overlapping national security , political , and economic interests . a fundamental assumption , supported by decades of experience , is that building and maintaining these partnerships enhances u.s. national security by providing some benefit that the u.s. would otherwise lack: access to otherwise inaccessible or hostile targets , corroboration of sources , cultural or linguistic expertise , the capacity to conduct joint assessments , providing indications and warning of an attack , obtaining basing rights , or jointly planning and conducting covert operations or intelligence collection . policy and authorities for initiating and managing ties between the ic and foreign intelligence services , and specifying the roles and responsibilities of personnel supporting these relationships , are found in statute , executive orders , and intelligence directives . intelligence community directive ( icd ) - 403 , foreign disclosure and release of classified national intelligence , states u.s. government policy on disclosure of u.s. intelligence to foreign state or non - state intelligence entities: u.s. intelligence is a national asset to be conserved and protected and will be shared with foreign entities only when consistent with u.s. national security and foreign policy objectives and when an identifiable benefit can be expected to accrue to the u.s . it is the policy of the u.s. government to share intelligence with foreign governments whenever it is consistent with u.s. law and clearly in the national interest to do so , and when it is intended for a specific purpose and general limited in duration . icd - 403 also requires that determinations to disclose or release u.s. intelligence should take into account the professional ability of a foreign intelligence service to protect the classified intelligence from subsequent compromise posing a risk to u.s. national security .