this report is divided into two parts . the first part analyzes cash and noncash payment systems , and the second analyzes potential outcomes if cash were to be significantly displaced as a commonly accepted form of payment . part i describes the characteristics of cash and the various electronic payment systems that could potentially supplant cash . the noncash payment systems include traditional electronic payment systems ( such as credit cards or payment apps ) and alternative electronic payment systems , focusing on private systems using distributed ledger technology ( such as cryptocurrencies ) and central bank digital currencies ( which are only under consideration by central banks at this time ) . part i also examines the advantages and costs specific to each payment system and the potential obstacles to the adoption of alternative electronic payment systems . part ii of this report analyzes the potential implications of a reduced role of cash payments in the economy , including potential benefits , costs , and risks . the report also includes an appendix that presents two international case studies of economies in which noncash payment systems rapidly expanded . this section provides analysis of cash , traditional noncash payment systems , and potential alternative payment systems . it describes the characteristics , presents usage data , and analyzes the advantages and costs of each system . it also includes a discussion on the potential decline in cash usage and a short inset on the legality of businesses' refusing to accept cash . as discussed above , although cash remains a frequently used payment system , other payment systems continue to develop that offer their own advantages and costs . various trends suggest that due to market preference or government policy , the role of cash in the payment system has begun to decline and may continue to decline , perhaps significantly , in coming years . if the relative benefits and costs of cash and the various other payment methods evolve in such a way that cash is significantly displaced as a commonly accepted form of payment , that evolution could have a number of effects , both positive and negative , on the economy and society . this section of the report describes a number of potential benefits of a reduced role for cash in the u.s. economy and the various risks and costs that may occur . many of the factors discussed below may not occur wholly as a benefit , risk , or cost ; rather , a potential benefit may bring with it a risk , and vice versa . cash has a number of advantageous features that has made it a simple and robust payment system throughout most of human history . it is difficult to imagine conditions under which cash would be replaced entirely , and disappear from the economy , at least in the near future . nevertheless , its hegemony as a payment system appears to have come to an end , as electronic payment systems have gained popularity , and the ubiquity of cash acceptance for in - person purchases also seems precarious .