in producing this estimate , cbo assumes that h.r . 865 would be enacted near the end of fy2019 and that authorized and estimated funds would be appropriated every year . there is no bond volume cap on tax exempt state and local government bonds . 865 would support public elementary and secondary school construction through several approaches . ed would administer federal grants , the department of the treasury would administer tax credit bonds , and regular reports on the condition and need for school facilities would fill a knowledge gap in order to inform future federal support . the following sections summarize the major provisions of the four titles included in h.r . title i would authorize grants for the long - term improvement of public school facilities , title ii would authorize school infrastructure bonds , title iii would cover general provisions , and title iv would authorize a temporary increase in funding for impact aid construction . the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l . 111-5 ) authorized a $54 billion state fiscal stabilization fund ( sfsf ) . states were required to use at least 81.8% of their share of the sfsf to restore support of public elementary , secondary , and postsecondary schools , and , as applicable , early childhood education programs and services . among the allowable uses of restoration funds were modernization , renovation , or repair of public school facilities . states were required to use the remaining 18.2% of their share of the sfsf for education , public safety , and other government services , which included modernization , renovation , or repair of public school and public or private college facilities , depending on the criteria that the state's governor used to allocate the funds . the 2014 study was the first by nces to estimate such costs since a 2000 report and is the most recent available . as there is no ongoing federal data collection on the physical condition of schools , it is difficult to assess the current state of the nation's school facilities and the need for infrastructure investment . while the construction , renovation , repair , and maintenance of public school facilities have primarily and typically been the responsibility of state and local governments , the federal government has provided some funding for construction and renovation for specific purposes . this report provides a description of and background for selected provisions of the rebuild america's schools act of 2019 ( h.r . 865 / s. 266 ) , which was ordered to be reported by the house committee on education and labor on february 26 , 2019 . 865 proposes to authorize $70 billion in grants and facilitate $30 billion in school infrastructure tax credit bonds to be used toward the construction and repair of public elementary and secondary school facilities . grant funds and school infrastructure bond limits would be allocated to states proportionally based on their prior - year local educational agency ( lea ) grant allocations under title i - a of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) . additional funds would also be authorized for impact aid construction payments authorized under section 7007 of the esea for fy2020 through fy2023 .