, the counterfactual ) . as a result , the focus should be on the relative magnitudes of policies' impacts and not on individual point estimates . one set of cbo estimates presented below is qualitative . still , the estimates presented in this section were made using conventional methods and provide a starting point for understanding how specific policies may affect the economy . the assumptions are subject to significant uncertainty . it is also never known what would happen in the absence of a particular stimulus package change ( i.e. the united states' recent budget deficits and the country's long - run budget outlook could influence the size of any stimulus package . the fy2018 real ( inflation - adjusted ) deficit equaled 3.8% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , which was higher than the average federal deficit since fy1969 ( 2.9% of gdp ) . real deficits are projected to increase over the next 10 years . in its latest economic forecast , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projected that u.s. debt held by the public would also increase over the next 10 years , from 77.8% of gdp in fy2018 to 92.7% of gdp in fy2029 . large and persistent budget deficits can hamper economic growth by lowering the rate of capital formation via reduced national saving , and can potentially offset short - term economic stimulus . at the same time , high levels of debt relative to gdp can constrain a country's borrowing capacity . there are no signs that federal borrowing capacity will be exhausted in the short term . however , congress may consider the consequences of exhausted fiscal space in designing the next potential stimulus package since it would increase both deficits and the debt . larger multipliers suggest larger stimulative effects . economists use multipliers to estimate the impact a particular fiscal policy , or collection of polices , will have on the economy . on the revenue side , it appears that the largest multipliers are associated with tax reductions that are targeted at lower - income households and those with less access to liquid assets . these individuals are more likely , out of necessity , to increase their spending in response to a tax cut or rebate than those with higher incomes or more accessible forms of wealth . business tax reductions also are estimated to stimulate demand , but most analyses find the multiplier effects to be smaller than those of well - targeted individual tax reductions . this finding is the result of research that indicates businesses are slow to respond to investment tax incentives , that business tax rate reductions primarily benefit existing capital rather than new investment , and that hiring incentives do not directly address the primary factor that influences the decision to bring on more employees , which is the demand for businesses' products and services . direct spending increases usually register as highly stimulative on a per - dollar basis , although some spending increases are able to work their way more quickly into the economy than others . for example , spending on unemployment benefits and food stamp assistance increase automatically during a recession and are targeted at households most vulnerable during a downturn .