order no . 745 allows demand response to earn compensation from wholesale electricity markets for providing energy services to balance the power system in day - ahead and real - time markets . order no . 841 allows energy storage systems to earn compensation from wholesale electricity markets for providing any energy , capacity , and essential reliability services they are capable of providing . implementation of order no . 841 might lead to greater deployment of energy storage which could improve balancing . various grant programs administered by the department of energy ( doe ) have supported the development of new technologies that can balance wind and solar sources or support reliability in other ways . these include research and development into electricity generators ; wind forecast models and methodology ; power electronics for solar sources ; and standards for interconnection into the bulk power system . doe's office of energy efficiency and renewable energy ( eere ) has funded research meant to improve short - term weather forecasting specifically related to wind power forecasts in two wind forecast improvement projects . doe reports that advances made during this research include improved observations of meteorological data and improved methodologies for using those data in wind forecasts . congress has held hearings related to the changes in the electricity generation profile of the country , and some members raised concerns about reliability during these hearings . members may continue to examine reliability issues moving forward , in light of projections that wind and solar will become an increasingly larger share of electricity generation . for example , eia's projection of existing law and regulations shows wind and solar sources contributing 23% of electricity generation in 2050 . members may also choose to include reliability as part of any debate about policies to increase the generation from wind and solar sources . preparing for higher levels of generation from wind and solar might require new approaches to maintaining electric reliability . the existing regulatory framework can accommodate some changes since ferc and nerc have authority to initiate development of new reliability standards . for example , nerc has raised the issue of whether it should develop new reliability metrics in light of the increasing use of vre for electricity generation . in addition to its capacity supply assessment , nerc's reliability assessment subcommittee should lead the electric industry in developing a common approach and identify metrics to assess energy adequacy . as identified in this assessment , the changing resource mix can alter the energy and availability characteristics of the generation fleet . additional analysis is needed to determine energy sufficiency , particularly during off - peak periods and where energy - limited resources are most prominent . congress could choose to provide guidance for ferc and nerc activities in this area . congress could also assess whether the existing regulatory framework is sufficient to maintain reliability if generation from wind and solar sources increase above current projections . one area of discussion is the siting and approval of transmission projects , particularly those that might result in enhanced availability of wind and solar sources for system balancing . currently , the siting of electricity transmission facilities is largely left to the states .