these are summarized in this report . domestic food assistance programs also receive funds from sources other than appropriations: in addition to appropriated funds from the child nutrition account for commodity foods ( which provides over $1.4 billion ) , usda purchases commodity foods for the child nutrition programs using "section 32" funds — a permanent appropriation . for fy2019 , the enacted appropriation specifies that up to $485 million from section 32 is to be available for child nutrition entitlement commodities , compared to $465 million in fy2018 . the fresh fruit and vegetable program ( ffvp ) for selected elementary schools nationwide is financed with permanent , mandatory funding from section 32 . the underlying law ( section 19 of the richard b. russell national school lunch act ) provides funds at the beginning of every school year ( july ) . for fy2019 , there is $171.5 million available for ffvp , which is consistent with the fy2018 base amount adjusted for inflation . the food service management institute ( technical assistance to child nutrition providers , also known as the institute of child nutrition ) is funded through a permanent annual appropriation of $5 million . the senior farmers' market nutrition program receives nearly $21 million of mandatory funding per year ( fy2002-fy2023 ) outside of the regular appropriations process . usda was one of the departments affected by a lapse in fy2019 funding and the resulting 35-day partial government shutdown ( during parts of december 2018 and january 2019 ) . most of usda's food and nutrition service ( fns ) programs , whether mandatory or discretionary , rely on funding provided in appropriations acts . as a result , the lapse in fy2019 appropriations required the execution of contingency plans , including staff furloughs , and at times the operating status of programs was in flux . fns program operations during a government shutdown vary based on the different programs' available resources , determined by factors such as contingency or carryover funds and terms of the expired appropriations acts as well as usda's decisionmaking . beginning in late december 2018 , fns released program - specific memoranda to states and program operators describing the status of different nutrition assistance programs during the funding lapse . in addition to the impact on programs' funding discussed below , furloughs of fns staff during this time period may have affected program operations ( for example , the availability of technical assistance ) on a case - by - case basis . this appendix summarizes some of the key issues and impacts on the snap , child nutrition , and wic programs during this partial government shutdown . further detail can be found in the fns documents referenced above . it is important to note that because circumstances during a lapse in appropriations and executive - branch decisionmaking can vary , operations during this partial shutdown are not necessarily how a future shutdown would proceed . snap benefits states issue snap benefits on a monthly basis . as in the fy2019 appropriations law , the fy2018 appropriations law ( p.l . 115-141 ) provided one year of snap funding as well as a contingency fund of $3 billion that can be spent in fy2018 or fy2019 .