participation is free . the livestock indemnity program ( lip ) compensates producers at a rate of 75% of market value for livestock mortality or livestock sold at a loss . eligible loss conditions may include ( 1 ) extreme or abnormal damaging weather that is not expected to occur during the loss period for which it occurred , ( 2 ) disease that is caused or transmitted by a vector and is not susceptible to control by vaccination , and ( 3 ) an attack by animals reintroduced into the wild by the federal government or protected by federal law . the livestock forage disaster program ( lfp ) provides payments to eligible livestock producers who have suffered grazing losses on drought - affected pastureland ( including cropland planted specifically for grazing ) or on rangeland managed by a federal agency due to a qualifying fire . the tree assistance program ( tap ) provides payments to eligible orchardists and nursery growers to replant or rehabilitate trees , bushes , and vines damaged by natural disasters , disease , and insect infestation . eligible losses must exceed 15% after adjustment for normal mortality . payments cover 65% of the cost of replanting trees or nursery stock and 50% of the cost of rehabilitation ( eg , pruning and removal ) . the emergency assistance for livestock , honey bees , and farm - raised fish program ( elap ) provides payments to producers of livestock , honey bees , and farm - raised fish as compensation for losses due to disease , adverse weather , feed or water shortages , or other conditions ( such as wildfires ) that are not covered under lip or lfp . the 2018 farm bill amended the permanent agricultural disaster assistance programs by expanding the definition of eligible producer to include indian tribes or tribal organizations . it also expanded payments under lip for livestock losses caused by disease and for losses of unweaned livestock that occur before vaccination . it increased replanting and rehabilitation payment rates for orchardists who are beginning farmers or veterans under tap . finally , it removed payment limits on elap . of the four disaster assistance programs , only the lfp is now subject to the $125,000 per - person payment limit . cbo projects usda spending for title i farm commodity and disaster programs under the 2018 farm bill at $31.3 billion for the five - year 2019-2023 period . this translates to $6.3 billion annually , including projected annual outlays of $4.1 billion for plc and $1.2 billion for arc ( table 2 ) . this contrasts with estimated annual outlays on title i programs under the 2014 farm bill of $7.2 billion , including $1.8 billion for plc and $3.3 billion for arc . under the 2014 farm bill , most acres of corn , soybeans , and wheat — the three largest crops produced annually in the united states — were enrolled in arc ( 93% , 97% , and 56% , respectively ) . this preference for enrollment in arc contributed to larger annual payment outlays under arc ( $3.3 billion per year on average ) than plc ( $1.8 billion per year ) under the 2014 farm bill .