b . the interest rate earned by special issues is equal to the average market yield on marketable , interest - bearing government securities due at least four years in the future . the managing trustee may redeem any of these special issues , at any time , at par ( i.e. , face value ) plus accrued interest . the ability to redeem the special issues at any time for par value , thus ensuring they cannot lose value , makes them nonmarketable . other u.s. government issuances , if sold prior to maturity , are redeemed at the prevailing market rate . because these special issues can always be redeemed at par , their early redemption at any time does not negatively affect the trust funds' value . if it is determined to be in the public interest , the managing trustee may purchase non - special issues ( eg , marketable u.s. securities ) at the original or market price . doing so would imply that any redemption , if needed prior to the maturity date of such security , would return the market price and possibly result in losses to the trust funds' capital . the 1957-1959 advisory council on social security financing acknowledged that the trust funds could invest in public ( i.e. , marketable ) issues , but recommended amending the social security act to allow investment in public issues only "when they will provide currently a yield equal to or greater than the yield that would be provided by the alternative of investing in special issues. had this amendment been enacted into law , it would have mandated the preference for special issues . the social security act provides no direction on how the trust funds' investments should be redeemed . in practice , the trustees have adopted two administrative policies to address this gap . first , special issues are redeemed before maturity only when they are required to cover immediate costs . this policy prevents special issues with a low yield from being redeemed and then immediately reinvested at a higher rate . second , special issues are redeemed in maturity - date order . this policy provides a reliable order of redemption . actuarial note number 142 , published by the social security administration's office of the chief actuary ( ocact ) , outlines the oasdi trust funds' investment principles . the note acknowledges that the legislative history of the social security act provides only limited guidance , and the rest can be inferred from the administrative policies adopted over the duration of the trust funds' existence . the 1994-1996 advisory council on social security identified the demographic implications of the aging b aby b oom generation — those born from 1946 through 1964 — and the associated effects on the trust funds as an issue . as a result , the council's final report recommended investing a portion of the trust funds in equities to help alleviate pressure on the oasdi program's long - term actuarial balance . other alternatives included investments in private ( eg , corporate ) bonds , or in social and economic activities , such as housing construction .