instead , it is more calculated , motivated by a "commercial interest. in particular , if a particular advertisement concerns a subject in which "the public lacks sophistication" and cannot verify the claims , the court has suggested that the government may have a freer hand to address such concerns . recent supreme court precedent suggests that the court is more closely reviewing commercial disclosure requirements , perhaps moving away from a more deferential treatment of such provisions . in nifla , the court held that a disclosure requirement was likely unconstitutional under zauderer because the government had not presented sufficient evidence to justify the measure — even though in other cases , the court had rejected similar challenges to commercial disclosure requirements , saying that the government did not need to present more evidence because the harm it sought to remedy was "self - evident. further , the court has recently suggested that if a law regulating commercial speech discriminates on the basis of content — as all disclosure requirements seemingly do — then this content discrimination might subject the law to heightened scrutiny . if the court further embraces this view , it could be a marked departure from its opinions holding that commercial speech could be regulated on the basis of its content , so long as the government's justification for the content discrimination were sufficiently related to its legitimate interests in regulating the speech . in concurring and dissenting opinions that have been joined by other justices , justice breyer has argued that insofar as the court's recent decisions suggest that commercial disclosure requirements should be subject to heightened scrutiny , they are inconsistent with prior case law and are not a proper application of the first amendment . the supreme court said in nifla that it was "not question[ing] the legality of health and safety warnings long considered permissible , or purely factual and uncontroversial disclosures about commercial products. and lower courts have frequently upheld commercial disclosure requirements , perhaps suggesting that disclosures of the kind cited by justice breyer are not in danger of wholesale invalidation under the first amendment . however , the majority opinion in nifla did not clarify what kind of disclosures it would consider permissible , and its opinion made clear that disclosure requirements should be scrutinized in light of the speakers they cover and the burdens they pose . moreover , although the nifla court said that it was not questioning these disclosures' "legality," it left open the possibility that these disclosure should nonetheless be subject to heightened scrutiny . this statement may mean only that the court believes that many commercial disclosure requirements would meet a higher standard of scrutiny . at least one federal appellate court seems to have taken nifla as a signal that lower courts should more closely scrutinize commercial disclosure requirements . in american beverage association v. city & county of san francisco , the ninth circuit , sitting en banc , relied on nifla to reverse a prior decision that had upheld an ordinance requiring "health warnings on advertisements for certain sugar - sweetened beverages.