the united states and north macedonia enjoy good relations . the united states strongly supports north macedonia's nato and eu membership bids . after greece blocked north macedonia's nato entry in 2008 , the united states signed a "declaration of strategic partnership and cooperation" with north macedonia to signal u.s. commitment to expeditiously securing north macedonia's nato membership . the united states provided $21.6 million in foreign assistance to north macedonia in fy2017 and $15.3 million in fy2018 . furthermore , the united states has cooperated with the eu to defuse political crises in north macedonia , most recently in 2017 . many members of congress supported greece and north macedonia's negotiations to resolve their bilateral dispute . resolutions were sponsored in both chambers to support north macedonia's landmark agreement with greece and back its nato membership bid . on february 6 , 2019 , the chairman and ranking member of the house committee on foreign affairs wrote an open letter to secretary of state mike pompeo urging the administration to back north macedonia's accession . with growing concern over chinese and russian global influence , some members have expressed concern over external influence in the western balkans region — including north macedonia . finally , some observers contend that north macedonia's strong desire for eu and nato membership serves as a reminder to officials on both sides of the atlantic of the worth of the transatlantic partnership , particularly at a time when it has grown strained . north macedonia foreign minister nikola dimitrov has often remarked that "those on the inside forget how cold it is outside. the united states also assists north macedonia with security challenges , including returned foreign fighters , trafficking , and cybersecurity . north macedonia's ministry of interior estimates that 150 or more of its citizens fought with the islamic state in iraq and syria , of which roughly 80 have since returned . the united states has cooperated with law enforcement and intelligence officials in north macedonia to identify threats , provided training for judges and prosecutors involved in terrorism cases , and supported organizations that work toward countering violent extremism . the u.s. state department classifies north macedonia as a tier 2 country with regard to trafficking in persons: despite improvements in its efforts to combat trafficking , the government does not meet the state department's minimum conditions for its elimination . finally , u.s. cyber command , a unit in the department of defense , has worked with authorities in north macedonia to improve cyber defense capabilities and is reportedly deploying one or more experts for on - site assistance . the united states has provided significant amounts of foreign assistance to north macedonia . from the country's independence in 1991 through fy2015 , the united states obligated about $819 million in aid to north macedonia , according to the usaid greenbook . in 2007 , the nato freedom consolidation act ( p.l . 110-17 ) was passed , making north macedonia eligible for assistance under the nato participation act of 1994 . as a candidate for eu and nato membership , north macedonia is eligible for assistance through the countering russian influence funds under the countering america's adversaries through sanctions act enacted in 2017 ( p.l .