the development of p.l . 116-20 was uncommon , in that the house and senate developed this measure in the absence of a formal supplemental appropriations request from the administration for disaster funding . in the process of exercising this constitutional authority , a number of issues frequently reemerge in congressional debate: the relative timeliness of supplemental appropriations ; the proper scope of a supplemental appropriations measure ; how exemptions from discretionary budget limits enable investments in disaster relief , and whether such exemptions are properly structured ; proposals to offset some or all of the proposed disaster relief spending ; how quickly relief and recovery funding will be made available ; how congress can ensure that the funding provided is not spent on wasteful or fraudulent endeavors . for example , as additional disaster needs arose , the appropriation provided for the office of the secretary for the u.s. department of agriculture that was proposed in division c of h.r . 695 grew from $1.1 billion to more than $3 billion in p.l . the controlling language changed to broaden the potential application of the assistance as well ( additions are shown in bold ) : "for necessary expenses related to losses of crops ( including milk , on - farm stored commodities , crops prevented from planting in 2019 , and harvested adulterated wine grapes ) , trees , bushes , and vines , as a consequence of hurricanes michael and florence , other hurricanes , floods , tornadoes , typhoons , volcanic activity , snowstorms , and wildfires occurring in calendar years 2018 and 2019 under such terms and conditions as determined by the secretary. the development and enactment of supplemental appropriations legislation is also affected by the same legislative rhythms that affect the timing of other legislation . disaster assistance supplemental appropriations may move more quickly at some times than others , given the legislative environment . they may move on their own or they may be included in a variety of legislative vehicles . continuing appropriations measures and consolidated appropriations measures ( which include multiple appropriations bills ) frequently serve as vehicles for supplemental appropriations toward the end of the fiscal year or soon after . for example , p.l . 114-223 , a continuing resolution for fy2017 in a consolidated appropriations act , included a $500 million supplemental appropriation for hud's community development block grant - disaster recovery ( cdbg - dr ) program targeting major disasters declared prior to the enactment of the measure in calendar 2016 . high - priority authorizing legislation may also prove to be a convenient vehicle . for example , division i of the faa reauthorization act ( p.l . 115-254 ) included a $1.68 billion supplemental appropriation for cdbg - dr , targeting areas impacted by major disasters declared in calendar 2018 . an administration request for supplemental disaster assistance can be an additional factor in the timing of the congressional consideration of supplemental appropriations . in september 2016 , gao released a report on disaster assistance provided by the federal government over the 10-year period from fy2005 through fy2014 .