that 'is delegation running riot.' although justice alito voiced "support [for the] effort" of the dissent in rethinking the court's approach to the nondelegation doctrine , he opted to not join that effort without the support of the majority of the court . however , justice gorsuch countered that "respecting the separation of powers" does not prohibit congress from authorizing the executive branch to fill in details , find facts that trigger applicable statutory requirements , or exercise nonlegislative powers . a future case may provide the court with the opportunity to provide guidance to the courts and congress on how precise congress must be in its delegation and how best to draw the line between permissible and impermissible delegations . for now , however , the current intelligible principle standard in use since 1935 survives while the nondelegation doctrine continues to remain "moribund. circuit ) for over a decade before his elevation to the supreme court . empirical evidence suggests the court can change with the retirement and replacement of one its members . as a result , the question looming over the october 2018 term was how justice kennedy's departure and justice kavanaugh's arrival would alter the court's jurisprudence going forward . indeed , one member of the court , justice ruth bader ginsburg , predicted justice kennedy's retirement to be "the event of greatest consequence for the current term , and perhaps for many terms ahead. notwithstanding the alteration in the court's makeup , observers have generally agreed that the october 2018 term largely did not produce broad changes to the court's jurisprudence . implications for congress: the divided opinions in gundy signal a potential shift in the court's approach in nondelegation challenges and potential resurrection of the nondelegation doctrine . with three justices and the chief justice in gundy willing to reconsider or redefine the court's "intelligible principle" standard , justice kavanaugh , who did not participate in gundy , appears likely to be the critical vote to break the tie in a future case considering a revitalization of the nondelegation principle . if the court were to replace the modern intelligible principle approach , new challenges may arise in determining when congress crosses the nondelegation line . a more restrictive nondelegation standard could invite constitutional challenges to many other statutory provisions that delegate broad authority and discretion to the executive branch to issue and enforce regulations . the significance of these challenges was the subject of a debate between the gundy plurality and dissent . justice kagan cautioned that striking down sorna's delegation as unconstitutional would make most of congress's delegations to the executive branch unconstitutional because congress relies on broad delegations to executive agencies to implement its policies . section 20913 ( d ) of sorna authorizes the attorney general to "specify the applicability" of the registration requirements "to sex offenders convicted before the enactment" of the act and to "prescribe rules for the registration of any such sex offenders" and for other offenders unable to comply with the initial registration requirements . as decided by the court in reynolds v. united states , the law's registration requirements did not apply to pre - sorna offenders until the attorney general so specified . justice brett kavanaugh replaced justice kennedy one week into the october 2018 term .