the gses issue mbss to investors . another factor may be that the pspas caps of $250 billion on both of the gses' portfolios potentially limit the amount of mortgages with nonstandardized characteristics they can purchase . the gses retained portfolios consist primarily of ( 1 ) mortgages in the pipeline to be securitized , ( 2 ) non - performing mortgages that may receive loss - mitigation , and ( 3 ) mortgages that support affordable housing mission goals . the pspa caps and changing mortgage market conditions may prompt the gses to be more deliberate when allocating their portfolios for certain purposes . under the current standardization initiatives , some mortgage purchases made to support the gses' affordable mission goals might not be securitized if they lack , for example , the prepayment characteristics required to be securitized into a umbs . hence , the standardization initiatives would not adversely affect low - and moderate - income borrowers whose prepayment speeds can be securitized into umbss ; however , borrowers with prepayments speeds not acceptable for umbs securitization could pay more for mortgages if the gses' portfolios are being used primarily as securitization pipelines for acceptable mortgages and operating closer to their pspa caps while the gses are under conservatorship . on january 10 , 2013 , the consumer financial protection bureau ( cfpb ) released a final rule implementing the ability - to - repay ( atr ) requirement of the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ; p.l . 111-203 ) ; the rule took effect on january 10 , 2014 . the dodd - frank act requires lenders to verify a borrower's atr with documentation . the final rule provides multiple ways for a loan originator to comply , one of which is by originating a qualified mortgage ( qm ) . if a loan meets certain underwriting and product - feature requirements , it receives qm status ; the lender receives a presumption of atr compliance for legal purposes . specifically , qm loans provide safe harbor legal protection , meaning that a borrower would not be able to assert that the originator ( and any subsequent secondary - market purchaser ) failed to comply with any of the required underwriting criteria . limiting the borrower's debt - to - income ( dti ) ratio to 43% is one of the underwriting requirements for a loan to receive qm status . if , however , a loan's dti exceeds 43% , it may still receive qm status if another federal agency that insures mortgage credit risk is willing to guarantee it . the qm patch allows the gses and other federal agencies to operate under their own qm rules for seven years ( until january 10 , 2021 ) or until the gses exit conservatorship , whichever is sooner . consequently , the federal housing administration , u.s. department of veterans affairs , and united states department of agriculture did not adopt a 43% dti requirement for the mortgages they guarantee . instead , these agencies adopted their own qm definitions , which included the exclusion of product features they considered would impede repayment from borrowers they predominantly serve—but they did not limit dtis to 43% .