this section provides an overview of some of these questions . the disadvantage of those systems is that they can only defend small areas . to defend the whole of the continental united states , you would need an unaffordable number of thaad batteries. in addition , some analysts have argued that the united states' current command and control architecture would be incapable of "processing data quickly enough to respond to and neutralize an incoming hypersonic threat. ( a broader discussion of hypersonic weapons defense is outside the scope of this report. ) as congress reviews the pentagon's plans for u.s. hypersonic weapons programs during the annual authorization and appropriations process , it might consider a number of questions about the rationale for hypersonic weapons , their expected costs , and their implications for strategic stability and arms control . although the department of defense is funding a number of hypersonic weapons programs , it has not established any programs of record , suggesting that it may not have approved requirements for hypersonic weapons or long - term funding plans . indeed , as assistant director for hypersonics ( usd r&e ) mike white has stated , dod has not yet made a decision to acquire hypersonic weapons and is instead developing prototypes to "[identify] the most viable overarching weapon system concepts to choose from and then make a decision based on success and challenges. as congress conducts oversight of u.s. hypersonic weapons programs , it may seek to obtain information about dod's evaluation of potential mission sets for hypersonic weapons , a cost analysis of alternative means of executing these mission sets , and an assessment of the enabling technologies—such as space - based sensors or autonomous command and control systems—that may be required to employ or defend against hypersonic weapons . assistant director for hypersonics ( usd r&e ) mike white has noted that dod is prioritizing offensive programs while it determines "the path forward to get a robust defensive strategy. this approach is reflected in dod's fy2021 request , which allocates $206.8 million for hypersonic defense programs—of a total $3.2 billion request for all hypersonic - related research . similarly , in fy2020 , dod requested $157.4 million for hypersonic defense programs—of a total $2.6 billion for all hypersonic - related research . although the defense subcommittees of the appropriations committees increased fy2020 appropriations for both hypersonic offense and defense above the fy2020 request , they expressed concerns , noting in their joint explanatory statement of h.r . 1158 "that the rapid growth in hypersonic research has the potential to result in stove - piped , proprietary systems that duplicate capabilities and increase costs. to mitigate this concern , they appropriated $100 million for dod to establish a joint hypersonic transition office to "develop and implement an integrated science and technology roadmap for hypersonics" and "establish a university consortium for hypersonic research and workforce development" in support of dod efforts . given the lack of defined mission requirements for hypersonic weapons , it may be challenging for congress to evaluate the balance of funding for hypersonic weapons programs , enabling technologies , supporting test infrastructure , and hypersonic missile defense . analysts disagree about the strategic implications of hypersonic weapons .