the longer the cr , the greater the consequences for our force. dod officials argue that the department depends heavily on stable but flexible funding patterns and new start activities to maintain a modernized force ready to meet future threats . the study , conducted in 2017 by the rand corporation , was sponsored by the office of dod's senior acquisition official ( the then - under secretary of defense for acquisition , technology , and logistics ) . summarizing its review of the literature on cr effects , the rand team said because of a lack of quantitative data , many of the [asserted] consequences … would be very difficult to estimate quantitatively or to conclusively demonstrate . all of the research that we reviewed on the consequences of operating under a cr employed qualitative approaches that focused on case studies , assertions , and anecdotal information . to see whether crs systematically are associated with cost increases and delays in dod procurements , rand examined 151 procurement awards for relatively high - profile programs during fy2013-fy2015 . in each of those years , dod operated under crs for several months . comparing procurement awards originally scheduled to occur while the agency was under a cr with those made after a regular appropriations bill had been enacted , the study found no statistically significant difference between the two groups in whether an award was delayed ; if it was delayed , the length of the delay ; or whether the unit cost increased compared with the projected cost . rand also compared the 151 procurement awards made during fy2013-fy2015—years when there were prolonged crs—with 48 awards made during fy1999 , when dod operated under a cr for only the first 3 weeks of the fiscal year . a comparison of the awards made during the period of "long - crs" ( 2013-15 ) with awards made during a period in which there was one relatively short cr ( fy1999 ) showed no statistically significant difference in the percentage of awards that were delayed ; for cases in which a delay occurred , longer delays in fy2013-fy2015 than in the earlier period ; and larger unit - cost increases ( relative to original projections ) for cases during the fy1999 ( i.e. , the "short - cr" period ) . in sum , rand concluded , "we did not find strong evidence … that crs are generally associated with delays in procurement awards or increased costs . on the other hand , given the limitations inherent in our statistical analysis , we cannot use its results to rule out the occurrence of these kinds of negative effects. inasmuch as crs have become relatively routine , congress may wish to mandate a broader and more systematic assessment of dod's use of what the rand study calls "levers of management discretion" to ameliorate their potential adverse impacts . in addition to cataloguing the techniques used and estimating their near - term costs , if any , congress also may sponsor assessments of the impact of crs over the longer term .