appendix a . historical timeline , 1747-2001 this timeline briefly describes the major political and military events that have shaped afghanistan's modern trajectory from the durrani empire to the u.s. invasion in 2001 . appendix b. soviet war in afghanistan the soviet union's invasion of , and withdrawal from , afghanistan has emerged as a frequently referenced possible historical analogue for the u.s. experience there . while there are clear and dramatic differences between the u.s. and soviet experiences in afghanistan , they also share some similarities that are of potential value in assessing various u.s. policy options . the soviet union deployed troops into afghanistan in december 1979 to buttress the communist people's democratic party of afghanistan ( pdpa ) government , which had been established after the 1978 saur ( april ) revolution . growing instability in afghanistan , including a nascent grassroots popular uprising against the pdpa's reform program and factional fighting within the pdpa , led soviet leaders to order the initial invasion of about 80,000 soviet troops , which quickly took control of urban centers , major lines of communication , and other strategic points . soviet troops , which numbered over 100,000 at their peak , partnered with afghan government forces and various paramilitaries but generally bore the brunt of fighting against armed opposition groups , collectively known as the mujahideen . mujahideen groups , supported by pakistan , the united states , saudi arabia , and others , led a guerilla campaign against soviet and afghan government forces characterized by sabotage operations , attacks against military and government sites , and attacks against some civilian targets . the soviet effort was not just military in nature . the ussr also "sent thousands of technical specialists and political advisors" to afghanistan to "help stabilize the government and broaden its base of support," though these missions were often undermined by "infighting and lack of coordination among advisers and other soviet officials. by 1985 , newly installed soviet leader mikhail gorbachev had decided to seek a withdrawal from afghanistan . soviet military losses were substantial ( around 13,000 soviet troops killed and 40,000 wounded over the course of the decade - long intervention ) , but experts disagree about the extent to which these casualties motivated the decision to withdraw . other reasons cited include international isolation , the economic cost of the war effort , the potential for political unrest within the ussr , and the greater importance gorbachev placed on his reform program . increasingly , soviet attention turned to both pressuring squabbling afghan leaders to unify and building up the afghan military , which suffered from high rates of desertion , attrition , and casualties . u.n. - mediated talks in geneva between delegations from the governments of afghanistan ( supported by the ussr ) and pakistan ( supported by the u.s. ) began in march 1982 and continued fitfully until the signing of the geneva accords in april 1988 . the soviet withdrawal began in may , per the accords , and finished on february 15 , 1989 , when the last soviet soldier crossed back into the soviet union ( now uzbekistan ) from afghanistan .