india - pakistan . the united states has long sought to assist in reducing india - pakistan conflict and its impact on developments in afghanistan . islamabad is wary of the indian presence in afghanistan and accuses new delhi of supporting anti - pakistan groups there , a dynamic that can in turn affect u.s. efforts to sustain pakistan's help in facilitating afghanistan reconciliation . many analysts expect india - afghanistan ties to grow stronger with modi's reelection , and new delhi appears wary of any precipitous u.s. withdrawal from afghanistan . meanwhile , india's deepening "strategic partnership" with japan is a major aspect of new delhi's broader "act east" policy and a key axis in the greater foip strategies broadly pursued by all three governments participating in a newly established u.s. - japan - india trilateral dialogue . prime minister modi appears to have a convivial personal relationship with his japanese counterpart and bilateral ties are seen as likely to strengthen going forward . while prime minister modi and his party have long sought to emphasize development and good governance , the 2019 election cycle revolved around nationalism and other emotive issues , with many observers arguing that hindu majoritarianism is a threat both to india's religious minorities and to the country's syncretic traditions . according to the u.s. state department and independent watchdogs , india is the site of numerous human rights violations , many of them serious and some perpetrated , or at least tolerated , by state actors . many observers are concerned about the impact of growing religious bigotry and hindu nationalism on human rights . the bjp is an openly hindu nationalist party and prime minister modi is a self - avowed hindu nationalist . in 2005 , modi was denied a u.s. visa over concerns about his role in government during lethal anti - muslim violence in 2002 . modi hit conciliatory notes in a national address three days after the 2019 election results were announced , vowing to seek the trust of minority groups and to work for the good of all indians . human rights nongovernmental organizations and social service groups have seen their indian operations constrained in recent years , and observers are watching closely for signs that the modi / bjp mandate will lead to renewed efforts toward hindu nationalist goals . some of these—including laws preventing religious conversions and cow slaughter—continue to cause sparks in u.s. - india relations , including explicit bjp criticism of the u.s. government for alleged "bias" against modi . future moves by the modi government on other "hindutva" policies could increase national divisions and lead to further international opprobrium . we are confident that the strong and upward trajectory of our partnership will continue . president trump terminated india's eligibility for the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) , effective on june 5 , 2019 , after determining that "india has not assured the united states that india will provide equitable and reasonable access to its markets. the chairman of the house foreign affairs committee also issued a laudatory statement and , in june , several members of congress penned an open letter to president trump to "highlight the continuing strategic importance of the u.s. - india relationship.