section 4 of e.o . 13767 , "physical security of the southern border of the united states," focuses almost entirely on the construction of "a physical wall" on the u.s. - mexico border as a means of obtaining operational control of the nearly 2,000-mile border . are the operational benefits worth the financial and operational costs , or are there more efficient ways to achieve the desired tactical or strategic outcomes ? how should congress respond to the administration's exercise of reprogramming and transfer authorities to provide funding for border barrier work above the amount congress provided to cbp for that purpose ? the united states' southern border with mexico runs for nearly 2,000 miles over diverse terrain , through varied population densities , and across discontinuous sections of public , private , and tribal land ownership . the department of homeland security ( dhs ) customs and border protection ( cbp ) is primarily responsible for border security , including the construction and maintenance of tactical infrastructure , but also the installation and monitoring of surveillance technology , and the deployment of border patrol agents to impede unlawful entries of people and contraband into the united states ( eg , unauthorized migrants , terrorists , firearms , and narcotics ) . built barriers , such as fencing , are a relatively new feature on the southern border . these structures vary in age , purpose , form , and location . at the end of fy2015 , approximately 653 miles—roughly one - third of the international boundary—had a primary layer of barriers . approximately 300 miles of the "primary fence" was designed to prevent vehicles from entering , and approximately 350 additional miles was designed to block people on foot—"pedestrian fencing. cbp has used various materials for pedestrian fencing , including bollard , steel mesh , and chain link , and employed bollard and normandy - style fencing for vehicle barriers . across 37 discontinuous miles , the primary layer is backed by a secondary layer of pedestrian fencing as well as an additional 14 miles of tertiary fencing ( typically to delineate property lines ) . on january 10 , 2020 , the administration announced the completion of the first 100 miles of the "new border wall system" under the trump administration . based on cbp's information , the 100 miles of new border wall system largely replaces less formidable existing barriers with 18- to 30-foot bollard style fencing designed to obstruct both vehicles and pedestrians . it does not represent additional miles of the primary layer of border barriers . cbp has not announced the completion of any additional miles of primary fencing since 2015 , but sections of legacy fencing and breached areas have been replaced or repaired and other improvements have been made . an interactive online project by inewsource ( a nonprofit , nonpartisan investigative online newsroom in san diego ) and kpbs ( a public broadcasting service television and radio station in san diego , california ) used data obtained via a freedom of information act ( foia ) request to customs and border protection to account for every mile of existing border fencing by the year built .