there are also arguments against using atd programs . for example , an alien may move within the united states and fail to provide updated contact information to ero . if they do not receive communication from ice or the immigration court system , they could miss court dates that have changed in the interim . if they fail to show up for a removal hearing , for example , they can be ordered removed in absentia , which would render them inadmissible for a certain period ( at least 5 years if they are an arriving alien , and at least 10 years for all other aliens ) and ineligible for certain forms of relief from removal for 10 years . another concern is that asylum - seeking families are often placed into atd , and this creates incentives for others to travel to the united states with children , request asylum , and receive similar conditions of release into the united states . dhs has expressed concern over adults using children as a "human shields" to avoid detention after illegally entering the united states . those without bona fide family relationships may travel with children and file fraudulent claims or do harm to children . recent reports of children being "recycled"—crossing into the united states with an adult or a family , only to be returned across the border to travel with another migrant—has prompted dhs to take biometric data , such as fingerprints , from children . additional arguments against using atd programs include that reliable measures of their effectiveness are limited , as discussed above in " evaluating atd " and "evaluating fcmp," and for the fcmp pilot , that the feasibility of scaling up a small pilot program to accommodate the large number of families requesting asylum remains an open question . ice's non - detained docket currently has approximately 3 million cases . cbp's office of field operations ( ofo ) handles the same responsibilities at the poes . foreign nationals seeking to enter the united states may request admission legally at a poe . in some cases , aliens attempt to enter the united states illegally , typically between poes on the southern border . if apprehended , they are processed and detained briefly by border patrol ; placed into removal proceedings ; and , depending on the availability of detention space , either transferred to the custody of immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) or released into the united states . removal proceedings take one of two forms ( streamlined or standard ) depending on how the alien attempted to enter the united states , his / her country of origin , whether he / she is an unaccompanied child or part of an arriving family unit , and whether he / she requests asylum . ice reported that 54,082 aliens were currently detained on june 22 , 2019 . figure 1 shows the ice caseload , which consists of all detained and non - detained aliens that ice must supervise as part of its docket management responsibilities .