this individual would be subject to both the wep and the gpo . more than 11% of those affected were subject to both provisions . the wep and the gpo reduce the social security benefit received by either member or both members of a couple within a household , and have the largest impact on households affected by both provisions . one study finds that the wep and the gpo , on average , reduce the present value of lifetime social security benefits by about 20% among households affected by either provision and by another 10% among households affected by both provisions . in this study , the households affected by both the wep and the gpo include those in which either member is affected by both provisions or one member is affected by the wep and the other is affected by the gpo . the study found that the present value of lifetime social security benefits and total household wealth—including the present value of lifetime social security benefits , public pension benefits , and other pension benefits , as well as all other assets—were lower among households subject to both the wep and the gpo than among households subject to either provision alone . about one - quarter of state and local government employees , or approximately 6.4 million individuals , are not covered by social security . social security coverage may be extended to state and local government employees through a voluntary section 218 agreement between a state and the social security administration . if a state or local government employee's position is covered under a public retirement system that provides a minimum retirement benefit comparable to social security retired - worker benefits , social security coverage may be extended to those positions via employee referendums . if a majority of all eligible employees votes in favor of social security coverage , all current and future employees in positions under the public retirement system will be covered . social security beneficiaries who were affected by both the wep and the gpo accounted for 38% of spouses and survivors affected by the gpo and 14% of beneficiaries affected by the wep . table 3 illustrates an example of a worker's social security benefits with and without an extension of social security coverage on the worker's own employment . table 2 breaks down the affected beneficiaries by state and type of offset . this section highlights issues related to dually entitled social security beneficiaries affected by both the wep and the gpo: social security overpayments to affected beneficiaries , the impact of the wep and gpo on social security benefits and household wealth , and the effect of extending social security coverage through section 218 agreements . overpayments to dually entitled social security beneficiaries affected by both the wep and the gpo have been an issue for ssa since the provisions were implemented . the improper payments occurred in part because ssa did not properly impose the wep and the gpo on dually entitled beneficiaries who also receive a pension based on noncovered employment . in a january 2013 report , ssa's office of the inspector general ( oig ) identified 20,668 dually entitled beneficiaries in current - payment status whose wep or gpo reductions were not applied properly .