an extension of gfsa ( p.l . 115-266 ) was enacted in 2018 and authorizes programs through fy2023 . food for peace nonemergency programs , in particular the title ii in - kind commodity purchase and distribution components , have historically received considerable bipartisan support from a broad domestic constituency . this support is a result of the program's link to u.s. farmers and shippers through the farm bill's statutory requirements . while ffp emergency responses make up the majority of the u.s. in - kind programming , the nonemergency food assistance programs share the same domestic connections . in a prepared statement for the house agriculture committee in relation to a 2017 hearing on the farm bill , the chairperson of the usa rice farmers board shared the board's support of u.s. international food aid programs , noting that while u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) commodity procurement - purchases comprise only between 1% and 2% of total rice exports , "it is important to the industry that we continue to play a strong role in providing our nation's agricultural bounty to those in need. in written testimony for the house subcommittee on agriculture appropriations , the senior director of policy and advocacy at mercy corps stated that "from our decades of experience working in fragile states , we have found non - emergency ffp programs to be the leading us government tool , for building the resilience of families and communities to food insecurity… . [w]ith these investments , we can prevent and mitigate food security crises. 2151 et seq. ) the gfsa also amended sections 491 and 492 of the 1961 act ( 22 u.s.c . 2292 et seq. ) these historic links to the u.s. agriculture and maritime industries have been a significant factor when congress considers legislation . the project is slated to run through late 2019 . the food for peace program was established in 1954 with the passage of the agricultural trade development and assistance act of 1954 ( p.l . title ii of the act authorized the use of surplus agricultural commodities to "[meet] famine or other urgent relief requirements" around the world and provided the general authority for ffp development programs . now referred to as the food for peace act , the program has evolved to reflect changes in domestic farm policy and in response to foreign policy developments . congress authorizes the majority of international food assistance programs , including the ffp program , in two pieces of legislation: the farm bill . typically renewed every five years , legislation commonly referred to as the farm bill is a multiyear authorization that governs a range of agricultural and food programs . the majority of farm bill - authorized programs are domestic , but title iii includes the food for peace act as subtitle a . in the most recent farm bill , the agriculture improvement act of 2018 ( p.l . 115-334 ) , congress authorized programs through fy2023 . the global food security act of 2016 ( gfsa ) . congress enacted the global food security act of 2016 ( p.l .