russia has not kept up this pace . when it began the most recent modernization cycle , it was in the midst of a financial crisis . it is divided into five sections . the first section describes russia's nuclear strategy and focuses on ways in which that strategy differs from that of the soviet union . the second section provides a historical overview of the soviet union's nuclear force structure . the third section details russia's current force structure , including its long - range intercontinental ballistic missiles ( icbm ) , submarine - launched ballistic missiles ( slbm ) , and heavy bombers and shorter - range nonstrategic nuclear weapons . this section also highlights key elements of relevant infrastructure , including early warning , command and control , production , testing , and warhead storage . it also describes the key modernization programs that russia is pursuing to maintain and , in some cases , expand its nuclear arsenal . the fourth section focuses on how arms control has affected the size and structure of russia's nuclear forces . the fifth section discusses several potential issues for congress . the soviet union conducted its first explosive test of a nuclear device on august 29 , 1949 , four years after the united states employed nuclear weapons against japan at the end of world war ii . after this test , the soviet union initiated the serial production of nuclear devices and work on thermonuclear weapons , and it began to explore delivery methods for its nascent nuclear arsenal . the soviet union tested its first version of a thermonuclear bomb in 1953 , two years after the united states crossed that threshold . the soviet stockpile of nuclear warheads grew rapidly through the 1960s and 1970s , peaking at more than 40,000 warheads in 1986 , according to unclassified estimates ( see figure 1 ) . within this total , around 10,700 warheads were carried by long - range delivery systems , the strategic forces that could reach targets in the united states in the mid - 1980s . by the 1960s , the soviet union , like the united states , had developed a triad of nuclear forces: land - based intercontinental ballistic missiles ( icbms ) , submarine - launched ballistic missiles ( slbms ) , and heavy bombers equipped with nuclear weapons . in 1951 , the soviet union conducted its first air drop test of a nuclear bomb and began to deploy nuclear weapons with its long - range aviation forces soon thereafter . bomber aircraft included the m - 4 bison , which barely had the range needed to attack the united states and then return home . the tu - 95 bear strategic bomber , which had a longer range , entered service in 1956 . later modifications of the bear bomber have since been the mainstay of the soviet / russian nuclear triad's air leg . in 1956 , the soviet union tested and deployed its first ballistic missile with a nuclear warhead , the ss - 3 , a shorter - range , or theater , missile .