appendix a . summary of dod energy goals and contracting authority in 10 u.s.c . working - capital funds ( t ) permits up to $1,000,000,000 in working capital fund , defense for petroleum market volatility . multiyear contracts: purchase of electricity from renewable energy sources ( a ) multiyear contracts authorized: authorizes the use of multiyear contracts for the secretary of defense for a period of 10 years from a renewable energy source , as defined in 42 u.s.c . to what extent should congress support these mechanisms ? as noted , existing statutory energy management goals do not apply to operational energy , but dod's operational energy policy is mandated by 10 u.s.c . as part of the operational energy policy , dod establishes a strategy including plans and performance metrics . further , dod is mandated to submit to congress both a report on the strategy ( operational energy strategy ) and a report certifying that the proposed presidential budget supports the implementation of the strategy ( operational energy budget certification report ) . operational energy comprises 70% of energy use within dod , much of which consists of petroleum - based fuels . federal energy management goals do not apply to most of dod's energy use . congress may consider setting mission priorities for dod . congress could also consider mandating whether or not dod should prioritize energy access over energy conservation , or vice versa . while making operational equipment more fuel efficient could increase range and decrease refueling convoys , the challenge is how to prioritize maintaining combat readiness and mission operations . congress may consider legislation addressing operational energy , such as setting a standard fuel efficiency target or a requirement for alternative fuel use . congress may also consider continuing to leave operational energy efficiency goals to be determined by dod or each military branch . while this option could provide more flexibility , it could also lead to some challenges . for instance , in 2009 , navy secretary ray mabus announced plans for the navy to consume half of all fuel from alternative sources by 2020 ( see textbox on secretary of the navy energy goals ) . the announcement also included a 2016 goal to deploy a carrier strike group using alternative fuels ( eg , nuclear power , biofuels ) and energy conservation measures , an initiative known as the great green fleet . the great green fleet deployed in 2016 and conducted operations using alternative fuels and energy - efficient technologies and operating procedures . some critics of the navy energy goals noted that the navy implemented these energy targets based on limited analysis . for instance , a house armed services committee hearing in march 2012 inquired how the navy determined the 50% goal for biofuel use , how it was determined that 50% was the amount the navy should have , whether it could be attained by 2020 , and what metrics were used to make this determination . a 2011 study by logistics management institute ( lmi ) was referenced as a source that outlined the attainability of the goal ; however , it had been released two years after the announcement of the energy plan .