"challenges. the wars in afghanistan and iraq "sapped [u.s.] strategic strength," le asserted , and the global financial crisis "exposed the deep - seated imbalances in the u.s. economy and society. the united states should not make china "a scapegoat," le argued , for "[p]roblems such as economic disparity , widening wealth gap and aging infrastructure. u.s. - china tensions predated the trump administration . frictions over such issues as taiwan , trade , and china's human rights record have been long - standing , as have been u.s. concerns about the intentions behind china's ambitious military modernization efforts . united states trade representative ( ustr ) reports to congress going back to the last years of the george w. bush administration document mounting u.s. frustrations with china's failure to implement market - opening commitments it made when it acceded to the world trade organization ( wto ) in december 2001 . previous administrations concluded , however , that a modus vivendi with china was necessary for a broad array of u.s. policy objectives in the world , and they thus sought to balance competition and cooperation in the u.s. - china relationship . during the trump administration , competition has dominated the relationship and areas of cooperation have shrunk . to pressure china to change its economic practices , the united states has imposed tariffs on hundreds of billions of dollars of u.s. imports from china , with almost all imports from china scheduled to be subject to additional tariffs by december 15 , 2019 . u.s. tariffs and china's retaliatory tariffs have reordered global supply chains and hit u.s. farmers and manufacturers particularly hard . twelve rounds of negotiations have not resolved the dispute . on august 5 , 2019 , the u.s. treasury department labeled china a currency manipulator for the first time in a quarter century . the administration has placed restrictions on the ability of u.s. firms to supply prc telecommunications giant huawei . the united states has also sought to warn other nations away from business dealings with huawei and from cooperation with china on infrastructure projects under the framework of china's belt and road initiative ( bri ) . feeding a persistent narrative that the administration seeks to "decouple" the u.s. and chinese economies , on august 23 , 2019 , president trump wrote on twitter , "our great american companies are hereby ordered to immediately start looking for an alternative to china , including bringing your companies home and making your products in the usa. as his authority for such an order , the president cited the international emergency economic powers act ( p.l . 95-223 ) , though he said on august 25 , 2019 , that he had "no plan right now" to trigger the law . many analysts ascribe the rising friction in the relationship today not only to the arguably more confrontational inclinations of the trump administration , but also to more assertive behavior by china under president xi jinping . xi assumed the top posts in the communist party of china in november 2012 and added the state presidency in march 2013 .