congress establishes advisory commissions for a variety of purposes . these include informing congress , providing expert advice on complex or controversial issues , and generating policy recommendations . these factors might include hiring staff , contracting with outside consultants , and engaging administrative support , among others . most complete their work by delivering their findings , recommendations , or advice in the form of a written report to congress . for example , the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( the 9 / 11 commission ) was created to "examine and report upon the facts and causes relating to the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001," and to "investigate and report to the president and congress on its findings , conclusions , and recommendations for corrective measures that can be taken to prevent acts of terrorism. the commission ultimately submitted a final report to congress and the president containing its findings and conclusions , along with 48 policy recommendations . commissions also may be established to help commemorate an individual , group , or event . commissions generally require funding to help meet their statutory goals . when designing a commission , therefore , policymakers may wish to consider both how the commission will be funded , as well as how much funding the commission will be authorized to receive . more complete and reliable data on commission funding and expenditure patterns may benefit policymakers who wish to use such data to guide the creation of future commissions , or to facilitate the oversight of such entities . additionally , most commissions reimburse the travel expenditures of commissioners and staff , and some compensate their members . the duration of a commission can also significantly affect its cost ; past congressional commissions have been designed to last anywhere from several months to several years . this report analyzes methods used to fund past congressional commissions ; amounts provided for commissions in appropriations acts ; and how selected commissions have utilized provided funds . if congress wished to systematize the collection of information on commission funding or expenditures , a number of options are available . congress has on several occasions required commissions to submit periodic financial reports that detail any income and expenditures . congressional commissions have been established for a variety of purposes , and can help serve a critical role by informing congress , providing expert advice on complex or controversial issues , generating policy recommendations , or organizing commemorative activities . these commissions have been funded in a variety of ways , and their total cost has varied considerably . the cost of any particular commission may depend on its scope , duties , and duration , among other factors , and the degree to which it can satisfactorily accomplish its duties may depend in part on the resources made available to it . no single data source comprehensively documents either the funds made available for congressional commissions , or how commissions have utilized the funds available to them . how commissions are funded and the amounts that they receive vary considerably .