the act supported the budget request . the act includes a provision ( section 1603 ) to designate the eelv program as the national security space launch ( nssl ) program , effective march 1 , 2019 . the provision also requires the secretary of defense to consider both "reusable and expendable launch vehicles" in any future solicitations "for which the use of a reusable launch vehicle is technically capable and maintains risk at acceptable levels. the budget request included approximately $1.5 billion for the gps satellite program and related projects . the technology provides worldwide positioning , navigation , and timing ( pnt ) information to military and civilian users . funding would support launch of two gps iii satellites , development of gps next generation operational control system ( ocx ) , and integration of military gps user equipment ( mgue ) intended in part to provide a more powerful jam - resistant signal and information to military personnel in contested environments . the act authorizes $18 million less than the requested $1.4 billion in research and development funding due to what the conferees described as "insufficient justification. the budget request included $842 million for the space - based infrared system ( sbirs ) , including $704 million for research , development , test , and evaluation and $138 million for procurement . the system is a successor to the defense support program ( dsp ) designed in part to provide early warning of a strategic missile attack on the united states and to support missile defense activities . the request was intended to support launch of geosynchronous earth orbit ( geo ) satellites and development of next - generation overhead persistent infrared ( opir ) satellites . the act authorizes increasing rdt&e funding by $100 million to $804 million to "accelerate sensor development. the act includes a provision ( section 1613 ) requiring the secretary of defense to evaluate supply chain vulnerabilities for protected satellite communications and opir . the conference report accompanying the bill directs the head of the government accountability office ( gao ) "to review the early planning for the next generation opir system and associated ground capabilities," and assess , in part , "to what extent will the next generation opir system continue to fulfill existing key sbirs capabilities ? the budget request included $842 million for advanced extremely high frequency ( aehf ) and satellite communications ( satcom ) projects , including $677 million in research , development , test , and evaluation and $91 million in procurement . the projects are intended in part to provide communications that are secure , survivable , and resistant to jamming . funding was to support the fifth and sixth aehf satellites , as well as activities to improve aehf operational resiliency through programs such as protected tactical service ( pts ) , protected satcom services - aggregated ( pscs - a ) , and protected tactical enterprise service ( ptes ) . the act supports the budget request .