if so , should the u.s. government take any further actions to address such concerns ? to date , but for a brief january visit by the u.s . ambassador to india , u.s. government officials and foreign journalists have not been permitted to visit the kashmir valley . the final status of the former princedom of kashmir has remained unsettled since 1947 . on august 5 , 2019 , the indian government announced that it was formally ending the "special status" of its muslim - majority jammu and kashmir ( j&k ) state , the two - thirds of kashmir under new delhi's control , specifically by abrogating certain provisions of the indian constitution that granted the state autonomy with regard to most internal administrative issues . china , a close ally of pakistan , is also a minor party to the dispute . there are international concerns about potential for increased civil unrest and violence in the kashmir valley , and the cascade effect this could have on regional stability.â to date , the trump administration has limited its public statements to calls for maintaining peace and stability , and respecting human rights . the legal changes went into effect on november 1 , 2019 , when new delhi also bifurcated the state into two "union territories," each with lesser indigenous administrative powers than indian states . indian officials explain the moves as matters of internal domestic politics , taken for the purpose of properly integrating j&k and facilitating its economic development . the process by which india's government has undertaken the effort has come under strident criticism for its alleged reliance on repressive force in j&k and for questionable legal and constitutional arguments that are likely to come before india's supreme court . internationally , the move sparked controversy as a "unilateral" indian effort to alter the status of a territory that is considered disputed by neighboring pakistan and china , as well as by the united nations . new delhi's heavy - handed security crackdown in the remote state also raised ongoing human rights concerns . the long - standing u.s. position on kashmir is that the territory's status should be settled through negotiations between india and pakistan while taking into consideration the wishes of the kashmiri people . president trump's apparent bonhomie with pakistan's prime minister and offer to mediate on kashmir in july was taken by some as a new and potentially unwise strategic shift . since 1972 , india's government has generally shunned third - party involvement on kashmir , while pakistan's government has continued efforts to internationalize it , especially through u.n. security council ( unsc ) actions . the unsc likewise calls for restraint by all parties ; an "informal" august 16 unsc meeting resulted in no ensuing official u.n. statement . numerous members of the u.s. congress have expressed concern about reported human rights abuses in kashmir and about the potential for further international conflict between india and pakistan . new delhi's august moves enraged pakistan's leaders , who openly warned of further escalation between south asia's two nuclear - armed powers , which nearly came to war after a february 2019 suicide bombing in the kashmir valley and retaliatory indian airstrikes .