3d printing is sometimes known as additive manufacturing . the manufacturing usa program's four stated goals are to increase the competitiveness of u.s. manufacturing ; facilitate the transition of innovative technologies into scalable , cost - effective , and high - performing domestic manufacturing capabilities ; accelerate the development of an advanced manufacturing workforce ; and support business models that help the manufacturing usa institutes to become stable and sustainable after the initial federal startup funding period . the necessary high temperatures for post - processing can be attained using pottery kilns , sintering machines , or other specialized devices . commercial services are available that offer high - temperature post - processing of metal - infused 3d - printed parts . 3d printers at the price range of $5,000 and up ( known as industrial printers ) are able to use a wider variety of materials in an even greater variety of applications . these 3d printers can create structures that are larger , more detailed , or more reliable than structures created by consumer printers , or they can print in materials that are unavailable at lower price ranges . for example , medical biofabrication printers can print structures made of living cells . metal 3d printers can create parts out of titanium , steel , and other metals , which may cost less than traditional subtractive machining processes . large - format plastic 3d printers can create parts that are more than 6 feet tall . some concrete 3d printers can manufacture the walls of an entire building . the development and growth of 3d printing can be described in three major periods . the period spanning 1980 to 2010 marks the creation of the technology , its industrial use , and the beginning of the consumer 3d printing movement . between 2010 and 2015 , the 3d printing market continued to expand , despite signs of weakening in 2014 . since 2015 , prices for consumer 3d printers have fallen , while sales of consumer and industrial 3d printers have continued to rise as the technology has matured . private industry has long been the primary innovator in 3d printing technology , accounting for an estimated 90% of additive manufacturing patents through 2015 . dod's institute for defense analysis ( ida ) found that the federal government played a relatively small but instrumental role in the creation of 3d printing technology , providing "direct funding for developing early phases of the technology and later refinements in two of the four processes. according to ida , [federal] support of early research ... created the knowledge , technologies , and tools later adopted in the [additive manufacturing] field and applied by inventors to develop foundational am patents and technologies . the knowledge generated from federally sponsored [research and development] from the early 1970s influenced the patents filed in the 1980s and 1990s and later innovations . observations from the backwards citations analysis of the foundational patents show that some of the earliest investors in am were the department of defense office of naval research ( onr ) and the defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) , which provided steady , continual streams of funding for both academic and industry - based researchers .