the tenth circuit agreed . in its decision , the tenth circuit briefly described the history of the muscogee ( creek ) reservation . in the 1820s , the federal government forcibly relocated the tribe's members ( and members of several other tribes ) to what is now present - day oklahoma . at that point , the "unique history" of oklahoma began to transition toward statehood , effectively merging eastern indian lands and western non - indian lands into a single geographic entity . to determine whether congress intended to disestablish the muscogee ( creek ) reservation land , the tenth circuit applied a three - step analysis employed in the supreme court's 1984 decision , solem v. bartlett . under this framework , courts examine ( 1 ) the language of the governing federal statute ; ( 2 ) the historical circumstances of the statute's enactment ; and ( 3 ) subsequent events such as congress's later treatment of an affected area . importantly , the solem framework instructs courts to resolve any uncertainty in favor of the tribes: if the evidence is not clear , courts "are bound by our traditional solicitude for the indian tribes to rule that diminishment did not take place and that the old reservation boundaries survived . using this framework , the tenth circuit agreed with murphy that his criminal conduct occurred in indian country , and oklahoma therefore lacked jurisdiction over it . although oklahoma referenced eight separate federal acts that it viewed as collectively disestablishing the muscogee ( creek ) reservation , the tenth circuit ruled that none of those statutes clearly referred to disestablishment , and in some instances reflected congress's continued recognition of the reservation's borders . oklahoma's evidence that congress intended to change its governance over the muscogee ( creek ) reservation failed to convince the tenth circuit that congress also intended to erase the reservation boundaries . similarly , the tenth circuit concluded that events subsequent to legislation cited by oklahoma insufficiently supported the argument that congress intended the muscogee ( creek ) reservation to be disestablished . in sum , the tenth circuit did not find that congress clearly intended to disestablish the muscogee ( creek ) reservation , so it concluded that oklahoma lacked jurisdiction to convict murphy for a murder occurring on those lands . oklahoma petitioned for certiorari review of the tenth circuit's decision , which the supreme court granted on may 21 , 2018 . in its brief to the court , oklahoma claimed that no one has treated the relevant land like a reservation since oklahoma became a state in 1906 . it also argued that because congress broke certain promises in the treaties that had established the reservation , congress must have intended to disestablish it . according to oklahoma , it "is inconceivable that congress created a new state by combining two territories while simultaneously dividing the jurisdiction of that new state straight down the middle by leaving the former indian territory as indian country. in other words , in oklahoma's characterization of the matter , congress could not have intended the state to lack jurisdiction over major crimes in half its land mass .