provisions under title iii have been resolved . the legislative history suggests that public health and environmental concerns at the time were generally focused on preventing exposure to radiological emissions released into the air , such as radon gas . many in congress also expressed concern about potential exposure risks associated with the unrestricted use of radioactive tailings material used as fill material for buildings and other construction projects . less understood at the time of umtrca's original enactment was the dispersion and migration of radiological and non - radiological contaminants in groundwater , which has been an issue at some umtrca sites . doe's surface remedial authority expired in 1998 for title i sites . doe continues to administer groundwater remediation and monitoring programs at title i sites under long - term federal management . the moab processing site in utah is the only title i site that has not transferred to long - term federal management . site remediation costs and time frames have exceeded amounts originally envisioned by congress , the agencies , and the licensees due to an evolving understanding of the complexities and risks posed by unintended releases of contaminants from uranium mill tailings . in 1995 , the gao reported that doe's total surface remediation costs were $2.3 billion , exceeding original 1982 estimates by $621 million . additionally , long - term federal costs to manage disposal sites and persistent groundwater contamination remain uncertain due to unforeseen challenges and site - specific monitoring and maintenance needs . numerous factors led to decrease of domestic uranium production . in particular , u.s. nuclear power growth was far less than envisioned by congress and federal agencies in 1978 , as u.s. nuclear plant orders virtually halted after that year and dozens of previous orders were canceled . while the number of operational uranium mills was less than originally envisioned , potential risks from the uranium mills that did operate continue to present technical and regulatory challenges . the awareness of the technical and economic challenges posed during the decommissioning and long - term management of uranium mill tailings have increased since 1978 . as of the second quarter of 2018 , the u.s. uranium concentrate facilities consisted of one uranium mill and six isr facilities in operation . the uranium mill tailings radiation control act of 1978 ( umtrca ; p.l . 95-604 ) includes three titles: title i authorized the remediation of uranium mill tailings inactive prior to the law's enactment in 1978 . title ii authorized the regulation of commercial uranium mills operating on or after 1978 . title iii directed the nrc to consult with the state of new mexico to study and designate two mill tailings sites in new mexico . by 1998 , doe completed site decommissioning for all title i sites , with the exception of the site located at moab , ut . legislation to authorize cleanup at moab was enacted subsequent to umtrca . title i provisions do not authorize remedial actions for sites in operation on or after 1978 , which are addressed under title ii . for title ii sites , six sites have been transferred to doe - lm as of fy2019 .