appendix a . tables of deadlines associated with the implementation actions and requirements of the disaster recovery reform act of 2018 in addition to numerous amendments to the stafford act , drra includes standalone authorities . drra requires reports to congress , rulemaking / regulatory actions , and other actions to support disaster preparedness , and increase transparency and accountability with regard to fema . the following three tables of deadlines are associated with drra's reporting , rulemaking / regulatory , and other implementation actions and requirements: table a - 1 . drra reporting requirements ( i.e. , reports to congress ) ; table a - 2 . drra rulemaking and regulations requirements ; and table a - 3 . drra guidance and other required actions . the tables are organized by deadline for implementation in chronological order , and include: the relevant drra section ; referenced stafford act section ( s ) , if applicable ; a brief description of the requirement ; the entity responsible for accomplishing the requirement ; the recipient of the information / action ; the due date described in drra ; and the deadline expressed as a calendar date . some sections of drra include multiple implementation actions and requirements and , as such , are included in multiple tables and may appear multiple times . additionally , some sections of drra do not specify the date by which the implementation action or requirement must be completed . for these sections , the due date and calendar deadline are listed as "n / a. . some sections of drra include requirements for ongoing actions ( eg , monthly reporting requirements ) . for these sections , the deadline is listed as "ongoing. acronyms used in the tables are defined in the associated notes sections . note that information included in the three tables of deadlines associated with drra implementation may be subject to change , and the following tables may not be up - to - date following the publication of this report . appendix b . acronym table the following acronyms for entities , programs , and legislation are used throughout this report: appendix c. brief legislative history drra includes provisions taken from numerous bills aimed at reforming aspects of fema . some of these bills and the provisions incorporated into drra include: disaster recovery reform act ( h.r . 4460 , introduced ) included many provisions duplicated or incorporated into drra with modifications ; disaster recovery reform act of 2018 ( s. 3041 , introduced ) included many provisions duplicated or incorporated into drra with modifications ; disaster assistance fairness and accountability act of 2017 ( h.r . 3176 , introduced ) included the provision prohibiting the recoupment of certain assistance ( incorporated into drra as section 1216 ( b ) —flexibility ) ; to amend the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act concerning the statute of limitations for actions to recover disaster or emergency assistance payments , and for other purposes ( h.r .