, and in some cases to vehicles or boats . unlike data collected under the arra ( discussed above ) and esea ( discussed below ) requirements , these data are collected directly from schools and leas , not states . in spring 2014 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) and ed's office of planning , evaluation , and policy development ( opepd ) requested that ed's national center for education statistics ( nces ) develop a school - level finance data collection , as such a collection had not been developed on a comprehensive , annual basis . in response , nces launched pilot efforts to expand ongoing surveys of state and lea finances to include school - level financial data as well . according to data from the u.s. census bureau for 2016 , 72.0% of all local government tax revenues were from property taxes , 17.4% were from sales taxes , 6.0% were from individual and corporate income taxes , and the remaining 4.6% came from motor vehicle and other miscellaneous taxes . while historically there have not been comprehensive state or federal efforts to calculate or report on specific budgets or expenditure levels for individual public schools , federal efforts to require and support the reporting of such information have expanded rapidly in recent years . the availability of school - level financial data , based on standard concepts applied consistently nationwide , could be especially helpful in the administration of a key fiscal accountability requirement of the esea title i - a program , as discussed below . the primary source of local revenues for public elementary and secondary education is the property tax . this tax is primarily applied to real property ( residences , commercial buildings , etc .

 ) the property tax is an annual percentage of the assessed value of residential and commercial "real" property ( i.e. , buildings and land ) and , in some localities , "personal" property ( i.e. , automobiles , other vehicles , and occasionally other items such as livestock ) . the property tax rate unit is often referred to as a "mill" or one - thousandth of the assessed value of the property . because almost three - quarters of all local government revenues come from property taxes , variations in the value of such real or personal property relative to the number of school - age children in a locality is usually the primary cause of local variations in capacity to raise revenues per pupil for public elementary and secondary education . beyond differences in taxable property per pupil , localities in many states are able to select their local property tax rate , at least within a limited range , and may choose to tax themselves at higher rates than other localities in the same state . state revenues for public elementary and secondary education are raised from a variety of sources , primarily personal and corporate income and retail sales taxes , "excise" taxes such as those on tobacco products and alcoholic beverages , plus lotteries in several states .