these requirements may not be waived by the secretary . in addition to the requirements in statutory language , there are several other requirements that the secretary has determined cannot be waived . for example , participating leas must continue to meet state - level requirements , such as implementing state academic standards , administering annual state assessments , meeting educational accountability requirements , and issuing an annual local report card , including reporting per - pupil expenditures by school . in addition , state - level requirements delegated by a state to an lea as part of a subgrant agreement cannot be waived . for example , if a participating lea is delegated state responsibilities for identifying migratory children and transferring student records , these responsibilities must be met . the extent to which this occurs may depend on the percentage of funds of an eligible federal program that are allocated through the lea's weighted student funding formula as opposed to being retained at the state or lea level . the last section of the report examines issues related to the title i - e flexibility authority . the first set of issues examines possible reasons why participation by leas in the title i - e authority has been low and some potential issues related to it . the secretary has also determined that a participating lea that has schools identified for comprehensive or targeted support and improvement under section 1111 must ensure that such schools develop and implement improvement plans . this is followed by an examination of possible issues that may arise if participation in the title i - e authority increases . this includes consideration of how the allocation of eligible federal funds , particularly title i - a funds , could be different if the title i - e flexibility was adopted more broadly , as well as lea access to other fund consolidation authority , whether the use of the title i - e authority could increase the extent to which federal programs are focused on individual schools , whether the title i - e authority could represent a model for a major change in the distribution of esea funds , and whether adequate safeguards exist to ensure that the purposes of federal education programs whose funds are consolidated are met . as of july 2019 , six leas have applied for the weighted student funding authority under title i - e , and one has been approved . the single approved lea , puerto rico , intends to implement the authority beginning in the 2019-2020 school year . one reason for the low rate of participation could be the relatively slow implementation by ed . the authority was provided under the essa's amendments to the esea , enacted on december 10 , 2015 . however , ed's initial announcement that the flexibility authority was available was made more than two years later , on february 2 , 2018 . lea interest , to the extent that it existed , may have waned over this time period . another possible constraint on lea interest in applying for the title i - e authority is that the authority is applicable for only a three - year period .