consumer finance encompasses the financial lives of individuals and households . americans aspire for economic advancement and wealth building , a central part of the american dream . safe and affordable financial services are an important tool for most american households to avoid financial hardship , build assets , and achieve financial security over the course of their lives . households use three types of financial products regularly: credit , insurance , and financial investments . this report will focus on the first category—credit and deposit - taking financial products for personal , family , or household purposes . in general , this report will focus on the consumer and household perspective , and consumer protection policy issues in each market . this report also discusses two important market structures that allow these consumer financial products to be offered: ( 1 ) the consumer credit reporting system and ( 2 ) the debt collection market . these aspects of the consumer credit system are important because they facilitate the pricing of credit offers and the resolution of delinquent consumer credit products for most consumer credit markets . the report begins with an overview of u.s. household finances , consumer finance markets , and common policy issues in these markets . major consumer finance markets examined in this report include mortgage lending , student loans , automobile loans , credit cards and payments , payday loans and other credit alternative financial products , and checking accounts and substitutes . these financial decisions can be complex and can affect households' financial well - being both now and in the future . understanding why and how consumers make financial decisions is important when considering policy issues in consumer financial markets . this section provides an introduction to u.s. households' finances , including a breakdown of a household balance sheet and its components . it then provides background on how consumer financial markets operate and general issues in these markets . the section also describes common policy interventions and considerations when using these policy tools . lastly , this section provides an overview of the bureau of consumer financial protection ( cfpb ) —the main regulator responsible for consumer compliance of financial products and services . the following sections examine specific issues within major consumer debt markets: mortgage lending , student loans , automobile loans , credit cards and payments , payday loans and other credit alternative financial products , and checking accounts and substitutes . the markets discussed are under the cfpb's jurisdiction , and sometimes that of other regulators as well . each section briefly describes the financial product , recent market developments , and selected policy issues that may lead each market away from its efficient price or outcomes . these sections focus on the consumer and household perspective as well as consumer protection policy issues in each market . although each consumer credit market is unique , certain common aspects of the consumer credit system facilitate the pricing of credit offers and the resolution of delinquencies and defaults for most consumer credit markets .