appendix a . the iqos tobacco heating system the iqos tobacco heating system ( iqos ) is commonly referred to as a "heat - not - burn" tobacco product . this new technology differs from ends technology because it aerosolizes the tobacco plant itself , rather than a tobacco - derived e - liquid . fda has determined that the iqos meets the definition of a cigarette and , as such , is subject to additional ffdca requirements and regulations specific to cigarettes , such as advertising restrictions . the iqos is composed of three main components: the iqos heatstick is a filtered , noncombusted cigarette . a heatstick is designed to be electrically heated to release nicotine - containing aerosol . the nicotine is derived from a reconstituted tobacco sheet made from ground tobacco powder . the iqos holder is an electrically powered and rechargeable unit that holds and warms the heatstick . the holder is used for a single heatstick for about six to seven minutes , after which the holder needs to be charged and the used heatstick is discarded . the iqos charger recharges and cleans the holder after each use . given the novel technology of the iqos , some industry stakeholders see this product as a potential precedent for the premarket review process that ends products will eventually undergo . on may 15 , 2017 , fda received pmtas from phillip morris international ( pmi ) for the iqos tobacco heating system ( iqos ) . pmi filed four pmta applications for the iqos . three pmta applications were for the heatstick—two of which were for menthol flavored heatsticks—and one pmta application was for the holder and charger . nearly two years later , on april 30 , 2019 , fda authorized the iqos tobacco heating system for marketing through these pmtas . based on the substantial back and forth between pmi and fda to elicit the information needed for the complete pmta applications , there is concern that small ends manufacturers may not have the resources to engage in the pmta process in the future . there is also concern that fda may need additional resources to accommodate the inevitable influx of lengthy ends pmta applications . appendix b . tobacco master settlement agreement of 1998 on november 23 , 1998 , attorneys general from 46 states , the district of columbia , and the u.s. territories signed a contractual agreement ( the master settlement agreement , or msa ) with the major cigarette companies to settle state lawsuits to recover the costs , borne by medicaid and other public programs , of treating smoking - related illnesses . the remaining four states — mississippi , florida , texas , and minnesota — had settled individually with the companies prior to the msa . under the terms of the msa , the companies agreed to make annual payments in perpetuity and accept certain restrictions on tobacco product advertising , marketing , and promotion .