if congress were to authorize such judgeships , it has several options available to it . as discussed above , congress determines through legislative action the size of the federal judiciary . consequently , creating additional u.s. circuit and district court judgeships requires congressional authorization of such judgeships . such authorization can be accomplished by passing legislation devoted solely to judgeships ( i.e. , "omnibus judgeships bills" ) or by including the authorization in an appropriations bill or other legislative vehicle . congress may decide not to authorize additional circuit and district court judgeships . these include ( but are not limited to ) the following: adopting all of the most recent recommendations of the judicial conference by creating 5 additional permanent judgeships for the ninth circuit and 65 additional permanent judgeships for the district courts specified by the conference ( as well as converting 8 temporary district court judgeships to permanent status ) . adopting , in part , the recommendations of the judicial conference by creating additional permanent circuit and / or district court judgeships for some of the courts identified by the conference's biennial review process as needing additional judgeships . congress first exercised its constitutional power to determine the size and structure of the federal judiciary with passage of the judiciary act of 1789 . the act authorized 19 judgeships , 13 for district courts and 6 for the supreme court . congress , however , began expanding the size of the judiciary almost immediately—adding two additional district court judgeships in 1790 and another in 1791 . while congress is constitutionally responsible for determining the size and structure of the federal judiciary , the judiciary itself can recommend legislation that alters or affects the size and structure of the federal court system . this includes legislation to increase the number of u.s. circuit and district court judgeships ( and to identify which judicial circuits and districts are most in need of new judgeships ) . the judicial conference of the united states , the national policymaking body for the federal courts , is the institutional entity within the judiciary that is responsible for making the judiciary's recommendations for new judgeships . the judicial conference may recommend to congress that new judgeships be either permanent or temporary . additionally , the judicial conference may recommend that a temporary judgeship be extended or converted into a permanent one , or that a judgeship serving multiple districts be assigned to a single judicial district or dual districts . the judicial conference makes its judgeship recommendations biennially , typically in march or april at the beginning of a new congress . the judicial conference's most recent recommendations to congress for new circuit and district court judgeships were made in march 2019 . the conference recommended that congress authorize 5 new circuit court judgeships and 65 new permanent district court judgeships ( as well as convert 8 existing temporary district court judgeships to permanent status ) . adopting , in part , the conference's recommendations by authorizing new judgeships only for the six u.s. district courts identified by the conference as having the most urgent need for such judgeships . it might also include only adopting the conference's recommendations for converting eight temporary judgeships to permanent status .