appendix a . national critical functions appendix b . key terms appendix c. sector and cross - sector coordinating structure . cisa administers both the nicc and the nccic . the underlying policy premise of the current partnership system is that removing or mitigating disincentives to information sharing and increasing trust between the public and private sector will lead to greater industry willingness to invest in system - level resilience . rigorous empirical analyses that might shed light on the extent and effectiveness of collaboration within the voluntary framework are scarce . a 2013 study found that fewer than half of the 16 ci sectors had strong "communities of interest" that actively engaged in cip issues through nipp partnership structures . ci communities of interest were strongest in those sectors with strong trade or professional associations unified by relatively specific threats posing individual risk to member companies . a 2011 study found that the most important factor in private - sector risk mitigation investment is a company's own cost - benefit analysis ; and that many ci owner - operators believed government will ( or should ) cover externalized social costs incurred by loss or disruption of company facilities due to a terrorist attack . gao testimony provided to congress in 2014 asserted that dhs partnership efforts faced challenges , and identified three key factors that impact effectiveness of the partnership approach: recognizing and addressing barriers to sharing information , sharing the results of dhs assessments with industry and other stakeholders , and measuring and evaluating the performance of dhs's partnership efforts . gao found that dhs did not systematically collect data on reasons for industry participation or non - participation in security surveys and vulnerability surveys , and whether or not security improvements were made as a result . gao asserted that dhs cannot adequately evaluate program effectiveness absent these measures . although dhs concurred and agreed to corrective measures , gao reported that it had not verified dhs's progress in implementing them . overall , the picture that emerges from this testimony and other sources is one of extensive partnership activity across multiple ci sectors , but relatively few measures to systematically assess effectiveness of this activity in meeting ci resilience goals . congress may explore the progress dhs has made in implementing gao recommended data gathering and analysis initiatives . availability of data and rigorous analyses may enable congress to better ascertain the effectiveness of the partnership system in incentivizing industry information sharing and investments in risk reduction . cisa and its predecessor organizations have not been able to provide reliable data indicating the reach and effectiveness of public - partnership programs in incentivizing bidirectional information sharing and efficient private investments in national level ( as opposed to enterprise level ) resilience . ( the volume and quality of industry information shared with dhs through the pcii program may be one of several useful indicators of program effectiveness. ) congress may address this gap , such as through introduction of appropriate reporting requirements . congress may also consider enhancement of regulatory authorities of federal departments and agencies as appropriate to meet national ci resilience goals in cases where voluntary measures do not result in effective industry action to mitigate risk , or emergent threats make immediate action necessary .