the clerk will report the words . it may take several minutes for the clerk to review the transcript and read the words out loud . during this pause in proceedings , the member who spoke the allegedly offensive words may ask unanimous consent to withdraw the words: mr. / madam speaker ( or chair ) , i ask unanimous consent to withdraw my words . alternatively , the member who demanded that the words be taken down may withdraw the request , which does not require unanimous consent: mr. / madam speaker ( or chair ) , i withdraw my demand that the gentleman's / gentlewoman's words be taken down . if neither occurs , then the clerk will read the words to the house , and the presiding officer will make a ruling on the remarks: in the opinion of the chair , the words in question [were / were not] in order . the presiding officer's ruling is subject to appeal , and that appeal is subject to a motion to table . the gentleman / gentlewoman from [state] will suspend . it may also be invoked in the standing and select committees of the house . a member initiates the call to order by demanding that a colleague's "words be taken down. the phrase taken down , as described in the rule , refers to the writing down of the words objected to so they may be read back to the house by the clerk . in current practice , all deba te in the house and in standing and select committees is transcribed by the official reporters of debate . therefore , when a member demands that the words of a colleague be taken down , the clerk will consult with the transcriber to identify the words objected to , which the clerk will then read out loud . following the reading of the allegedly unparliamentary remarks , the speaker of the house ( or , if the words are spoken in a committee , the chair of the committee ) will determine whether the words are in order . the standing rules of the house do not state explicitly what language is considered to be disorderly , although clause 1 ( b ) of rule xvii prohibits members from engaging in "personalities" in debate . house precedents catalog words and phrases previously deemed to be in order and those that were ruled out of order , or unparliamentary . when ruling on the words objected to , the presiding officer considers the words themselves , as well as the context in which they were used , and bases the ruling on these precedents . on the floor , the parliamentarian advises the speaker based on recorded precedents . the office of the parliamentarian is not responsible for providing procedural assistance during committee meetings , although the chair could attempt to consult with the parliamentarian in advance of or during such meetings .