for example , h.res . 370 would express "the sense of the house of representatives that small business owners seeking financing have fundamental rights , including transparent pricing and terms , competitive products , responsible underwriting , fair treatment from financing providers , brokers , and lead generators , inclusive credit access , and fair collection practices. although factors such as annual earnings , number of employees , type of business , and market share are typically considered , determining the universe of small businesses from which to collect data is difficult without a consensus definition . ( the cfpb has not yet implemented this requirement. ) in addition , various bills addressing the sbl market have been introduced in the 116 th congress . the community reinvestment act ( cra ; p.l . 95-128 ) encouraged banks to address persistent unmet small business credit demands in low - and moderate - income ( lmi ) communities . the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank act ; p.l . for example , the internal revenue service ( irs ) sets different size standards for small businesses under various tax laws . the irs provides certain tax forms for self - employed taxpayers and small businesses with assets under $10 million . the patient protection and affordable care act of 2010 ( aca ; p.l . 111-148 ) , however , defined a small business in multiple ways ( eg , fewer than 50 full - time employees to avoid aca's employer shared responsibility provision ; fewer than 25 full - time equivalent employees for tax credits , etc. ) according to a federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) survey , small and large banks have their own definitions of a small business . small banks ( defined as banks with $10 billion or less in assets ) view a small business as one in which the owner "wears many hats," referring to an owner who performs multiple tasks , perhaps because the firm is a start - up or still in its early growth stage . large banks define small businesses more formally , in terms of annual revenues and sales . this section provides background on small business lenders and underwriting practices . although small businesses rely on a variety of credit sources that include personal ( consumer or mortgage ) credit , family , friends , and crowd - funding , they also rely on various types of financial institutions ( banks and nonbanks ) . financial institutions vary in how they are regulated , the business models they adopt , the types of loans they offer , and the growth stages of the small businesses they serve . these differences are all factors involved when evaluating whether shortages exist in the sbl market . some lenders are increasingly using business credit scores to assess creditworthiness , and they may deny sbls due to either a lack of or poor business credit history . the sba since 2014 has also relied upon credit scores to qualify applicants for its 7 ( a ) loan program .