each of these components is discussed below . health informatics and data visualizations are not discussed because they are beyond the scope of this report . the telehealth services that the va provides to veteran patients align with their respective va in - patient care services . a va health care service does not change when a va provider delivers the service via telehealth . for example , a veteran patient who chooses to access telemental health services via the vvc app on a mobile device would receive the same type of mental health services he or she would have received in - person . according to the va secretary , the vha is the largest u.s. provider of telehealth services , having provided 2.29 million telehealth episodes of care to 782,000 veteran patients in fy2018 . of those 782,000 veteran patients , 9% of them were female and 45% of them live in rural areas . veteran patients can access a range of telehealth services through the vha . these telehealth services can be grouped into the following seven categories , in alphabetical order: 1. consultative and evaluative telehealth services , 2. disease and illness - specific telehealth services , 3. gender - specific telehealth services , 4. preventative telehealth services , 5. rehabilitative telehealth services , 6. rural - specific telehealth services , and 7. wellness telehealth services . according to the va , the agency will provide general va health care services to veteran patients and refer them to private health care providers for health care services that those providers provide "most effectively and efficiently. the va's decision to refer such services to the private sector might stem from the agency's shortage of va providers . a veteran can access va telehealth services from various va sites of care , such as va medical facilities , mobile telehealth clinics , and non - va sites of care such as the homes , work places , and schools of veterans . a veteran , who seeks va care , including va telehealth services at non - va medical facilities and nonfederal facilities from non - va providers , must receive prior authorization from the va before accessing such services . the va generally authorizes a veteran to seek va care from a non - va provider when [the existing] va facilities or other government facilities are not capable of furnishing economical hospital care or medical services because of geographic inaccessibility or are not capable of furnishing care or services required . the va continues to develop new telehealth services to meet the needs of veterans . according to the va fy2019 funding and fy2020 advanced appropriations budget request to congress , for example , the comprehensive opioid management in patient aligned care teams ( compact ) team is "testing a telehealth - based self - management training system to promote improved care for [v]eterans receiving chronic opioid therapy. the va is leveraging the use of telehealth with the goal of expanding veterans' access to va care . based on its experience with telehealth to date , the va has stated that increased access to telehealth could reduce the use of va travel benefits by veterans and reduce hospital admissions . telehealth is not a new form of health care delivery .