figure 1 . preemption taxonomysource: crs . while the supreme court has repeatedly distinguished these preemption categories , it has also explained that the presence of an express preemption clause in a federal statute does not preclude implied preemption analysis . in geier v. american honda motor co . , the court held that although a preemption clause in a federal automobile safety statute did not expressly displace state common law claims involving automobile safety , the federal statute and associated regulations nevertheless impliedly preempted those claims based on conflict preemption principles . congress must therefore consider the possibility that the laws it enacts may be construed as impliedly preempting certain categories of state law even if those categories do not fall within the explicit terms of a preemption clause . this report provides a general overview of federal preemption to inform congress as it crafts laws implicating overlapping federal and state interests . the report begins by reviewing two general principles that have shaped the court's preemption jurisprudence: the primacy of congressional intent and the "presumption against preemption. the report then discusses how courts have interpreted certain language that is commonly used in express preemption clauses . next , the report reviews judicial interpretations of statutory provisions designed to insulate certain categories of state law from federal preemption ( "savings clauses" ) . finally , the report discusses the court's implied preemption case law by examining illustrative examples of its field preemption , impossibility preemption , and obstacle preemption decisions . congress often relies on the language of existing preemption clauses in drafting new legislation . moreover , when statutory language has a settled meaning , courts often look to that meaning to discern congress's intent . this section of the report discusses how the supreme court has interpreted federal statutes that preempt ( 1 ) state laws "related to" certain subjects , ( 2 ) state laws concerning certain subjects "covered" by federal laws and regulations , ( 3 ) state requirements that are "in addition to , or different than" federal requirements , and ( 4 ) state "requirements," "laws," "regulations," and "standards. while preemption decisions depend heavily on the details of particular statutory schemes , the court has assigned some of these phrases specific meanings even when they have appeared in different statutory contexts . many federal statutes contain provisions that purport to restrict their preemptive effect . these "savings clauses" make clear that federal law does not preempt certain categories of state law , reflecting congress's recognition of the need for states to "fill a regulatory void" or "enhance protection for affected communities" through supplementary regulation . the law regarding savings clauses "is not especially well developed," and cases involving such clauses "turn very much on the precise wording of the statutes at issue. with these caveats in mind , this section discusses three general categories of savings clauses: ( 1 ) "anti - preemption provisions," ( 2 ) "compliance savings clauses," and ( 3 ) "remedies savings clauses. as discussed , federal law can impliedly preempt state law even when it does not do so expressly . like its express preemption decisions , the supreme court's implied preemption cases focus on congress's intent . the supreme court has recognized two general forms of implied preemption .