301 et seq .

 ) , the united states began a then novel policy of providing federal support for post - secondary education , specifically for agriculture and the mechanical arts . the national system of land - grant colleges and universities that has developed since then is recognized for its breadth , reach , and excellence in teaching , research , and extension . located in every state , washington , d.c. , and many insular areas , these institutions educate the next generation of farmers , ranchers , and citizens , and form the backbone of a national network of agricultural extension and experiment stations . later federal legislation expanded the scope and reach of the 1862 morrill act . beyond providing initial resources for establishment of the land - grant institutions , the federal government contributes funds annually through a variety of capacity and competitive grants administered by the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) national institute of food and agriculture ( nifa ) . capacity grants , also known as formula funds , are allocated to states based on statutory formulas . competitive grants are awarded to specific projects selected through peer - review processes . in many cases , the states and territorial governments complement federal appropriations through matching funds . legislation has also expanded the land - grant system to include historically black colleges and universities ( hbcus ) and tribal colleges and universities ( tcus ) . additional institutional categories are recognized for specific programs . these categories include non - land - grant colleges of agriculture ( nlgcas ) , hispanic - serving agricultural colleges and universities ( hsacus ) , and cooperating forestry schools . looking forward , the scheduled fall 2019 relocation of nifa from its current location in washington , d.c. ; the shifting balance of public and private investment in agricultural research ; disparities in state matching funds among the different classes of land - grant institutions ; and the funding of tcu land - grant institutions may invite congressional engagement . while state and local governments have roles in the u.s. land - grant university system , this report focuses on federal laws , appropriations , and other matters . the u.s. land - grant university system has evolved over the past 150 years . all states meet the matching requirements for their 1862 institutions , which are predominantly white . in contrast , ten of the nineteen 1890 institutions , which are predominantly black , received a full match from their states in fy2016 . those 1890 institutions that do not meet the 100% matching funds requirement must apply to usda for a waiver or forfeit their federal capacity funding . while receiving a waiver allows an 1890 institution to receive its allocation of federal funding , such a waiver reduces the total public support for the institution , from the combination of federal and state funding , compared with what it would receive if a complete match was provided . this opens a disparity between 1890 and 1862 institutions .