it was later extended . in 2018 , the two parties signed political and military agreements to end their dispute , and in august 2019 they signed a permanent cease - fire prior to signing a comprehensive peace accord . since late 2017 , the country also has faced a brutal insurgency by armed islamist extremists in its far north , in an area where large - scale gas development operations are underway . trafficking of persons , wildlife , and illicit drugs , along with other organized crime activity , also poses security challenges . mozambique enjoys cordial relations with the united states and receives sizable u.s. global health assistance , but has received relatively limited congressional attention since the early 2000s . however , the country hosted congressional delegations in 2016 and 2018 that focused on such issues as u.s. health and wildlife aid and the renamo - frelimo conflict . recent developments and policy challenges in mozambique have the potential to draw increased congressional attention . these include increasing u.s. private - sector stakes in the energy sector , the implications of state corruption for the government's integrity and status as a u.s. development and investment partner , u.s. government counterterrorism concerns , and recovery from two powerful cyclones that hit the country in march and april 2019 . the devastation caused by the cyclones has prompted an ongoing u.s. assistance response—funded at a level of $74 million as of may 31—in support of humanitarian needs and longer - term recovery efforts , alongside a broader international response . ( on these issues , see crs report r45683 , cyclones idai and kenneth in southeastern africa: humanitarian and recovery response in brief . ) mozambique gained independence in 1975 , after a long frelimo - led armed struggle against portuguese colonial rule . in 1977 , renamo , a guerrilla group initially formed as a proxy of the white minority regime in rhodesia ( now zimbabwe ) , initiated attacks against the socialist frelimo - led state , sparking a civil war . the war caused hundreds of thousands of deaths , social displacement , a mass refugee exodus into nearby countries , and widespread destitution . these effects were exacerbated by natural disasters , as well as by frelimo's abortive attempts to control the economy , which prompted a turn toward economic liberalization in the late 1980s . after internationally aided peace talks , a new constitution was ratified in 1990 . peace accords signed in 1992 ended the war and , along with u.n. - aided peacebuilding efforts , paved the way for renamo's transformation into a political party and multiparty elections in 1994 . postwar politics mainly have centered on intra - frelimo competition and polarized rivalry between frelimo , which has held an electoral majority since 1994 , and renamo . broad public postwar support for reconciliation and peacebuilding initially led to a system of informal bargaining among political elites over policymaking , giving renamo influence that it might not otherwise have had . over time , however , frelimo increasingly wielded its electoral majority , aided by its strong influence over the electoral system , to marginalize renamo .