appendix a . additional recent legislative approaches to uc drug testing in addition to the recent statutory and regulatory developments in uc drug testing related to p.l . 112-96 , legislation introduced in recent congresses has proposed using other approaches to drug test uc applicants and beneficiaries . these approaches have generally either proposed a new federal uc drug testing requirement or some type of risk - assessment tool to guide the drug testing of uc claimants . new federal requirement to drug test one legislative option would be to add a new federal requirement to drug test uc applicants and beneficiaries . this type of approach differs from allowing states to expand uc drug testing ( as under p.l . there have been some proposals calling for this approach in recent congresses . for example , h.r . 2001 ( 112 th congress ) â would have created a new federal requirement that individuals be deemed ineligible for uc benefits based on previous employment from which they were separated due to an employment - related drug or alcohol offense . this proposal would have required states to amend their state uc laws . 1172 â  ( 113 th congress ) also would have created a new federal requirement that individuals be deemed ineligible for uc benefits based on previous employment from which they were separated due to an employment - related drug or alcohol offense . it would have denied benefits to anyone who ( 1 ) was discharged from employment for alcohol or drug use , ( 2 ) was in possession of controlled substance at a place of employment , ( 3 ) refused the employer's drug test , or ( 4 ) tested positive on the employer's drug test for illegal or controlled substances . this proposal would have required states to amend their state uc laws . another proposal , the accountability in unemployment act ( h.r . 3615 in the 112 th congress , h.r . 1277 in the 113 th congress , and h.r . 1136 in the 114 th congress ) ,â would have created a new federal requirement for states to drug test all uc claimants as a condition of benefit eligibility . under this proposal , if an individual tested positive for certain controlled substances ( in the absence of a valid prescription or other authorization under a state's laws ) , he or she would have been required to retake a drug test after a 30-day period and test negative in order to be eligible for uc benefits . this proposal would have made individuals ineligible for uc benefits for five years after a third positive drug test . risk assessment - based drug testing another policy approach toward uc drug testing proposed in recent congresses involves using a substance abuse risk assessment tool to screen uc applicants and beneficiaries and then drug test those individuals determined likely to be engaged in the unlawful use of controlled substances . in this way , such an approach attempts to avoid suspicionless drug testing . this type of proposal was introduced in the ensuring quality in the unemployment insurance program ( equip ) act in the 112 th congress ( h.r . 3601 ) , 113 th congress ( h.r .