however , snapshots of these data exist . however , some portion of illicit drugs successfully smuggled across the border may later be seized by law enforcement officers . notably , seizure data reflect illicit drugs that were not successfully smuggled into the country ; they reflect known , unsuccessful smuggling attempts . in addition , seizures vary across sectors of the border , differ on whether they were made at or between poes , and are diverse in the associated modes of land , air , or sea transport ; as such , they can help inform , along with intelligence , the likelihood of smuggling attempts at various locations and via a host of transport modes . for instance , in understanding the risks posed by threat actors smuggling drugs into the united states , one may consider the likelihood of drugs successfully flowing into the country . this likelihood may be complicated by a variety of factors including past and expected frequencies . as the true frequency of illicit drug smuggling is unknown , officials may rely on a combination of intelligence and known drug seizure levels to inform their expectations . however , seizure data do not speak to the portion of drugs successfully smuggled into the country . moreover , expectations of future drug flows may combine knowledge about past flows with intelligence and analysis of additional information such as drug market forces in source and destination countries . policymakers may question how border officials use intelligence about drug flows and data on drug seizures to assess the risks posed by drug trafficking and appropriately allocate resources to counter the threat . because there is a need to balance resources for sometimes competing priorities , some may also question whether dhs's risk management approach to countering threats at the borders is able to effectively evaluate and reduce threats posed by drug trafficking—and whether the data to make this evaluation exist . it also notes that some measures of effectiveness are that "[t]he production of plant - based and synthetic drugs outside the united states has been significantly reduced , illicit drugs are less available in the united states as reflected in increased price and decreased purity , and drug seizures at all u.s. ports of entry increase each year over five years. the united states has a number of strategies aimed , at least in part , at reducing drug trafficking into and within the country , and data on drug flows can help evaluate progress toward achieving goals outlined in them . for instance , the 2019 national drug control strategy outlines that one of three key elements in the overarching goal of building a stronger , healthier , drug - free society is reducing the availability of illicit drugs in the united states . the strategy notes that some measures of performance are to "significantly reduce the availability of illicit drugs in the united states by preventing their production outside the united states , disrupt their sale on the internet , and stop their flow into the country through the mail and express courier environments , and across our borders.