table 4 provides major votes on tpa legislation . it includes the final house and senate votes on tpa - related provisions . votes are grouped by the trade agreement authority granted to the president . for a selected list of crs products on ftas and tpa , see the appendix . more complete bill information can be found on congress.gov—including roll call votes for all legislation back to 1993 . the bill numbers listed in the following tables link to congress.gov , and the vote tallies link to the house and senate roll call votes , for all votes back to 1993 . table 1 provides a timeline of trade agreements including the date the agreement was signed , the date implementing legislation was enacted , and the date the agreement went into force . the table also notes the tpa legislation under which the trade agreement was considered in congress . resolutions were introduced in the 106 th and 109 th congress ; neither passed . see table 3 for a compilation of major legislation and votes concerning u.s. membership to the wto . all u.s. ftas , except the agreement with jordan , were considered in congress under trade promotion authority ( tpa ) . tpa is the process by which congress enables fta legislation to be considered under expedited legislative procedures , provided the president observes certain statutory obligations . because tpa is extended only for limited periods , congress periodically reconsiders legislation to extend it and to outline future negotiation objectives . since 1974 , congress has passed seven measures extending tpa . tpa , like many issues related to international trade , has been politically contentious in congress over time , resulting in vigorous debate and two multi - year lapses in authority . for a list of major votes on tpa , see table 4 . congressional consideration of bills can be a complex process , sometimes requiring multiple votes . for clarity's sake , this report only provides the final vote for each measure . the table includes fully implemented trade agreements , as well as two recent agreements: the usmca , which has not yet entered into force , and the trans - pacific partnership , a trade agreement that the united states signed , but later announced that it would not ratify . table 2 provides major votes on ftas , including the final house and senate votes on fta implementing legislation . table 3 provides major votes on u.s. membership to the wto , including implementing legislation for multilateral agreements and resolutions calling for the united states to withdraw from the wto . crs in focus if10297 , tpp - trade promotion authority ( tpa ) timeline , by ian f. fergusson crs report r43491 , trade promotion authority ( tpa ) : frequently asked questions , by ian f. fergusson and christopher m. davis crs report rl33743 , trade promotion authority ( tpa ) and the role of congress in trade policy , by ian f. fergusson crs infographic ig10001 , trade promotion authority ( tpa ) and u.s. trade agreements , by brock r. william .