does the agency need everything it has ? is the agency disposing of unneeded assets so that other agencies or the public may make use of them ? is the agency getting the best price on replacement items ? what safeguards are in place to make it difficult to steal or misuse personal property ? the office of management and budget ( omb ) provides agencies with broad guidance on establishing internal controls via circular a - 123 . specific guidance for agency personal property policies and procedures is primarily located in the federal management regulation , which is promulgated by the general services administration ( gsa ) . in addition , appendix b of circular a - 123 establishes requirements for internal controls over the management of federal charge cards , which includes safeguards for the receipt of personal property acquired with purchase cards . personal property management is a relatively decentralized process , and there is no government - wide source of data on agency inventories . policymakers and federal auditors have shown particular interest in the disposal of personal property , as recent assessments demonstrate that agencies fail to identify and dispose of items they no longer need . agencies must continually survey their property holdings , identify items that are not needed , and dispose of any unneeded property by transferring it at no cost to other federal agencies , donating it to state or local entities , selling it to the public , or abandoning or destroying it . for example , an agency may purchase items they could have obtained at no cost from another agency's excess inventory , and property that is lost or stolen when not properly inventoried may need to be replaced . when federal agencies do not follow a sound property management process , state and local entities may lose the opportunity to acquire excess federal property at no charge , resulting in higher costs for them when serving the public . the federal government also incurs greater storage expenses when agencies hold onto excess property and loses revenue from potential sales . to address these concerns , congress passed the federal personal property management act of 2018 ( personal property act ; p.l . 115-419 ) , which establishes new inventory tracking and assessment requirements for federal agencies . this report begins with a discussion of federal personal property management guidance , then examines weaknesses in agency policies and procedures . next , the report analyzes the personal property act and how it may address weaknesses in the personal property disposal process . the report concludes with observations on the intersection of real property and personal property . the personal property disposal process begins when an agency determines it no longer needs certain items . to ensure that agencies are able to identify unneeded or "excess" personal property in a timely manner , they are required to maintain adequate property controls and continually survey their inventories to determine the utility of each item . when an agency identifies excess property , it has the option to transfer an item directly to another federal agency , provided the item had an acquisition cost of less than $10,000 .