some programs also periodically come before congress for reauthorization . the heavy toll of recent natural disasters such as hurricanes harvey and irma on historic resources has contributed to increased support for incorporating preservation needs in federal disaster relief planning and aid . this report includes a summary of the federal government's role in historic preservation activities , from its early efforts in the late 1890s to today . the report contains a list of many of the federal grant programs funded through the annual appropriations process ( see appendix ) . it also includes overviews of historic preservation grants for tribal historic preservation , african american civil rights , historically black colleges and universities ( hbcus ) , japanese american confinement sites ( jacs ) , native american graves protection and repatriation act ( nagpra ) programs , the save america's treasures grant program , and the american battlefield protection program ( abpp ) . the appendix includes eligibility requirements , matching fund guidelines , and statutory authorization for each program . it also includes an overview of federal funding for historic preservation activities from fy2016 to fy2020 , along with requested totals for fy2021 . finally , the report outlines some potential issues facing the 116 th congress in determining whether and how to address historic preservation needs at the federal level . the federal role in historic preservation was limited for much of the country's early history , with no formal federal policy in place . the two most significant early efforts at federal historic preservation came in the 1890s . first , congress passed laws intended to protect ancient puebloan sites in the american southwest . soon thereafter , congress acquired thousands of acres of private land to establish five civil war national battlefield parks to be administered by the department of war . these two distinct federal efforts—commemorating very different moments in american history—are often marked as the genesis of the united states' federal preservation program . in the 20 th century , a legislative campaign for a comprehensive historic preservation policy bolstered these efforts . various federal programs and federally established entities support historic preservation across the united states . many of these programs and entities were established in nhpa and its subsequent amendments ; however , congress has authorized through separate legislation several other programs that also support activities related to historic preservation . although it is beyond the scope of this report to discuss all federal programs and entities that support historic preservation , selected major programs and entities are highlighted . the federal government currently supports historic preservation through a variety of grant programs . the largest source of funding for federal historic preservation programs is the hpf , which currently funds state , tribal , and local historic preservation , african american civil rights grant programs , grants to underrepresented communities , tribal heritage grants , the save america's treasures program , disaster recovery grants , historic revitalization grants , and grants to historically black colleges and universities ( hbcus ) . several other historic preservation grant programs are funded through annual appropriations under other nps and non - nps accounts rather than through the hpf .