section 2602 . this definition could potentially be interpreted that generators of electricity that make energy trades using blockchain technology are electric utilities by virtue of the fact that they sell electricity , and are therefore subject to all laws , requirements , and regulations pertaining to electric utilities . congress may choose to consider extending or clarifying ferc's role regulating blockchain technology use in the energy sector . while blockchain could be implemented as a means to validate peer - to - peer distributed electricity trading , these transactions could potentially still be subject to ferc oversight as engaging in a sale for resale . applications of blockchain technology in the energy sector have been limited in scope to date ; wide - scale adoption of blockchain technologies could pose additional vulnerabilities to grid operations . ferc may also have a role in considering whether the existing grid infrastructure is capable of handling more power movement at high speeds in response to blockchain users' transactions . other potential issues could include data privacy , interoperability of technology solutions , and market structure . ferc has not issued guidance or announced standards associated with blockchain technologies . within this context , utilities and industry groups may interpret the lack of guidance as a signal to continue business as usual . as the bitcoin network's energy consumption grows , some have questioned whether the proof - of - work ( pow ) algorithm that is used by bitcoin is sustainable . many alternative algorithms exist . pow and two approaches that are conceptually less energy intensive—proof - of - stake and proof - of - authority—are discussed below and illustrated in figure a - 1 . proof - of - work under proof - of - work ( pow ) , miners are presented a difficult computational problem , or puzzle . pow identifies a numeric value ( called a nonce ) , which is used to generate an authenticator ( hash value ) . the hash value ensures a user that the block of data sent has not changed . hashes are determined by submitting the data through an algorithm that will output a string of characters . by inserting the nonce into the algorithm , miners seek to change the hash value . identifying these valid nonces and hashes is computationally intensive , and the essence of mining . the security properties of hash algorithms are such that a miner tests nonces until a valid hash is found for a block . generally , by solving the problem or puzzle , miners win the opportunity to post the next block and possibly receive a reward for doing so . in the case of bitcoin , miners who create and publish new blocks in the blockchain are rewarded with bitcoin . once the problem is solved and a valid hash is identified , the miner announces it to the community . other users can validate the solution immediately—without going through the resource - intensive computation process—by having transparent access to the entire history of the blockchain's transaction ledger . once the majority of the community validates and confirms the block , the next block can be added to the chain .