as u.s. prices fell , the world took note . canada supplied about 97% of u.s. imports in 1998 . between 1998 and 2008 , the difference between u.s. production and consumption averaged 1,764 bcf annually . in 1998 , u.s. natural gas consumption was mainly in the industrial sector , but by 2008 natural gas used to generate electricity equaled its use in the industrial sector . during this same time period , average annual u.s. natural gas prices quadrupled , reaching a peak in june , 2008 . from 1998 to 2008 , the united states added to its lng import capacity by expanding existing facilities and constructing new import terminals . import capacity in 2008 was almost 4,800 bcf , with an additional 2,000 bcf added later . there were also more than 20 additional import projects at various stages of development , most of which were never built because the market did not need additional import capacity as the united states moved toward being an exporter . in the mid - 2000s , as lng import terminals were capturing headlines in the u.s. effort to meet growing demand , some small and mid - size production companies were trying to figure out how to produce the massive resources of natural gas that were trapped in shale formations . multi - stage hydraulic fracturing and improved directional drilling capability were the keys to unlocking these resources . during this time , there were wide swings in u.s. daily natural gas prices as market conditions changed , sometimes quickly . nevertheless , prices trended upward until the loss of economic activity from the great recession decreased demand . as prices rose , interest in developing shale gas grew . during this period , natural gas became more incorporated in the nation's energy mix , especially in the electrical sector . in 2010 , cheniere energy became the first u.s. company to apply for a permit to export u.s. natural gas from the lower - 48 states from its sabine pass facility ( which was originally an import terminal ) , transporting it as lng . liquefaction facilities like sabine pass liquefy natural gas—convert it to lng—and store it in liquid state so that it can be shipped globally in specialized tankers . liquefaction of natural gas is achieved by cooling the gas to - 260" f. at this temperature , the natural gas becomes a liquid and occupies only 1 / 600 th of its gaseous volume making it economical to send by ship . u.s. companies were looking to exports of natural gas for additional demand and a way to access higher world prices . as the global economy improved , natural gas prices outside the united states began to climb , which increased the number of companies looking to export u.s. natural gas . by the end of 2009 , the united states surpassed russia as the world's largest producer of natural gas . global production of natural gas rose 28% between 2008 and 2018 . u.s. production outpaced other producers and its share of the global natural gas market rose from 18% to 22% , while russia's fell from 20% to 17% .