appendix a . evidence on elasticities for charitable giving lifetime ( inter - vivos ) giving table a - 1 reports the results of seven different studies ( with a number of specifications that attempt to measure both permanent and transitory effects of changes in price and income on charitable giving ) . two of these studies ( bakija 2000 , and bakija and mcclelland 2002 ) also provided some critiques of other studies and some sensitivity analysis that is useful in understanding the studies and their strengths and weaknesses . results that are not statistically significant have an asterisk . lack of statistical significance means that , although a relationship that most closely fits the data is estimated , there is such deviation from that relationship in the observations that there is not a clear causal effect . estimates that are not statistically significant are usually , although not always , associated with very small values that are close to zero . while the studies differ in methodology , as discussed below , one difference is the type of data used . tax return data are available for general use only to researchers in the treasury department and the joint committee on taxation . ( the congressional budget office [cbo] has access to taxpayer data but must have uses approved by the joint committee on taxation. ) the data on giving and tax rates are probably superior in these studies and contain a larger sample of high - income taxpayers ; however , such research cannot be replicated or subjected to any sensitivity analysis by others . other researchers have to use public - use data constructed from other sources . of the seven studies in table a - 1 four ( randolph 1995 , auten et al . 2002 , and bakija and heim 2008 and 2011 ) used taxpayer data , and all had as authors or coauthors a treasury employee . the bakija and mcclelland ( 2002 ) study , with a cbo coauthor , included a sensitivity analysis for the auten et al . study , but used a public - use file , not the tax data . the other two studies also used a public - use file . many of the studies listed below report multiple results using different specifications and , in general , an attempt is made to report the results that appear to be preferred by the author ( s ) . in the case of the bakija and heim ( 2011 ) report , the preferred estimate for the permanent elasticity is associated with variations in the state tax rate , and estimates from other specifications ( such as allowing coefficients to vary across incomes ) are even larger ( see the discussion of that study ) . for comparison with this table and to illustrate the importance of dealing with transitory effects , bakija and mcclelland ( 2002 ) , who presented a range of strategies , also estimated a standard pooled cross - section estimate , the type that had been done prior to the evidence shown by the 1980s tax cuts that did not deal with transitory effects .