( exemptions are described below. ) amber box outlays non - exempt ams outlays are referred to ( or classified ) as "amber box" spending and subject to a strict spending limit . the majority of u.s. domestic agricultural program outlays have been categorized as indirect support that adhere to green box criteria ( $119.5 billion ) and thus have not been subject to any payment limit . in addition , the united states has traditionally relied on the de minimis exemptions to exempt substantial program outlays from counting against the amber box spending limit . how will usda classify the mfp payments for 2018 and 2019 in its notifications to the wto ? how will market conditions and commodity prices evolve in 2019 with respect to final crop values and product - specific de minimis exemptions ? what will be the final value of total u.s. farm output in 2019 for evaluating the 5% non - product - specific de minimis exemption threshold against total non - product - specific ams outlays ? how will market conditions affect decoupled arc and plc payments and total non - product - specific outlays in 2019 ? will the u.s. - china trade dispute continue into 2020 , and if so , will a third year of trade assistance be in the offing ? in response to the first question , the 2018 mfp payments appear to be coupled , product - specific ams , whereas 2019 mfp payments appear to be non - product - specific ams . thus , different de minimis exemptions will be important for these two programs when evaluating compliance in 2018 and 2019 . according to the scenarios developed in this analysis , including a projected set of market conditions , the united states may potentially exceed its cumulative amber box spending limit of $19.1 billion in 2019 . excessive amber box payments in 2019 could result from the addition of large mfp payments to the traditional decoupled revenue support programs arc and plc . however , this analysis found that u.s. compliance with wto amber box spending limits was very sensitive to a change in market conditions and market valuations . noncompliance hinges on many key market factors that are currently unknown but would have to occur in such a manner as to broadly depress commodity prices through the 2019 marketing year ( which extends through august 31 , 2020 , for corn and soybeans ) . another crucial uncertainty is how the u.s. - china trade dispute—with its deleterious effects on u.s. agricultural markets—will evolve . resolution of the u.s. - china trade dispute and an improved demand outlook could lead to higher commodity prices and output values while lowering payments under countercyclical farm programs such as mal , plc , and arc . such a turn of events could help facilitate u.s. compliance with its wto spending limits . appendix a. wto domestic support commitments wto member nations have agreed to limit spending on their market - distorting farm policies .