in central hudson gas & elec . v. public s ervice comm ission , the court considered whether the public service commission of the state of new york could order electric utilities in new york state to cease advertising promoting electricity use . the court noted a "common sense" distinction between speech proposing commercial transactions that occurs in an area traditionally subject to government regulation and other varieties of speech . consequently , the court applied a four - part analysis for commercial speech . first , for commercial speech to be protected , it must concern lawful activity and not be misleading . next , there must be a substantial government interest in its regulation . if both inquiries yield positive answers , the court must determine whether the regulation directly advances the governmental interest asserted and whether it is "narrowly drawn" to be no more extensive than necessary to serve that interest . in central hudson , the court held that new york's interest in reducing inequities in the regulated electricity market that would be caused by increased energy consumption was substantial , as was the government's energy conservation interest . the court went on to hold , however , that it was speculative whether the governmental interest in avoiding inequities would be served , and that this interest was only served if other factors that affected electricity rates remained constant . the court did find that the state's interest in energy conservation was substantial and that the parties did not dispute that advertising would increase sales . the court , however , struck down the advertising ban as not narrowly drawn to that interest , in that it prohibited not only advertising that would increase energy use but also advertising that would have an energy neutral effect or would lead to a net decrease in energy consumption . it should be noted that , despite the more limited protection afforded commercial speech , the supreme court has not upheld governmental suppression of truthful commercial speech in more than twenty years . further , several post - central hudson cases seem to afford more protection to commercial speech than originally contemplated by the case . for instance , in city of cincinnati v. discovery network , inc. , the court , considering a city of cincinnati regulation banning commercial publications from public newsracks , rejected the "bare assertion that the 'low value' of commercial speech is a sufficient justification for [a] selective and categorical ban on newsracks dispensing 'commercial handbills.' rejecting the city's regulation , the court noted that "the city's argument attaches more importance to the distinction between commercial and noncommercial speech than our cases warrant and seriously underestimates the value of commercial speech. similarly , in 44 liquormart , inc. v. rhode island , justice stevens , writing for a plurality , suggested that the first amendment requires a full , "rigorous review" of any commercial speech regulations "unrelated to the preservation of a fair bargaining process[.] even applying the hudson analysis , there are arguments that flag - misuse laws regarding advertising would violate free speech .