direct plus loans . these loans are available to graduate and professional students , and to the parents of undergraduate students who are dependent upon them for financial support . they are made without regard to financial need and generally do not have an interest subsidy . 89-329 , as amended ) . the federal government was also responsible for making several different types of payments to lenders and guaranty agencies to support the operation of the program . the ffel program was administratively complex and the direct loan program was established with the aims of streamlining the federal student loan delivery system and achieving cost savings . several years into the implementation of the direct loan program , statutory provisions specifying that it ultimately succeed the ffel program were repealed by the higher education amendments of 1998 ( p.l . from 1994 to 2010 , the direct loan program and the ffel program operated side - by - side . during this period , ihes could elect to participate in the program of their choice . as this decision was made at the institutional level , the program through which an individual could borrow federal student loans was dependent upon the program participation decisions made by the institution a student attended . during the period while loans were being made through both the ffel and direct loan programs , from the perspective of the borrower the terms and conditions of loans offered through the programs were similar in most respects . however , the degree of similarity varied over time . notable differences included certain characteristics of the repayment plans offered and , beginning in 2008 , the availability of the public service loan forgiveness ( pslf ) program only to borrowers of loans made through the direct loan program . the authority to make loans through the ffel program was terminated , effective july 1 , 2010 , by the safra act , title ii of the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( hcera ; p.l . while loans are no longer being made through the ffel program , as of the end of the second quarter of fy2019 , $271.6 billion in principal and interest on ffel program loans , borrowed by or on behalf of 12.8 million students , remained outstanding and due to be repaid over the coming years . over the history of the direct loan program , congress has periodically made changes to loan terms and conditions . such changes have often been made as part of comprehensive amendments to the hea , which authorizes the direct loan program ; as part of amendments contained in budget reconciliation measures ; or as part of amendments included in annual appropriations measures . congress may well contemplate making future changes to loan terms and conditions . the following types of loans are currently made available to borrowers through the direct loan program: direct subsidized loans . these loans are available only to undergraduate students who demonstrate financial need .