certain elements of the apportionment process are established by the u.s. constitution . this includes the requirement for representation in the house based on state population size ; the reallocation of house seats every 10 years upon the completion of a national population count ; and the requirements that each state receives at least one representative and that there can be no more than one representative for every 30,000 persons . other elements of the process are addressed through congressional legislation , such as the overall number of house seats or method of distributing seats among the states . congress more regularly legislated in this area prior to the mid - 20 th century , passing decennial acts to address upcoming censuses and apportionments , rather than creating bills intended to apply for all future reapportionment cycles . whereas apportionment is a process largely governed by federal statute , redistricting is a process , in practice , largely governed by state law . certain federal standards apply to house districts , generally in the interest of preserving equal access to representation , but the method and timeline by which those districts are created is largely determined by state law . in states with multiple congressional districts , there are a multitude of ways in which district boundaries can be drawn , depending upon the criteria used to create the districts . there is often an expectation that congressional districts will be drawn in a way that ensures "fair" representation , but "fairness" can be a somewhat subjective determination . many lawmakers and members of the public may agree on some of the more basic representational principles embedded in apportionment and redistricting law , but can find it difficult to apply those principles in practice . the criteria commonly used for redistricting today reflect a combination of state and federal statutes , judicial interpretations , and practices from past redistricting cycles that may require trade - offs between one consideration and another . ensuring equal population size across all congressional districts , for example , may be an agreeable goal for many individuals . in practice , however , the geographic and demographic distribution of residents within and across states , coupled with requirements to observe state boundaries , provide all states with at least one representative , and maintain a constant number of house seats , make this goal more difficult to achieve . packing describes district boundaries that are drawn to concentrate individuals who are thought to share similar voting behaviors into certain districts . concentrating prospective voters with shared preferences can result in a large number of "wasted votes" for these districts , as their representatives will often be elected by a supermajority that far exceeds the number of votes required for a candidate to win . cracking may be thought of as the opposite of packing , and occurs when individuals who are thought to share similar voting preferences are deliberately dispersed across a number of districts . this approach dilutes the voting strength of a group and can prevent its preferred candidates from receiving a majority of the vote in any district .