, pandemic preparedness ) goals . donor - backed child vaccination campaigns have reduced mortality in poor countries , though occasionally they have faced setbacks . in the early 1990s , u.s. foreign assistance for large - scale vaccination campaigns led by the world health organization ( who ) and the united nations children's fund ( unicef ) , and with significant u.s. funding and technical support , contributed to an approximately 80% immunization rate for three doses of the diphtheria , tetanus , and pertussis vaccine ( dtp3 ) . over 1.5 million children die every year from vpds . nearly 60% of these children live in 10 countries: angola , brazil , drc , ethiopia , india , indonesia , nigeria , pakistan , the philippines , and vietnam . from 1990 to 2017 , overall child deaths fell from 12.7 million to 5.8 million , largely due to gains made by global immunization campaigns and expanded national immunization programs . for example , from 2000 to 2017 , scaled - up measles vaccination coverage averted an estimated 15.6 million deaths from the disease . global coverage for several recommended vaccines has continued to climb over the past decade ( see figure 1 ) ; however , progress in expanding the number of children vaccinated with dtp3 ( a three - dose diphtheria , tetanus and pertussis vaccine ) has stagnated in recent years , though its coverage remains higher than coverage for other required vaccinations ( see figure 2 ) . gavi reports recent stagnation in coverage is due to "acute problems that a small number of previously high performing countries have faced. diphtheria , tetanus and pertussis are particularly fatal to neonates , new mothers , and pregnant women . maternal and neonatal tetanus ( mnte ) has been almost eliminated globally , and since 2000 there has been an 85% reduction in newborn deaths from tetanus . as of march 2019 , mnte remains present in 14 countries . in 2018 , 86% of children under the age of one received all three doses of the dtp3 vaccine . as global uptake of childhood vaccines improves , an increasing proportion of child deaths are concentrated in sub - saharan africa and southern asia: four out of every five under - 5 child deaths occur in these regions . figure 2 displays geographical immunization coverage for three doses of the dtp3 vaccine . dtp3 immunization coverage is used as a proxy indicator to estimate the proportion of children vaccinated within their first year of life . congress has historically supported global child vaccination programs , both as a component of u.s. foreign assistance and as part of efforts to eradicate infectious diseases that might affect americans at home or abroad . through annual appropriations for the department of health and human services and the department of state and foreign operations ( sfops ) , congress funds global immunization activities through the centers for disease control ( cdc ) , the united states agency for international development ( usaid ) , and the global alliance for vaccines and immunization ( gavi , now called gavi , the vaccine alliance ) .