these subjects are now the focus of a global policy debate . many aviation safety experts attribute the safety advancements in commercial aviation over the past three decades , at least in part , to improvements in aircraft systems technology and flight deck automation . paradoxically , these same factors have been implicated as causal or contributing factors in several aviation accidents and incidents . modern aircraft flight systems incorporate advanced autopilot systems as well as traditional flight controls that interface with computers instead of directly actuating flight control surfaces , such as the rudders , ailerons , and elevators that control an airplane's movement in flight ( see figure 2 ) . flight data computers aboard the aircraft continuously analyze pilot inputs , aircraft states , and environmental factors , like winds , to maneuver the aircraft safely and efficiently . when the autopilot is engaged , flight control computers will command inputs to the flight control surfaces and aircraft engines to achieve the desired inputs in a manner that is optimized for efficiency . when pilots are flying manually , displays such as a flight director provide visual aids to pilots to achieve desired states of flight ( eg , a particular altitude , airspeed , or heading ) most efficiently . the flight computers also continuously monitor pilot or autopilot inputs , aircraft states , and environmental states ( eg , winds ) to ensure that the airplane continues to fly safely . these systems and displays are designed to enhance safety by improving pilot situation awareness , reducing pilot workload , and monitoring aircraft and aircraft system states to prevent unsafe operations such as flying at too high of a pitch angle or at too steep of a bank . however , the complexity of the modern cockpit can present considerable challenges to pilots , potentially leading to confusion and errors , particularly in high - workload situations . if these errors go undetected or if they are compounded by other mistakes or other situational factors , they can potentially lead to a serious incident or accident under rare and unusual circumstances . worldwide , the most common causes of commercial jet accidents are ( 1 ) loss of control in flight and ( 2 ) controlled flight into terrain , two categories that often involve incomplete pilot situation awareness , poor judgment , and human errors in interaction with complex aircraft systems . the third most common type of accident , runway excursions ( i.e. , aircraft running off the end or side of a runway ) , also typically can be traced back to pilot performance and pilot understanding of aircraft performance , environmental factors , and flight control systems . pilots require advanced training to understand the various features , modes , capabilities , and limitations of advanced flight control systems under various flight conditions . congress has generally supported increased utilization of faa's delegation and designation authorities in order to engage design and manufacturing organizations and their employees more directly in the aircraft certification process , often working as proxies for faa and its aircraft certification inspector workforce . nonetheless , legislative language in the 2012 faa reauthorization ( p.l . 112-95 ) and the 2018 faa reauthorization ( p.l .