funding of programs . funding for ew systems can be difficult to track due to the complexity and classification of ew programs . one challenge associated with ground ew funding is that both the army and the marine corps use research and development appropriations to potentially fund procurement activities due to the relatively fast - paced changes to electronic components . a second , but related , challenge is tracking ew programs when they transition from development to procurement . part of the challenge is that the procurement activities for ew systems can be relatively small compared with larger weapons systems . as a result , dod procurement activities do not necessarily disclose these components from the larger acquisition , making it difficult to track both a breakout of ew components associated with larger systems ( eg , the m1 abrams main battle tank ) and the total dollar figure associated with ew procurement activities for the army and marine corps . the marine corps and the army use different funding policies to maintain ew programs . many of the army's ew capabilities , as either demonstrators or prototypes , receive r&d funding . as a result , funding for these programs is generally seen as inconsistent and lacking plans for sustainment . the marine corps' programs , on the other hand , are programs of record , receiving both r&d and procurement funding . by making these systems programs , the marine corps seeks to provide predictable funding for systems over long periods of time . however , these systems are developed through the acquisition system and therefore might not be at the forefront of technological advances . emerging technologies . emerging technologies may change how the army and marine corps conduct ew . some experts argue that advances in electronics are already changing how ground forces perform electronic warfare , particularly with continuously improving active electronically scanned arrays and new software defined radios . some argue that these advances in electronics , paired with artificial intelligence , could allow for some automated decision making . these algorithms could help manage the electromagnetic spectrum by making spectrum allocation decisions , determine when adversaries are jamming ( or denying ) a frequency band , and automatically develop a jamming plan to deny adversaries access by looking at trends in their electronic emissions . artificial intelligence algorithms could also enable ew systems to locate and engage small unmanned aerial systems by using data sources to help identify radar contacts ( versus environmental clutter from clouds or animals ) and electronic emissions . neither the army nor the marine corps have publicly stated that they plan to use artificial intelligence for managing electromagnetic spectrum operations or electronic warfare . new materials are changing the size , weight , power , and cooling of electronics components and power supplies . electronics are smaller and require less power , and therefore smaller batteries . these new electronics emit less heat because of their reduced consumption of energy , requiring less cooling to maintain ideal temperatures , further reducing energy consumption . these programs also pose a number of potential oversight issues for congress . congress's decisions on these issues could affect future u.s. military capabilities and funding requirements .