some federal agencies have received criticism of their dam safety programs . for example , in 2014 , the department of defense ( dod ) inspector general found that dod did not have a policy requiring installations to implement a dam safety inspection program consistent with the federal guidelines for dam safety . since the findings , some service branches of dod reported developing new dam safety policies including the creation of a dam safety program for the u.s. marine corps . congress may consider other oversight activities similar to , for example , direction requiring usace , reclamation , and ferc to brief the senate committee on appropriations on efforts to incorporate lessons learned from oroville into dam inspection protocols across all three agencies and their state partners . although incidents and reviews may result in recommending improvements to federal dam safety programs , some agencies report financial and other limitations to revising or expanding their dam safety programs . congress may consider these obstacles , as identified in its oversight activities , in determining whether new authorities or appropriations are needed . some stakeholders argue that the federal government should continue its activities in maintaining and regulating dams owned by federal agencies and nonfederal dams under federal regulatory authority , while state dam safety programs should retain responsibility for state - regulated dams by following the guidelines of the model state dam safety program . however , some stakeholders , such as the association of state floodplain managers and asdso , advocate for a larger federal role in nonfederal dam safety . to address this backlog , congress has considered authorizing mandatory funding from the reclamation fund to provide for dam o&m , rehabilitation , and repair , so the funding would not be subject to the appropriations process . while some members of congress and stakeholders support this proposal , such as the western states water council , other members of congress argue that increasing mandatory funding would remove congressional oversight and control of the reclamation fund and result in increases in spending and budget deficits , among other things . agencies with portfolios of smaller dams ( eg , forest service , fish and wildlife service , national park service ) report that their biggest challenge for dam safety is lack of resources , especially when dam safety is competing against other facility projects ( eg , buildings , levees ) . the fish and wildlife service suggested in the fy2016-fy2017 national dam safety program report that downgrading small impoundments from the definition of a dam would alleviate some financial burdens . the agency reasoned that small impoundments that narrowly qualify as dams based on height and / or storage volume obligate the owners and regulators to perform dam safety functions with little likelihood of providing significant dam safety benefits or any genuine risk reduction . congress may consider continuing current spending levels for dam safety . under current funding , some metrics for the ndsp , such as the percentage of dams with eaps and condition assessments , have shown improvement ( see " progress of the national dam safety program " ) .