in contrast , h.r . 3799 would raise the annual diversity visa allocation to 80,000 . as congress weighs whether to eliminate or revise the diversity visa category , it may want to consider various policy questions pertinent to this discussion . the index can be standardized by dividing by its maximum , log k. doing so results in a range of 0 ( for the case where all of the population is in one subpopulation ) to 1.0 ( for the case where all subpopulations are present in equal proportions ) . for this report , the standardized entropy index was calculated by year for country of birth of total lpr admissions , lpr admissions minus dv admissions , and dv admissions . this was calculated after creating a standardized list of countries across all years so that k was held constant . as shown in figure a - 1 , between fy1995 and fy2017 , the entropy index varied , but in all years the index was higher when dv lprs were included . diversity can be defined as the "relative heterogeneity of a population. it is at its maximum when all subpopulations are present in equal proportions ( for the purposes of this report , when each country of birth receives an equal number of lpr admissions ) . the formula for the entropy index is where h is the entropy index , k is the country - of - origin group , and p is the proportion of the total from each country - of - origin group . others might observe that the family - based , employment - based , and diversity visa categories are statutorily designed as independent pathways to lpr status and that the problems of the family - based and employment - based backlogs should be addressed separately . some also argue that the dv program increases fairness in the immigration system by making visas available to individuals who would not otherwise have a chance of obtaining one and by discouraging illegal immigration through expanding access to the legal immigration system . some argue that the diversity visa program reverts to discriminatory national origin quotas , which congress eliminated through the 1965 amendments to the immigration and nationality act . however , there are other examples of admissions policies that effectively discriminate based on nationality ( eg , h - 2a , h - 2b , e , and tn nonimmigrant visas , the visa waiver program , and the per country caps on family - and employment - based lpr admissions , all of which limit admissions by nationality ) . these trends are consistent with the statutory formula congress outlined to allocate diversity visas . figure 3 presents the countries from which at least 1,000 dv immigrants were admitted in the first five years that the program was in full effect ( fy1995-fy1999 ) and the most recent five years for which data are available ( fy2013-fy2017 ) . early in the program , most of the top countries were in europe ( particularly eastern europe ) and africa . in more recent years , there has been a shift toward africa and asia .