why that happened is not clear . the current surface transportation authorization act ( map - 21 ) , which was enacted in december 2015 , created several new discretionary grant programs for surface transportation ; that , combined with the new lowered cap of $25 million on maximum tiger / build grant sizes that took effect in fy2017 , may have led sponsors of more expensive projects , which are often located in urban areas , to seek funding from the new grant programs rather than from the tiger / build program . the administration's stated rationales for prioritizing funding for projects in rural areas are open to question . while 71% of the nation's roads are in rural areas , they account for only 30% of total vehicle miles traveled , and over the period fy2009-fy2015 , 37% of federal highway funding went to rural roads . rural roads are on average in better condition than urban roads ; in 2012 93% of the vehicle miles traveled on rural roads were on roads with pavement conditions rated as acceptable or good , compared with 78% of the vehicle miles traveled on urban roads . the administration's claim that safety factors justify directing two - thirds of build grants to rural areas is only partially supported by available data . while a disproportionate share of highway deaths occurs on rural roads , that proportion has been trending downward , declining from around 60% in the early 2000s to 46% in 2017 . the number of traffic fatalities in rural areas declined by 18% from 2008-2017 , while the number of fatalities in urban areas increased by 17% over the same period . moreover , road conditions are only one factor among the reasons why the share of highway fatalities in rural areas exceeds the share of population in those areas . other factors include driver behavior ( eg , higher typical speeds , lower rates of seat belt use , and higher driver fatigue rates ) , typically longer travel times for emergency medical care , and vehicle condition . in the fy2019 dot appropriations act , congress made two changes that may constrain the administration's discretion to steer funding toward projects in rural areas: limiting the share of program funding that can go to rural areas to 50% , and changing the definitions of urban and rural areas used in the build program . urban areas would be defined as areas "located within ( or on the boundary of ) a census - designated urbanized area that had a population greater than 200,000 in the 2010 census. areas outside that are considered rural . by this definition , roughly 60% of the u.s. population lived in urban areas , and roughly 40% in rural areas , in 2015 . thus , some areas that in previous rounds of applications would have been considered urban areas would now be considered rural for the purposes of the build program . how this change will affect the distribution of funds in fy2019 and subsequent years is unclear . since the second year of the program , congress has directed dot to ensure that the program makes "investment in a variety of transportation modes.