drug . that is adulterated or misbranded. the fd&c act defines misbranding broadly: a drug is considered misbranded if , among other things , its labeling , advertising , or promotion "is false or misleading in any particular. unlabeled drugs are considered misbranded , as are prescription drugs that fda has not approved , including imported drugs . in addition , misbranding may include misrepresenting that a substance offered for sale is a brand - name drug ( even if the seller believes the substance for sale is chemically identical to the brand - name drug ) . the fd&c act provides that a drug is deemed to be adulterated if , among other things , it "consists in whole or in part of any filthy , putrid , or decomposed substance," "it has been prepared , packed , or held under insanitary conditions," its container is made of "any poisonous or deleterious substance," or its strength , quality , or purity is not as represented . the key aims of the fd&c act are related to but distinct from those of the csa . the csa establishes distribution controls to prevent the misuse of substances deemed to pose a potential danger to the public welfare . the fd&c act , by contrast , is a consumer protection statute that seeks to prevent harm to consumers who obtain drugs ( and other public health products ) through commercial channels . any person or organization that produces , distributes , or otherwise works with prescription drugs that are also controlled substances must comply with the requirements of both the csa and the fd&c act . with respect to both pharmaceutical and nonpharmaceutical drugs , many drugs subject to the act are also subject to state drug laws . state substance control laws often mirror federal law and are relatively uniform across jurisdictions because almost all states have adopted a version of the uniform controlled substances act ( ucsa ) . however , states are free to modify the ucsa , and have done so to varying extents . moreover , the model statute does not specify sentences for violations , so penalties for state controlled substance offenses vary widely . there is not a complete overlap between drugs subject to federal and state control for several reasons . first , states may elect to impose controls on substances that are not subject to the csa . for example , some states have controlled the fentanyl analogues benzylfentayl and thenylfentanyl , but those substances are not currently subject to federal control . second , states may wish to adopt federal scheduling decisions at the state level but lag behind federal regulators due to the need for a separate state scheduling process . third , states may decide not to impose state controls on substances subject to the csa , or they may choose to impose modified versions of federal controls at the state level . crucially , however , the states cannot alter federal law , and when state and federal law conflict , the federal law controls .