this was not enacted . the 1980s also saw an increasing concern that single parents were becoming dependent on assistance . research showed that while most individuals used afdc for short periods of time , some received assistance for long periods . there was continuing concern that receipt of afdc—assistance generally limited to single mothers—led to more children being raised in single parent families . the family support act of 1988 established an education and training program and expanded participation requirements for afdc recipients . additionally , the federal government and states fielded numerous experiments that tested approaches to moving assistance recipients ( mostly single mothers ) into work . these experiments indicated that mandatory participation in a program providing employment services could increase employment and earnings and reduce receipt of assistance . the cash assistance caseload began to increase in 1988 , rising to its historical peak in march of 1994 . amid that caseload increase , then - presidential candidate bill clinton pledged to "end welfare as we know it. the subsequent plan created by the clinton administration was not adopted ; instead , house republicans crafted a plan following the 1994 midterm elections that became the basis of the legislation enacted in 1996 . prwora created tanf and established a statutorily set amount of funding to states under the tanf basic block grant through fy2002 ; new rules for assistance recipients , such as a five - year time limit on federally funded benefits ; and a broad - purpose block grant , giving states flexibility in how funds are used . the bulk of tanf funding is in the form of a basic block grant . both the total amount of the basic block grant ( $16.5 billion per year ) and each state's share of the grant are based on the amount of federal and state expenditures in tanf's predecessor programs ( afdc and related programs ) in the early to mid - 1990s . states must also expend a minimum amount of their own funds on tanf or tanf - related programs under the maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirement . that minimum totals $10.4 billion per year . the moe is based on state expenditures in the predecessor programs in fy1994 . prwora froze funding at both the national and state levels through fy2002 . tanf has never been comprehensively reauthorized ; rather , it has been extended through a series of short - term extensions and one five - year extension . thus , a funding freeze that originally was to run through fy2002 has now extended through fy2019 . there have been no adjustments for changes—such as inflation , the size of the cash assistance caseload , or changes in the poverty population—to the total funding level or each state's level of funding . though most of the debates leading to prwora in 1996 and the creation of tanf focused on assistance to needy families with children , the law as written created a broad - purpose block grant . thus , tanf is not a program . it is a funding stream that is used by states for a wide range of benefits and services .