this vote on h.r . 6 was one of several house and senate floor votes since 2018—and the only successful one—on legislation to grant some type of immigration relief to unauthorized childhood arrivals . as commonly used , the term "unauthorized childhood arrivals" encompasses both individuals who entered the united states unlawfully and individuals who entered legally but then lost legal status , by , for example , overstaying an authorized temporary period of stay . there is no single set of requirements that defines an unauthorized childhood arrival . individual bills include their own criteria . this report considers house and senate measures on unauthorized childhood arrivals that have seen legislative action since 2001 , focusing in particular on legislation considered in the 115 th and 116 th congresses . it also discusses the related deferred action for childhood arrivals ( daca ) initiative and daca - related data . the material is presented chronologically to trace the development of legislative proposals on unauthorized childhood arrivals and highlight the interplay between legislative action on these measures and developments related to the daca initiative . legislation on unauthorized childhood arrivals dates to 2001 . that year , the development , relief , and education for alien minors ( dream ) act ( s. 1291 ) was introduced in the 107 th congress to provide a pathway to lawful permanent resident ( lpr ) status for eligible individuals . lprs can live and work in the united states permanently and can become u.s. citizens through the naturalization provisions in the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) . in most cases , lprs must reside in the united states for five years before they can naturalize . s. 1291 sought to provide immigration relief to unauthorized childhood arrivals who , like the larger unauthorized population , were typically unable to work legally and were subject to removal from the united states . many policymakers viewed this subset of the unauthorized population more sympathetically than unauthorized immigrants on the whole because unauthorized childhood arrivals had arrived in the united states as children and were thus not generally seen as being responsible for their unlawful status . although not all subsequent bills to grant lpr status to unauthorized childhood arrivals were entitled the "dream act" and no subsequent bill included exactly the same provisions as s. 1291 , such legislation came to be known generally as the "dream act" and its intended beneficiaries as "dreamers. in general , the potential beneficiaries of such bills did not have an avenue under the ina to become lprs . the most common way for a foreign national to adjust status ( become an lpr while in the united states ) is through ina provisions that require the individual to be eligible for an immigrant visa and to have such a visa immediately available to him or her through the permanent immigration system . individuals are most often eligible for immigrant visas based on a qualifying family relationship ( to a u.s. citizen or lpr ) or an employment tie . among the other criteria to adjust status under these provisions , the individual must have been "inspected and admitted or paroled into the united states" ; thus , individuals who entered the united states unlawfully are not eligible .