fema has statutory authority to set premium rates . the limitations on annual premium increases are also set in statute , and risk rating 2.0 will not be able to increase rates annually beyond these caps . hfiaa set maximum rate increases for primary residences at 5-18% per year . hfiaa permits individual property increases of up to 18% , but limits the rate class increases to 15% per year . 3167 ) , and the national flood insurance program reauthorization and reform act of 2019 ( s. 2187 ) and its companion bill in the house , h.r . these rating factors are used to calculate the premium that is sufficient to cover expected losses . the methodologies used to estimate these components , particularly the average annual loss and the risk , have changed over the decades that the nfip has been in operation . this report will outline how the nfip currently rates risks and sets premiums to cover losses , and how these are expected to change with the introduction of risk rating 2.0 . table 1 shows the effects of a maximum statutory increase on the national average premium for a standard flood insurance policy ( sfip ) which pays the full $75 for increased cost of compliance ( icc ) coverage . according to fema , the national average premium for an sfip is $700 . when premium rates are calculated for compliance with the statutory caps , fema only includes the building and contents coverage , the increased cost of compliance coverage , and the reserve fund assessment . the nfip was established by the national flood insurance act of 1968 . the general purpose of the nfip is both to offer primary flood insurance to properties with significant flood risk , and to reduce flood risk through the adoption of floodplain management standards . a longer - term objective of the nfip is to reduce federal expenditure on disaster assistance after floods . the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , which administers the nfip , is planning to introduce risk rating 2.0 , which represents the biggest change to the way the nfip calculates flood insurance premiums since its inception . the new rates are scheduled to go into effect on october 1 , 2021 , for all nfip policies . the price of insurance is generally based on three components: ( 1 ) the average annual loss , which is the expected loss per year ; ( 2 ) the risk , which depends on the variability or uncertainty in loss estimates ; and ( 3 ) expenses . in other words , the average annual premium rate increase for primary residences within a single risk classification rate may not be increased by more than 15% a year , while the individual premium rate increase for any individual policy may not be increased by more than 18% each year .