congress has considered this in the past . for example , the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-58 ) authorized federal approval for some transmission infrastructure under certain conditions , though this authority has never been used . as noted in " potential environmental effects " a national portfolio standard might alternatively incentivize distributed energy development or projects in other locations that might not require new transmission capacity . some states have adopted policies to create competition among electricity generators , an effort known as deregulation or restructuring . while the previous section addressed the question "how can a portfolio standard be designed ? ," this section addresses the question "what might happen if a portfolio standard were implemented ? eligible sources will be available at different costs . policymakers may want to avoid a situation where compliance is achieved mostly through the use of a single , low - cost source . many expect these trends to continue . for example , international demand for electricity from solar energy could lower the cost to produce solar panels , or countries with large critical mineral resources could impose export bans , increasing the cost in the united states of any technology using those minerals . the overall effect on the american economy of a national portfolio standard would be influenced by multiple factors . increased electricity costs could reduce economic activity , depending on the price response throughout the economy . potential price responses are reduced electricity consumption , increased investment in efficiency measures , or reduced spending on other goods or services . some price responses might have minimal effect on overall economic activity , for example if consumers shifted spending from electricity consumption to energy efficiency improvements . potential economic effects might not be uniformly distributed . there could be regional differences in electricity price changes , given the geographic variability in energy resources . utilities in regions with relatively less potential to develop eligible sources ( i.e. , regions in which eligible sources are relatively costlier ) might buy credits from eligible generators in other regions . the cost of credits might result in higher electricity prices for customers of the utility buying credits . at the same time , customers of any utilities selling credits might see lower electricity prices . as discussed above , the ability to use unbundled credits for compliance could reduce overall compliance costs relative to the case where only bundled credits were allowed because utilities across the country could take advantage of low cost eligible sources . at the same time , unbundled credits could result in wealth transfer between different regions of the country . policy design choices might affect any potential wealth transfer . electricity prices already vary across the country as a result of differences in resource availability , electricity demand , and utility regulatory models . there might also be differences in cost distribution among household income levels . generally , poorer americans spend a larger portion of their income on electricity than wealthier americans , so electricity cost increases could disproportionately affect them . within the electric power sector , businesses associated with eligible sources might be positively affected while businesses associated with ineligible sources might be negatively affected .