this report provides an overview on financial inclusion . for some younger consumers , a lack of a co - signer might make it more difficult to build a credit report history or a lack of knowledge or familiarity with financial institutions may be a barrier to obtaining a bank account . for consumers living paycheck to paycheck , a bad credit history or a lack of money could serve as barriers to obtaining affordable credit or a bank account . for immigrants , the absence of a credit history in the united states or language differences could be critical access barriers . for consumers who do not have familiarity or access to the internet or mobile phones , a group in which older americans may be overrepresented , technology can be a barrier to accessing financial products and services . the banking sector provides valuable financial services for households that allow them to save , make payments , and access credit . most u.s. consumers choose to open a bank account because it is a safe and secure way to store money . for example , the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) insures up to $250,000 per depositor against an institution's failure . in addition , consumers gain access to payment services through checking accounts , such as bill pay and paper checks . frequently , a checking account includes access to a debit card , which increases a consumer's ability to make payment transactions through the account . for most consumers , a checking or savings account is less expensive than alternative ways to access these types of services . some studies suggest that affordable access to payment transactions may be particularly important for consumers to manage their financial lives . for most consumers , opening a bank account is relatively easy . consumers undergo an account verification process and sometimes provide a small initial opening deposit of money into the account . many consumers open their first depository account when they get their first job or start post - secondary education . checking and savings accounts are often the first relationship that a consumer has with a financial institution , which can later progress into other types of financial products and services , such as loan products or financial investments . safe and affordable financial services , especially for families with unpredictable income or expenses , have the potential to help households avoid financial hardship . however , many u.s. households—often those with low incomes , lack of credit histories , or credit histories marked with missed debt payments—do not use banking services . the credit reporting industry collects information on consumers and uses it to estimate the probability of future financial behaviors , such as successfully repaying a loan or defaulting on it . the information collected has largely related to consumers' past financial performance and repayment history on traditional credit products . consumer files generally do not contain information on consumer income or assets or on alternative financial services . credit bureaus collect and store payment data reported to them by financial firms , and they or other credit scoring companies use this data to estimate individual consumers' creditworthiness , generally expressed as a numerical "score.