appendix a . methodology and data sources to examine how the federal individual income tax affects poverty , this report uses estimates from the transfer income model , version 3 ( trim3 ) and data from the census bureau's annual social and economic supplement ( asec ) to the current population survey . trim3 is a static microsimulation model that estimates federal and state taxes and certain benefit transfer programs . trim3 is primarily funded by the u.s. department of health and human services and maintained by the urban institute . the measure of poverty used is the census bureau's supplemental poverty measure ( spm ) . the annual social and economic ( asec ) supplement to the current population survey the asec is a household survey of the noninstitutionalized population conducted by the census bureau in march of each year . there are approximately 94,000 households in the asec . the asec includes questions related to household members' demographic characteristics and family living arrangement at the time of the survey , and work experience and income in the prior year . this report's estimates are based on the 2017 asec , which captures information on work experience and income in the prior year—2016 . the asec is used by the u.s. census bureau to estimate both the official poverty measure and spm poverty in its reports . the sample of the asec is large enough to make reliable estimates for the nation as a whole and , sometimes , for some of the larger states . however , the sample is not large enough to make state - level estimates for all states . estimates discussed in this report were weighted from the sample information to make the asec representative of the population of u.s. households . since the estimates in this report come from a sample , they are subject to sampling error . additionally , the information on the asec is based on respondents' answers to the survey questions , and nonresponse or incorrect responses can result in nonsampling error . the asec itself does not ask survey respondents about taxes paid or refundable credits received in the prior year . that information—important for determining a family's or an individual's spm poverty status—must be estimated . this report uses estimates from the trim microsimulation model for these estimates . the census bureau uses a different microsimulation model in its reports on spm poverty . the trim3 microsimulation model microsimulation models of tax and transfer programs are composed of computer code that mimics the rules of the tax code and benefit programs . the models determine whether an individual , family , or other unit is eligible to be subject to a tax or eligible for a benefit and then estimates the amount of the tax ( or benefit ) . trim assumes that all taxpayers fully comply with the requirements and rules of the tax code . federal income tax module for 2016 trim3 applies policy rules in effect during the year to the population for that year . the estimates in this report use information from the trim3 federal income tax module for 2016 . the 2016 federal income tax module makes "baseline estimates" of the tax code as it existed for 2016 .