two of these bills ( h.r . 3616 ) would direct epa to address pfas using authorities provided to the agency under the cwa , which congress established to restore and protect the quality of the nation's surface waters . global concern about another group of cecs—microplastics—and their potential impacts has also been mounting . recent studies have found that treated effluents from wastewater treatment plants can be key sources of microplastics , as can runoff from agricultural sites where sewage sludge from the wastewater treatment process has been applied as fertilizer . as with many other cecs , wastewater treatment facilities are generally not designed to screen for microplastic debris , such as microbeads , plastic fragments , or plastic fibers from clothing . congress has shown interest in addressing the impacts of plastic pollution . in 2015 , congress passed legislation to ban plastic microbeads from rinse - off personal care products ( "microbead - free waters act of 2015," p.l . more recently , some members in the 116 th congress announced plans to introduce comprehensive legislation to address plastic waste in fall 2019 . some stakeholders have asserted that epa could be more effective in using its existing cwa authorities to address cecs , while others have suggested a need to identify and address potential gaps in cwa authorities through amendments to the statute . this report examines authorities available to address cecs under the cwa . epa has several cwa authorities it may use to address cecs , although it faces some challenges in doing so . the cwa's stated objective is "to restore and maintain the chemical , physical , and biological integrity of the nation's waters. to help achieve this objective , the cwa prohibits the discharge of pollutants from any point source ( i.e. , a discrete conveyance , such as a pipe , ditch , etc. ) to waters of the united states without a permit . under the cwa , one of the primary mechanisms to protect or improve surface water quality is to limit or prohibit discharges of contaminants , including cecs , in national pollutant discharge elimination system ( npdes ) permits . the cwa authorizes epa and delegated states to set limits or prohibit discharges of pollutants in permits through technology - based effluent ( i.e. , discharge ) limitations and standards and through water - quality - based effluent limitations , which are established through water quality standards and criteria . technology - based effluent limitations are specific numerical limits ( i.e. , maximum allowable levels of specific pollutants ) that represent the minimum level of control that must be established in a permit . in addition to focusing on pfas , several bills proposed in the 116 th congress look more broadly at how to address cecs . while congress is currently debating how to best address the concerns related to widespread detections of pfas , attention to other emerging contaminants ( eg , microplastics and algal toxins ) has also increased with the availability of new detection methods and increased monitoring . observers note that in the coming years , other cecs will likely emerge and prompt similar calls for immediate action to protect public health and the environment .