appendix a . selected communications and documents the tables below contains a chronology of selected communications , correspondence , and documents relevant to the use of 10 u.s.c . section 2808 and section 284 , drawn primarily from court records . this section is intended to identify milestones in the decision - making process . appendix b . 284 reprogramming requests dod has submitted two reprogramming notifications to defense committees transferring a total of $2.5 billion to the drug interdiction and counterdrug activities account . the department's first action , on march 25 , 2019 , used general transfer authority to reallocate $1 billion . approximately 82% of this total was taken from the active duty army pay and allowances ( for officers and enlisted personnel ) , savings realized from service recruiting shortfalls . dod's second action , on may 9 , 2019 , used a mix of $818.465 million in general transfer authority ( base ) and $881.535 in special transfer authority ( oco ) ; a total of $2.5 billion . in the table below , reprogramming actions that use special transfer authority are indicated parenthetically with the ( oco ) designation . together , both reprograming actions reallocated $1.8 billion from base and $.7 billion from oco defense funds . the majority of these funds were derived from army personnel accounts and programs supporting the afghanistan security forces . the department's two actions were sourced exclusively from appropriations that began in fy2019 and had a one - to three - year lifespan , or period of availability . when these program savings were transferred to the drug interdiction and counter - drug activities fy2019 appropriations , they became one - year appropriations . following additional transfer actions , all appropriations were merged with an fy2019 army operations and maintenance appropriations account , another one - year account . appendix c. wall projects requested by dhs pursuant to 10 u.s.c . 284 on february 25 , 2019 , dhs formally requested dod support its ability to impede and deny illegal entry and drug smuggling activities along the southwest u.s. - mexico border by assisting with the construction ( or replacement ) of fences , roads , and lighting . dhs summarized the work required: the new pedestrian fencing includes a linear ground detection system , which is intended to , among other functions , alert border patrol agents when individuals attempt to damage , destroy or otherwise harm the barrier . the road construction includes the construction of new roads and the improvement of existing roads . the lighting that is requested has an imbedded camera that works in conjunction with the pedestrian fence . the lighting must be supported by grid power… . dhs will provide dod with more precise technical specifications as contract and project planning moves forward . dhs requested dod undertake a total of 11 projects on federal lands , which the agency identified by geographic location and unique numeric id . the border patrol divides responsibility for its operations along the southwest border into nine geographic sectors . four of these were included as part of the dhs request: yuma sector arizona . at the time of the court's injunction , $646,000,000 remained unobligated .