cybersecurity . the house - passed bill provided that no highly autonomous vehicle or vehicle with "partial driving automation" could be sold domestically unless a cybersecurity plan had been developed by the automaker . such plans would have to have been developed within six months of enactment and would include a written policy on mitigation of cyberattacks , unauthorized intrusions , and malicious vehicle control commands ; a point of contact at the automaker with cybersecurity responsibilities ; a process for limiting access to autonomous driving systems ; and the manufacturer's plans for employee training and for maintenance of the policies . the senate bill would have required written cybersecurity plans to be issued , including a process for identifying and protecting vehicle control systems , detection , and response to cybersecurity incidents , and methods for exchanging cybersecurity information . a cybersecurity point of contact at the manufacturer or vehicle developer would have had to be named . unlike the house - passed bill , s. 1885 would have directed dot to create incentives so that vehicle developers would share information about vulnerabilities , and would have specified that all federal research on cybersecurity risks should be coordinated with dot . in addition , s. 1885 would have established a highly automated vehicle data access advisory committee to provide congress with recommendations on cybersecurity issues . federal agencies would have been prohibited from issuing regulations pertaining to the access or ownership of data stored in autonomous vehicles until the advisory committee's report was submitted . the staff draft would have added several cybersecurity provisions , including an additional study by the national institute of standards and technology that would recommend ways vehicles can be protected from cybersecurity incidents . privacy . before selling autonomous vehicles , manufacturers would have been required by the house - passed bill to develop written privacy plans concerning the collection and storage of data generated by the vehicles , as well as a method of conveying that information to vehicle owners and occupants . however , a manufacturer would have been allowed to exclude processes from its privacy policy that encrypt or make anonymous the sources of data . the federal trade commission would have been tasked with developing a report for congress on a number of vehicle privacy issues . although s. 1885 would not have explicitly required privacy plans by developers and manufacturers , it would have required nhtsa to establish an online , searchable motor vehicle privacy database that would include a description of the types of information , including personally identifiable information ( pii ) , that are collected about individuals during operation of a motor vehicle . this database would have covered all types of vehicles—not just autonomous vehicles—and would have included the privacy policies of manufacturers . the database would also have included an explanation about how pii would be collected , retained , and destroyed when no longer relevant . the senate staff draft would have added new passenger motor vehicle privacy protections . research and advisory panels . both bills would have established several new advisory bodies to conduct further research on autonomous vehicles and advise dot on possible new vehicle standards .