the trump administration has built on these efforts . in may 2019 , the white house released the united states government global health security strategy , which outlined the u.s. role in extending the global health security agenda and improving global health security worldwide . it will take more than simply a medical approach . it will take a development approach to try to tackle this terrible disease and to contain its outbreak. after traveling to drc in august 2019 , administrator green wrote , "decades of corrupt , authoritarian rule during which communities were denied any meaningful voice in their government have undermined the congolese people's trust in institutions. health experts have been troubled by reports of ebola cases in major drc cities ( including the capital of north kivu , goma ) and outside of drc . between june and august 2019 , a total of four cross - border cases were detected in uganda . observers expressed optimism about the rapid detection and containment of these cases , but new concerns have arisen about subsequent suspected cases in tanzania . in mid - september , who was informed by unofficial sources of a number of suspected ebola cases in that country , including in the capital city of dar es salaam , while tanzanian authorities asserted that there were no confirmed or suspected ebola cases in the country . who has reportedly since sent personal protective equipment ( ppe ) and vaccination supplies to tanzania , and recommended that the sickened patients ( one of whom reportedly died ) receive secondary confirmation testing at a who facility . as of september 21 , none of the cases had received secondary confirmation . ebola control in other neighboring countries such as south sudan , burundi , or central africa republic , which have minimal state capacity and are affected by protracted conflicts and political crises , could be highly challenging if required . outbreak control , treatment , and disease surveillance activities are being carried out primarily by drc government employees ( including health workers and frontline workers , who provide routine and essential services ) , as well as by international nongovernmental organizations , with u.n. agencies ( including the who ) , other multilateral entities ( including the world bank ) , and foreign governments providing funding , expertise , coordination , and logistical assistance . classic ebola outbreak control protocol entails infection prevention control ( ipc ) in health care facilities ; management and isolation of patients in ebola treatment centers ( etcs ) ; fever surveillance with rapid diagnosis ; tracing of ebola cases and their contacts ; and community awareness and adherence to ipc protocols , safe patient and body transport , safe burials , and household and environmental decontamination . the extraordinary conditions on the ground in affected areas of eastern drc have limited the effectiveness of conventional control measures , however , and are requiring ever - evolving strategies for containment , including aggressive vaccination campaigns ( see text box below ) .