for example , the frequency with which each is exercised differs greatly . but the two investigations arguably contrast in a few notable ways . while the house has conducted myriad legislative investigations of the executive branch , there have been comparatively few impeachment investigations of executive branch officials . in addition , the house has previously granted the subject of an impeachment investigation certain procedural rights that are not seen in legislative investigations . for example , during both the nixon and clinton impeachment investigations , the house judiciary committee adopted resolutions affording the president and his counsel the right to respond to evidence gathered by the committee , raise objections to testimony , and cross - examine witnesses , among others . this is because in the period before standing committees existed an investigating committee needed to be created and authorized . even after standing committees were established , the house typically still needed to provide the committee with both investigative jurisdiction and compulsory investigative tools such as the power to issue a subpoena to force the disclosure of information . indeed , although the house often adopted resolutions providing individual committees with limited subpoena powers following the legislative reorganization act of 1946 , it was not until 1975 that the house granted its committees standing investigative and subpoena powers under house rules . even after 1975 , there was still practical value in authorizing resolutions , which typically provided the investigating committee with additional investigative tools beyond what the committee may have otherwise possessed , such as the ability to conduct staff depositions or issue written interrogatories . thus , for a good portion of the house's history , authorizing resolutions were generally needed to give a committee the tools necessary to carry out an effective and expeditious investigation . use of an authorizing resolution has also provided the house with the opportunity to assert control over the scope , direction , and conduct of a committee's impeachment investigation . addressing the scope of the house's access to information during an impeachment inquiry requires some brief comparison of impeachment and legislative investigations . to begin , the two types of investigations have much in common: both represent exercises of the house's constitutional power ; both act as essential checks on executive overreach and help ensure preservation of the separation of powers ; and both are unique and consequential powers characterized by their mix of judicial , legislative , and political features . in addition , whether engaged in an impeachment or legislative investigation , the tools used to gather information are now mostly the same , especially given recent changes to the house rules that provide committees with authority to carry out investigations in an increasingly prompt manner and without the full participation of the committee . in any investigation , a committee would likely obtain most information through requests for information , voluntary interviews , hearings , subpoenas for documents or testimony , and depositions . in another distinguishing feature , the judiciary committee's power to issue subpoenas in impeachment investigations has previously been altered in an effort to encourage "a fair , impartial and bipartisan" investigation .