although h.r . 8 would provide exceptions for "temporary transfers" for target shooting and other related activities , some gun rights advocates argue that such exceptions are too narrow . for example , they argue further that h.r . 8 would prohibit a person from loaning a neighbor a firearm for a hunting trip with a background check being required for both the loan to the neighbor and the return of the firearm to its lawful owner . perhaps more fundamentally , h.r . 8 would prohibit a person from loaning a firearm to another person—who may be facing some threat of death or serious bodily injury—for self - defense purposes , unless that threat were "imminent. gun rights advocates might also see such a measure as a significant step towards a national—albeit decentralized—registry of firearms and firearms owners , since its practical implementation would likely necessitate recordkeeping on such transfers . such advocates cite an obama administration , department of justice official who observed that "universal background checks" are unenforceable without a comprehensive registry of firearms . legislation to expand federal recordkeeping and background check requirements to cover private , intrastate firearms transfers saw action in the 106 th and 108 th congresses following the april 20 , 1999 , columbine , co , high school mass shooting ; in the 113 th congress following the december 14 , 2012 , newtown , ct , elementary school mass shooting ; and in the 114 th congress following the december 2 , 2015 , san bernardino , ca , social services center all - staff meeting and june 12 , 2016 , orlando , fl , pulse night club mass shootings . over time , related legislative proposals have varied in the scope and type of intrastate , private party ( nondealer ) firearms exchanges between federally unlicensed persons that would fall under their respective background check provisions . since the 113 th congress , such proposals fall under two basic types that , respectively , have been labeled as either "universal" or "comprehensive" background check bills . "comprehensive" background checks would cover transfers at gun shows and similar public venues ( eg , flea markets and public auctions ) and firearms that are advertised via some public fora , including newspaper advertisements and the internet . "universal" background checks would cover private transfers under a much wider set of circumstances ( sales , trades , barters , rentals , or loans ) , with more limited exceptions . in the senate , from the 113 th congress forward , the principal sponsors of "universal" background check bills have been senators charles schumer , christopher murphy , and richard blumenthal . the principal sponsors of "comprehensive" background check amendments have been senators joe manchin and pat toomey . "universal" background check bills were introduced in the house in the 113 th and 114 th congresses . while representatives peter king and mike thompson introduced proposals that were similar to manchin - toomey "comprehensive" background check bills in the past three congresses , they have sponsored and supported a "universal" background check proposal ( h.r . 8 ) in the 116 th congress . the house - passed enhanced background checks act of 2019 ( h.r .