mass atrocities . some experts and observers have debated whether u.n. peacekeeping operations are an effective tool for preventing or addressing mass atrocities . u.s. support for minusca's creation was nested within a high - level effort to prevent further mass atrocities in car ; fulfilling this goal has proven challenging . in mali , militias have engaged in a spate of civilian massacres in the center of the country , a region that was largely outside the purview of minusma until the 2019 mandate renewal ( as discussed below ) . role of host governments . a key challenge is how and to what extent u.n. peacekeeping operations should pursue positive working relationships with host governments whose interests may not align with international stabilization efforts . in practice , peacekeeping personnel may require approvals from host governments to acquire entry visas or access certain parts of the country , for example . pursuit of positive relations may , however , undermine perceptions of u.n. neutrality or trustworthiness in the context of an active conflict and / or state abuses . u.n. operations in car , drc , and mali , among others , are mandated to support the extension of state authority , although state security forces are a party to internal conflicts . these same u.n. missions are also tasked with facilitating peace talks between the government and rebel groups . operations in sudan and south sudan have faced obstructions and threats from government officials and security forces , and the role of state security forces in attacks on civilians complicates the missions' civilian protection and reporting mandates . counter t errorism . some policymakers have questioned what role , if any , u.n. peacekeeping operations should play in addressing transnational terrorism in africa . this debate has repeatedly arisen in the context of mali , and may become relevant in other places ( such as drc , where the islamic state has claimed ties to a local militia group ) . despite calls from the malian government and other regional leaders , the security council has declined to mandate minusma explicitly to conduct counterterrorism operations , notwithstanding the mission's civilian protection and stabilization mandates . sexual exploitation and abuse by u.n. peacekeepers . members of congress have demonstrated an ongoing interest in how the united nations might better address sexual abuse and exploitation by u.n. peacekeepers—particularly in monusco and minusca , which have the highest rates of substantiated allegations of sexual abuse and exploitation . congress has enacted several provisions to address the issue . for example , sfops bills since fy2008 have prohibited the obligation of u.n. peacekeeping funding unless the secretary of state certifies that the united nations is implementing effective policies and procedures to prevent u.n. employees and peacekeeping troops from engaging in human trafficking , other acts of exploitation , or other human rights violations . african troop - contributing countries ( tccs ) . experts and policymakers have debated the advantages and drawbacks of relying on african countries to contribute the bulk of military and police personnel to u.n. peacekeeping operations in africa . african troop contributors may be willing , but they often display capacity shortfalls and / or poor adherence to human rights standards .