order no . 845 also changed the interconnection rules to allow "interconnection customers to request a level of interconnection service that is lower than their generating facility capacity. this could potentially allow some electric generators to add storage capacity to their facility ( i.e. , co - location ) , and use that storage capacity to send energy to the grid . this may provide an opportunity for renewable generators , in particular , to sell power when the renewable capacity is unavailable . in june 2019 , the senate energy and natural resources committee held a hearing to examine opportunities for the expanded deployment of grid - scale energy storage in the united states . among the key statements from witnesses were observations on the developing nature of battery storage systems . among the observations from dr. george crabtree , the director of the joint center for energy storage research and argonne national laboratory was a statement on the readiness of battery technologies for long - term grid support: the present cost of lithium - ion battery packs , about $200 / kwh , must fall by a factor of two or more to make storage economically appealing across all its uses in the grid . in addition , we must be able to purpose - design batteries for a diversity of applications in the grid spanning generation , transmission , and distribution . an example is long duration storage , needed to fill in for renewable generation when the wind does not blow or the sun is blocked by clouds for as many as seven days in a row . these long , cloudy , or calm periods are common in weather patterns in the northeast and midwest . the present generation of lithium - ion batteries can optimally discharge for about four hours , much too short to span many weather - related generation gaps . new battery materials , concepts , and technology are needed to meet the challenges of long - duration - discharge energy storage . among other observations , the witness from xcel energy , mr. ben fowke noted that xcel energy's long - term carbon strategy depends on the deployment of advanced clean technologies . he said that grid - scale storage helps with renewable integration , allowing higher renewable energy levels than would otherwise be possible . storage can also provide other system benefits , including more reliable grid operations , voltage support and frequency control . at the same time , he pointed out that storage today still has limitations . two significant challenges for storage were described in his testimony: first , storage cannot today solve the problem of the wide seasonal variation in renewable energy generation , which is the chief factor preventing the creation of fully renewable electricity system . second , while storage can initially help integrate renewables by moving energy from the time it is produced to when it is needed , the value of each additional increment of storage capacity declines as more is added to the system . finally , although storage can bring multiple services to the grid—power quality and grid support , for example—the value of all of these services are not all additive ( or "stackable" ) .