there is an enforcement gap , in other words . in response , executive branch administrations have , to varying degrees , established enforcement priorities to focus their removal resources on aliens who have committed crimes or who meet other criteria . when an immigration judge grants cancellation of removal to an unlawfully present alien , the alien becomes an lpr . some commentators have thus called cancellation of removal a mechanism for "case - by - case legalization. but the major parameters for this mechanism—the annual cap , the fact that aliens cannot apply for it affirmatively but instead only in removal proceedings , and the required hardship showing—sharply limit its availability . the lack of an affirmative channel for requesting cancellation of removal , in particular , has prompted some aliens who believe they clearly qualify for cancellation to proactively prompt dhs to initiate removal proceedings against them . the aliens do this , through their counsel , by making a special request to dhs or by filing an affirmative application for asylum , which upon denial triggers an automatic referral to removal proceedings . this strategy has pitfalls , however: it affirmatively triggers proceedings that could end in removal , and , in any event , immigration judges have discretion to dismiss the proceedings without granting cancellation upon determining that the alien filed "a meritless asylum application with the uscis for the sole purpose of seeking cancellation of removal in the immigration court. other mechanisms in the ina provide for the legalization of unlawfully present aliens who suffer particular types of harms . under current law , the registry statute remains in effect , but the 1972 cutoff date renders it mostly obsolete . registry applications surged on the heels of the 1986 update that set the date at 1972 , but applications dwindled to a trickle as the date grew more distant . in 2004 , the last year for which dhs published separate statistics on registry in its statistical yearbook , 205 aliens became lprs through registry . thus , while the concept of registry persists in u.s. law as a legalization mechanism based on long - standing presence , few ( if any ) unlawfully present aliens qualify to legalize through registry because few have been present since the 1972 cut - off date . perhaps the most significant body of legalization principles in the ina governs the extent to which unlawful presence disqualifies an alien from obtaining lpr status through family relationships or on other generally applicable grounds . with the registry statute effectively obsolete , federal law no longer provides for the legalization of unlawfully present aliens based on the duration of their presence in the country alone . but unlawfully present aliens often come within the generally applicable criteria that the law uses to select aliens for immigration to the united states . the ina allocates immigrant visas to three major categories of aliens: family - based immigrants , employment - based immigrants , and diversity - based immigrants .