in the following more than two decades , u.s . the sanctions' effects have been limited , however , and arguably largely symbolic . for example , u.s. representatives to ifis may by law support projects in tibet only if they do not encourage the migration and settlement of non - tibetans into tibet or the transfer of tibetan - owned properties to non - tibetans , due in part to the potential for such activities to erode tibetan culture and identity . previously , members of congress had written to secretary ross and other senior administration officials urging them to expand the entity list "to ensure that u.s. companies are not assisting , directly or indirectly , in creating the vast civilian surveillance or big - data predictive policing systems being used in [xinjiang]. some observers believe the decision could result in significant adverse business impacts for some of the chinese technology companies . the united states also has engaged in multilateral diplomacy to advocate for improved human rights conditions in china . for example , in march 2016 , the united states joined 11 other countries to deliver a joint statement at the united nations human rights council criticizing china's human rights record and calling on china to uphold its human rights commitments . the trump administration has curtailed u.s. participation in some multilateral human rights organizations , most prominently by announcing the u.s. withdrawal from the unhrc in june 2018 , and arguably has placed less emphasis on multilateral diplomacy . the united states reportedly did not sign a 2018 joint letter by 15 foreign ambassadors in beijing requesting a meeting with xuar party secretary chen quanguo to raise concerns over human rights abuses in xinjiang . on july 8 , 2019 , 22 nations issued a joint statement to the unhrc president and the u.n. high commissioner on human rights calling on china to "refrain from the arbitrary detention and restrictions on freedom of movement of uighurs , and other muslim and minority communities in xinjiang," and to "allow meaningful access to xinjiang for independent international observers. the statement , which was signed by numerous countries that are not current members of the unhrc , was not signed by the united states . relatedly , china also has been subject to potential nonhumanitarian and nontrade - related foreign assistance restrictions as a result of its state department designation as a "tier 3" ( worst ) country for combating human trafficking in recent years . the global magnitsky human rights accountability act , enacted as part of the national defense authorization act for fy2017 ( p.l . 114-328 , subtitle f , title xii ) , authorizes the president to impose both economic sanctions and visa denials or revocations against foreign individuals responsible for "gross violations of internationally recognized human rights. the trump administration has thus far sanctioned one chinese security official , gao yan , pursuant to the global magnitsky act . according to the treasury department , gao headed the public security bureau branch in beijing at which human rights activist cao shunli was held and denied medical treatment ; cao died in march 2014 .