2833 , 116th cong. ) would ( among other things ) ( 1 ) require federal student loan servicers to provide the cfpb with any information requested by specified cfpb officials and ( 2 ) reinstate the aforementioned mous between ed and the cfpb that ed terminated in 2017 . of a loan made" under title iv of the hea . representatives from the servicing industry deny these accusations . these allegations of servicer misconduct have drawn the attention of both federal and state policymakers . at least two congressional subcommittees have conducted hearings on student loan servicing within the past few months , and the house committee on financial services conducted another hearing on the topic on september 10 , 2019 . additionally , several state legislatures have enacted new laws to regulate student loan servicers within the past few years . a number of state attorneys general and individual borrowers have also tried to pursue civil litigation against servicers of federal student loans based on alleged violations of state statutory and common law . the states' involvement has raised questions involving the appropriate interaction between federal and state law , as well as the respective roles of the federal and state governments with respect to regulating student loan servicers . significantly , ed has taken the position that the existing regime of federal regulation of student loan servicers leaves no room for state regulation on the topic . while some courts have agreed with this position , others have concluded that current federal law permits the state to regulate servicers with whom the federal government contracts . this report analyzes the regulation of servicers of federal student loans . after providing necessary background information regarding the federal student loan programs , the report describes federal law governing student loan servicers . the report then discusses how some states and borrowers have tried to enact or enforce state laws to regulate servicers of federal student loans . then , the report analyzes the legal issues implicated by the interaction of federal and state servicing laws , including whether ( and , if so , to what extent ) federal servicing regulation preempts the states from creating or enforcing servicing laws of their own . the report concludes by identifying relevant legal considerations for congress . the federal government's roles with respect to the operation , supervision , and administration of federal student loan programs have evolved over time . around the turn of the millennium , for instance , most ( though not all ) federal student loans were issued under the now - discontinued federal family education loan program ( ffelp ) , under which private lenders extended loans to borrowers that the federal government guaranteed against the risk of loss . although the federal government set the terms and conditions of ffelp loans and subsidized the ffelp program , various entities other than the federal government also helped operate the ffelp . for example , private lenders ( or third parties with which those lenders contracted ) bore the responsibility of servicing ffelp loans . several recent developments , however , have shifted the federal government's role in the student loan system .