courthouse. courthouse "library reductions in camden , nj ; wilmington , de ; harrisburg , pa ; philadelphia ; and u.s. virgin islands saved over 18,000 square feet. the sixth circuit's library headquarters in cincinnati "relocated to space formerly used for clerk's office file storage . total savings: 15,000 square feet. courthouses for which there was no permanently assigned judge , that is , non resident courthouses , "were closed in bryson city , nc ; wilkesboro , nc ; beaufort , sc ; and parkersburg , wv . total savings: over 35,000 square feet. "in miami , 33,000 square feet and $900,000 in annual rent were saved by relocating the bankruptcy court into the c. clyde atkins u.s . courthouse . two magistrate judges were relocated , and a circuit library and jury assembly area were vacated. the administrative office of u.s. courts also noted that , in addition to space reduction , the judiciary has "undertaken significant efforts to develop alternative organizational models that may result in cost savings , including expanding shared administrative services within and among" district courts . the house appropriations committee noted in its report that it recognizes the judiciary's "cost containment efforts over the past 12 years and is pleased with the [its] savings and cost avoidance. the judiciary works closely with the u.s . marshals service ( usms ) to ensure that adequate protective policies , procedures , and practices are in place for the federal courts . as discussed in the text above , the marshals are largely responsible for protecting federal courthouses , judges , and other judicial employees . in fy2018 , after the usms assessed the level of danger in explicit threats and inappropriate communications directed at judges and other court officers , there were 531 predicated protective investigations opened "based on the presence of or potential for criminal activity. the house appropriations committee , in the report accompanying its markup of the fy2020 judiciary budget , stated that the committee considers it a priority to improve the physical security of federal judicial facilities and "to ensure the integrity of the judicial process. the judiciary continues the cost containment initiatives that it began in 2004.â specific areas of focus for containing costs include office space rental , personnel expenses , information technology , and operating costs . the senate report that accompanied the appropriations committee's markup addressed the issue of cost containment , stating that the "judicial branch is subject to the same funding constraints facing the executive and legislative branches . it is imperative that the federal judiciary devote its resources primarily to the retention of staff . further , it is also important that the judiciary contain controllable costs such as travel , construction , and other expenses. of particular focus by the judiciary is an effort to cut costs associated with office space and rental payments . the administrative office of u.s. courts ( ao ) announced in december 2018 that the federal judiciary "has succeeded dramatically in its five - year quest to reduce building space and rent costs , exceeding its original reduction goals by nearly 30 percent. additionally , ao noted that "rent has been cut more than $36 million a year," with additional savings anticipated in the future .