a broad array of challenges is associated with offshore aquaculture development and expansion . these challenges pertain to evolving production technology , uncertain economic costs and benefits , and potential environmental and social impacts . generalizations about how to address these challenges are difficult to make because of the variety of candidate species , different technologies , and potential scales of operation . while many stakeholders continue to call for federal legislation , it has been difficult to find a common vision among them for future development of an offshore aquaculture industry . the united states is the largest importer of seafood products in the world , and nearly half of domestic seafood imports are produced by aquaculture . aquaculture development and production in the united states have lagged behind other countries due to a variety of factors , such as relatively inexpensive imports , regulatory policies , user conflicts , and higher costs of production . sca operates under the committee on environment of the national science and technology council in the executive office of the president . sca is chaired by the secretary of agriculture , in consultation with the secretaries of commerce and the interior . in addition to the three main departments , sca includes nine additional departments and agencies with an interest in aquaculture . sca meets quarterly and has provided information on topics such as fish disease , aquaculture regulation , and other areas of interest . most federal aquaculture activities and programs that are specific to aquaculture are carried out by the department of the interior ( doi ) , department of commerce ( doc ) , and the department of agriculture ( usda ) . other federal agencies have roles that are indirectly related to aquaculture , such as regulatory programs that apply to a variety of aquatic or marine activities , including aquaculture . examples include usace for activities in navigable waters , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) for protection of environmental quality , and the food and drug administration for regulation of drugs used to treat fish diseases . major categories of concerns related to offshore aquaculture development include ( 1 ) the legal and regulatory environment ; ( 2 ) potential environmental harm ; ( 3 ) economic , trade , and stakeholder concerns related to development of a new industry ; and ( 4 ) business and institutional support . currently , development of offshore aquaculture appears unlikely because of regulatory , technical , and economic uncertainties . one of the main issues for congress is whether legislation can be developed that could provide the industry with greater regulatory certainty while assuring other stakeholders that environmental quality can be maintained and other potential conflicts minimized . research and development of inshore facilities have shown that offshore aquaculture is technically feasible but have not shown whether moving facilities to offshore areas would be profitable . it is likely that the investment required for commercial development of offshore aquaculture facilities will depend to some degree on greater regulatory certainty . for example , one business that was developing offshore aquaculture in puerto rico has moved its operations to panama ; according to the owner , u.s. regulations made expansion impossible .