access to , . referrals for , provision of , or coverage for , any health care item or service. for women desiring an alternative method. other proposals , including a bill introduced in the 116th congress , would direct the departments to include certain forms of contraception at the regulatory level . in general , legislation specifying that contraception is among the required preventive health services may help tip the scales on the government interest prong of the rfra analysis toward a compelling interest in providing cost - free coverage for contraception through employer - sponsored health plans . in hobby lobby , the supreme court assumed that the government had a compelling interest in "guaranteeing cost - free access" to the objected - to contraceptive methods . however , the majority noted that "there are features of aca that support" the opposing view , in particular , the inapplicability of the requirement to grandfathered plans . the departments went a step further in the 2019 final rules , suggesting that the government did not have a compelling interest in contraceptive coverage because congress left the decision of whether to include it to the agencies . codifying the requirement may respond to arguments of this nature . however , proposals to expand contraceptive coverage , standing alone , could still be susceptible to challenge by religious objectors who might still assert that laws mandating coverage—even if they include some exemptions—impose a substantial burden on their religious exercise and are not narrowly tailored under rfra . rfra applies by default to all federal statutes adopted after its enactment ( november 16 , 1993 ) "unless such law explicitly excludes such application by reference to this act. some legislation concerning contraception includes language excepting those provisions from rfra or excluding rfra claims . a pair of bills introduced in the wake of hobby lobby would have prohibited an "employer that establishes or maintains a group health plan for its employees" from "deny[ing] coverage of a specific health care item or service . where the coverage of such item or service is required under any provision of federal law or the regulations promulgated thereunder," notwithstanding rfra . lawmakers have also proposed amendments to rfra itself . similar bills introduced in both chambers this congress would provide that rfra's strict scrutiny standard does not apply to certain types of laws , including "any provision of law or its implementation that provides for or requires . laws that make rfra inapplicable to the contraceptive coverage requirement would not foreclose challenges based on the free exercise clause . however , as previously noted , free exercise claims are potentially subject to a less stringent standard of review than rfra - based objections because of the supreme court's holding in employment division v. smith that the free exercise clause typically does not require the government to provide religious - based exemptions to generally applicable laws . other approaches to contraceptive coverage have focused on accommodating the interests of religious objectors . some courts and objecting employers have suggested that congress could avoid or minimize burdens on religious objectors by funding separate contraceptive coverage or expanding access to programs that provide free contraception instead of requiring employers to provide this coverage .