, a singular concentration level ) . because of the diversity of the potential universe of these chemicals , designating all pfas as a singular category for regulatory or reporting purposes would also present challenges in implementation to identify which chemicals would be subject to applicable requirements . studies of the potential human health and environmental effects of pfas have focused on pfoa , pfos , and certain other longer chain perfluoroalkyls because of their more predominant manufacture and use . fewer studies have examined shorter chain perfluoroalkyls or polyfluoroalkyls . toxicity and potential health effects may also vary . whereas persistence would affect how long the properties of the chemical remain intact , the potential risks associated with exposure would depend on the toxicity of the specific chemical , the exposure pathway and other exposure factors . given this variability , evaluating the potential risks of all pfas as a singular category presents scientific ( and regulatory ) challenges . similarly , regulating all pfas as a singular category would present challenges in developing a singular risk - based standard ( i.e. although scientific understanding of the potential risks of these chemicals has been evolving , uncertainties remain about health effects that may be associated with exposures to various pfas . federal actions to address potential risks from pfas have primarily been taken under the authorities of tsca , sdwa , and cercla . most of these actions have focused on pfos and pfoa , because of predominant past uses , prevalence in the environment stemming from these uses , and the greater availability of scientific research on potential health effects than for other pfas . congress has also authorized specific federal actions in separate legislation . see the section on " relevant legislation enacted in the 115th congress " for a list of these laws . epa has taken actions under tsca over the past few decades to gather and assess existing information on the risks of pfos , pfoa , and certain other pfas . based on the findings , tsca authorizes epa to require manufacturers to submit more information if needed to further evaluate potential risks , and the agency has done so . epa has also required , or worked with , manufacturers to develop new information when existing information on a substance is insufficient to evaluate the risks . if epa determines that the risks would meet the statutory threshold of "unreasonable" under tsca , tsca authorizes epa to establish various regulatory controls if no other statute addresses the risks . epa has not rendered a finding of unreasonable risk for any pfas to date . following a series of voluntary industry phase - outs in the united states for the manufacture of pfos , pfoa , and other related substances , epa used tsca authority to promulgate multiple significant new use rules ( snurs ) that require manufacturers to notify the agency prior to reintroducing these substances into commerce . tsca also requires manufacturers to notify epa of the intent to produce any new pfas . when information on potential risks is insufficient , epa has issued orders that restrict the manufacture , processing , distribution , use , disposal or any combination of these activities pending the development of new information on risks .