interoperability . interoperability ( the ability to make payments across different systems ) is more difficult to achieve with competing firms , but the fed argues that if no single rtp system is ubiquitous , the ability of any two given institutions to exchange funds is improved if competing systems increase ubiquity . the ability to make payments across ach networks is an example of how interoperability has currently been achieved between competing fed and clearing house systems . however , the technology involved in rtp may make interoperability more difficult . in its proposal , the fed did not commit to ensure interoperability , but stated that it was a desirable goal . equity . the clearing house has attempted to assuage equity concerns by pledging access to its system on equal terms to all banks , regardless of size , but these terms could change , and small banks have raised concerns that they may since the system is owned by large banks . the clearing house has pointed to the fed's volume discounts for existing payment systems as evidence that fednow may not be equitable , however . security . security across competing systems could be difficult to coordinate , but systems might also attempt to compete by providing better security features . the fed argues that competing rtp systems reduces operational and systemic risks because a system with only one provider has a "single point of failure. repeated data breaches at large financial institutions also point to the difficulty of monitoring cybersecurity in private systems , although government has also proven to be vulnerable to data breaches as well . the fed states that "participating banks would continue to serve as a primary line of defense against fraudulent transactions , as they do today ... " under fednow . the fed , and by extension the taxpayer , is exposed to default risk because of its provision of intraday and overnight credit ( some of which is uncollateralized ) when banks use its payment and settlement systems . currently , when banks use fed payment and settlement systems , the time lag between payment and settlement can cause mismatches in the amounts due and the amounts available in their accounts . as a result , the fed extends intraday credit for a fee ( if uncollateralized ) to avoid settlement failures . daily overdrafts have been relatively low in recent years , but peaked at $186 billion during the 2007-2009 financial crisis . introducing real - time payments with deferred settlement could increase the use of intraday credit . the fed does not state in its final rule whether it expects the level of intraday credit to be affected under fednow , although it notes that it might need to extend the availability of intraday credit to off - hours . note that the fed provides this credit to reduce systemic risk to the banking system , so eliminating intraday credit has the potential to reduce financial stability . rtps offered by the private sector could fit into the existing regulatory framework . the fed already regulates and supervises private payment systems for risk management and transparency , but not pricing .