the provision in p.l . 115-141 was added with the intent to ensure that the trump administration's fta did not excessively delay providing the transit grants to applicants . this provision avoids a situation in which fta capital investment grants to transit agencies would be reduced due to a reduction in the appropriated level resulting from the application of irs provision: section 9503 ( e ) ( 4 ) . similar language is in the house - passed commerce , justice , science , agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , interior , environment , military construction , veterans affairs , transportation , and housing and urban development appropriations act , 2020 ( h.r . this section allows amounts made available in the housing for the elderly account to be apportioned at a rate necessary to allow the department of housing and urban development to maintain rental assistance contracts that are coming up for renewal or require additional funding in order to continue to subsidize the rents of low - income elderly residents of section 202 properties . section 108 provides daily spending rate flexibility to agencies by waiving time limitations . the report accompanying h.r . 116-62 ) provides the following explanation of congressional intent in the context of that legislative proposal with regard to the sns and associated policy issues: "the committee expects that cdc will continue its significant role in providing scientific expertise in decision - making related to procurement of countermeasures , and maintaining strong relationships with state and local public health departments to facilitate efficient deployment of countermeasures in public health emergencies. section 138 authorizes the transfer to the cdc of up to $20 million for ebola preparedness and response activities from the infectious disease rapid response reserve fund . this fund was established by section 231 of the department of defense and labor , health and human services , and education appropriations act , 2019 and continuing appropriations act , 2019 ( p.l . this fund was created in p.l . 115-232 , which authorized $20 million for fy2019-fy2023 . prior to this , cfius was not provided a separate appropriation within the department of the treasury . this section grants congressional approval for dc officials to expend locally raised funds for purposes made available under p.l . 116-6 ( consolidated appropriations act , 2019 ) at a rate set forth in the fiscal year 2020 local budget act of 2019 ( d.c. act 23-78 ) . dc political leaders have consistently expressed concern that passage of the appropriations act for the district ( in which congress approves the city's budget ) has too often been delayed until well after the start of the district's fiscal year , hindering their ability to manage the district's financial affairs and negatively affecting the delivery of public services . this section provides an additional $48 million to the office of personnel management's ( opm ) salaries and expenses account for administrative expenses for 2019 . of this amount , $29,760,000 is to be transferred from trust funds .