calendar no . 3162 ( mcmorris rodgers ) , introduced june 6 , 2019 , as the broadband data improvement act of 2019 , would require the fcc to establish a reporting requirement under which each provider submits accurate and granular information regarding the geographic availability of broadband internet access and to establish a framework for an ongoing challenge process through which a provider or a member of the public may submit information challenging the accuracy of the information reflected on the national broadband map . referred to the committee on energy and commerce . 4024 ( finkenauer ) , introduced on july 25 , 2019 , as the broadband transparency and accountability act of 2019 , would direct the fcc to require an entity to report data that reflects the average speed and characteristics of broadband service . it would also require the fcc to establish a process to use data that is reported by consumers , businesses , and state and local governments to verify the data used in the broadband map . referred to the committee on energy and commerce . 4128 ( lujã¡n ) , introduced on july 30 , 2019 , as the map improvement act of 2019 , would direct the fcc to establish a standardized methodology for collecting and mapping accurate fixed broadband internet service and mobile broadband internet service coverage data . it would also establish an office of broadband data collection and mapping within the fcc . referred to the committee on energy and commerce . 4227 ( mceachin ) , introduced on september 6 , 2019 , as the mapping accuracy promotes services act , would prohibit the submission to the federal communications commission of broadband internet access service coverage information or data for the purposes of compiling an inaccurate broadband coverage map . referred to the house committee on energy and commerce . 4229 ( loebsack ) , introduced on september 6 , 2019 , as the broadband deployment accuracy and technological availability act , would require the fcc to issue rules relating to the collection of data with respect to the availability of broadband services . referred to the house committee on energy and commerce . s. 842 ( klobuchar ) , introduced on march 14 , 2019 , as the improving broadband mapping act of 2019 , would require the fcc to establish a process to use coverage data reported by consumers and state , local , and tribal government entities to verify coverage data reported by wireless carriers . additionally , it would direct the fcc to consider other measures , including , but not limited to , an evidence - based challenge process , to help in verifying coverage data reported by providers of both fixed and mobile broadband services . referred to the committee on commerce , science , and transportation . s. 1485 ( manchin ) , introduced on may 15 , 2019 , as the map improvement act of 2019 , would require the fcc , in coordination with ntia , to establish a standardized methodology for collecting and mapping accurate fixed and mobile broadband coverage data .