members of the selected reserve ( i.e. , drilling reservists ) and their families qualify for trs if the following criteria are met: the reservist is not on active duty orders ; the reservist or their family members are not covered under the transitional assistance management program ; and the reservist or their family members are not eligible for the federal employee health benefits ( fehb ) program . prior to 2006 , trs availability was limited to members of the selected reserve ( including family members ) after serving on continuous active duty in support of a contingency operation for 90 or more days and signing an agreement to continue serving in the selected reserve for one or more years . dod does not subsidize the program costs for trr . dod annually updates the premiums for each program on an "appropriate actuarial basis. monthly trs and trr premiums for calendar years 2019 and 2020 are listed in table 1 . for example , a reservist or qualified retired reservist who is also a civil service or u.s . postal service ( usps ) employee , annuitant , or family member that is eligible for the fehb program is barred from enrolling in trs or trr . this restriction does not apply to other tricare programs for which reservists or retired reservists may also be eligible under other criteria ( eg , tricare prime , tricare select , tricare for life , tricare dental program , or the transition assistance management program ) . in 2019 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated approximately 110,000 members of the selected reserve are prohibited from enrolling in trs because they are eligible for fehb . this represents approximately 13.7% of the total selected reserve force . cbo also estimated that about "one third would enroll in trs if given the opportunity. neither dod nor cbo has published any similar estimates for trr . the congressional record , the committee and conference reports accompanying the enacting and amending legislation for trs and trr , do not articulate why the prohibitions are in place . nevertheless , observers have speculated that the prohibition may be related to potential increases in mandatory or discretionary costs associated with certain risk - pool adjustments to fehb and expansion of the tricare program . as the house of representatives considered the fy2007 ndaa , as reported by the house armed services committee , the office of management and budget issued a statement of administration policy ( sap ) that expressed cost concerns with the proposal to expand to trs . the sap noted: … the administration strongly opposes section 709 , which expands tricare eligibility to all selected reserve members and their families and dramatically worsens the fiscal situation by increasing the government subsidy for non - mobilized reservists and their families at an estimated cost of $400 million in fy 2007 and $3.6 billion from fy 2007 through fy 2011 . by fy 2011 , it is estimated that the annual cost for this expanded benefit will reach $1.2 billion . it is critical for congress to eliminate these unfunded expansions and work with the administration to place the system on a sound fiscal foundation .