however , there are some constraints on dhs's detention power . dhs generally has substantial authority to detain aliens who are subject to removal . the following sections provide more discussion of these developing issues . but the governing laws on detention may differ depending on the circumstances , including ( 1 ) whether the alien is seeking initial admission into the united states or had been lawfully admitted into the country ; ( 2 ) the type of removal proceedings in which the alien is placed ; ( 3 ) whether the alien has committed specified criminal or terrorist - related activity ; ( 4 ) whether the alien is a uac or falls within some other category subject to special rules for detention ; and ( 5 ) whether the alien is being held for formal removal proceedings or has been ordered removed and is awaiting effectuation of the removal order . typically , dhs may detain aliens who are placed in formal removal proceedings , but may release the alien on bond , on his or her own recognizance , or under an order of supervision pending the outcome of those proceedings . in some cases , such as those involving aliens who have committed specified crimes , or aliens arriving in the united states who are placed in expedited removal proceedings , detention is mandatory and the alien may not be released from custody except in limited circumstances . furthermore , dhs generally must detain aliens who have received final orders of removal for up to 90 days while their removal is effectuated , and the agency retains the discretion to detain certain classes of aliens after that 90-day period has lapsed . the supreme court has determined that the indefinite detention of aliens after formal removal proceedings would raise "serious constitutional concerns," at least for those who were lawfully admitted into the united states and became subject to removal . and while the court has recognized that governing statutes confer broad authority to dhs to detain aliens without bond pending their removal proceedings , some lower courts have held that due process requires the government to provide detained aliens with bond hearings after prolonged periods of detention and to prove that any continued detention is justified . furthermore , dhs's ability to detain family units pending their proceedings remains constrained by the flores settlement , which limits the length of detention of alien minors . in addition , while detention litigation has largely centered on the duration of detention , detained aliens have also sometimes brought challenges to the conditions of their confinement . and more recently , some courts have imposed restrictions on dhs's ability to take custody of aliens in state or local law enforcement custody through immigration detainers . as courts continue to grapple over the scope of dhs's detention power , congress may consider legislative proposals that would either limit or expand that authority . for instance , some recent bills would end mandatory detention entirely , afford all aliens the opportunity to be released on bond pending removal proceedings , and require dhs to prove that any continued detention is warranted .