appendix a . acronyms appendix b. mhs genesis functional capability requirements appendix c. stages of electronic medical record adoption and utilization appendix d. iot&e summary results appendix e. methodology for crs focus groups on mhs genesis background on july 8-13 , 2018 , analysts from the congressional research service ( crs ) participated in a congressional staff delegation visit to various dod facilities in the puget sound area of washington state . dod facilities visited were madigan army medical center , naval hospital bremerton , and the puyallup community medical home . the purpose of the visit was to: review milestones , achievements , and challenges associated with the implementation of mhs genesis ; and understand implementation and continuous improvement processes utilized at initial operational capability sites . methodology at each site , crs conducted numerous focus groups comprised of various mtf staff members . each focus group was comprised of 5–15 staff members selected by the mtf commander or his / her designee . madigan army medical center focus group #1: patient administration division , managed care and scheduling , and patient satisfaction department representatives focus group #2: health care providers ( eg , physicians , dentists , psychologists , physicians assistants ) focus group #3: nurses naval hospital bremerton focus group #1: nurses focus group #2: health care providers ( eg , physicians , dentists , psychologists , physicians assistants ) focus group #3: enlisted personnel focus group #4: patient administration , referral management , and patient relations representatives puyallup community medical home focus group #1: health care providers , nurses , health care administrators , enlisted personnel prior to each site visit , crs provided each mtf with questions for discussion during each focus group . crs documented the themes and responses to each of the following questions: what challenges have you experienced with implementing mhs genesis ? how have you locally mitigated these issues ? are the mitigation processes in place working ? how have you locally mitigated these issues ? are the mitigation processes in place working ? senate appropriations committee . senate armed services committee . senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation . senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs . given the complexity , size , and timeline of dod's ehr modernization effort , as well as parallel efforts by the uscg and va , a coordinated oversight strategy may be necessary . such a strategy could allow congress to conduct a wide range of oversight activities without creating redundancies for committee staff and executive branch officials and could facilitate information - sharing among congressional stakeholders . since the initial deployment of mhs genesis , there have been no congressional oversight hearings held solely on dod's ehr modernization effort . on june 20 , 2018 , the house committee on veterans' affairs established the subcommittee on technology modernization . the role of the new subcommittee is to "focus on conducting oversight of the ehr modernization program and other major technology projects at the department of veterans affairs. both dod and va officials testified before the subcommittee at its june 2019 oversight hearing .