nearly all federal land is open and available to the public for recreation . the authors state that this limitation provides a conservative estimate . although research suggests that many visits to federal recreation sites do indeed originate from nearby , the nationwide estimates discussed above ( see " the national outdoor recreation economy " ) indicate that a large proportion of economic activity derives from travel - related expenses . if the travel - related portion of economic activity related to federal sites is not being captured in these results because that activity occurs more than 50 miles from the federal recreation site , these studies may undercount the true value . similarly , results of national studies indicate that activities requiring major purchases ( eg , vehicles ) account for a large proportion of the outdoor recreation economy . if visitors do not report such expenditures , it also may result in undercounting . the agencies used different methods to measure visitation and economic activity ; thus , estimates may be only generally comparable . federal lands comprise approximately 640 million acres in the united states , about 28% of the total land area . approximately 92% ( 573 million acres ) of federal lands are located in 11 western states and alaska , with over one - third ( 224 million acres ) of all federal land in alaska alone . the forest service ( fs ) and the bureau of land management ( blm ) manage the majority of federal land . although there is considerable overlap in the recreation opportunities across agencies , some agencies could be considered to have dominant niches . fs and blm offer a range of opportunities , from camping , picnicking , and birdwatching in developed settings to activities in undeveloped backcountry , motorized recreation , and others . opportunities on fish and wildlife service land emphasize wildlife , fish , and birds . the national park service ( nps ) is associated with "iconic natural and cultural resources. opportunities on land owned by the bureau of reclamation , national oceanic and atmospheric administration , and u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) tend to center on water and underwater resources . although some agencies' resources are used mostly by locals , all agencies have resources with regional , national , or international markets . table 3 presents information from various sources on recreation visits to federal lands from fy2012 to fy2017 . in general , these statistics are not comparable to the nsre estimates given above due to differences in measurement . the statistics indicate that , in general over this period for agencies with complete data , fs and nps had the most visits . these statistics underscore that size and location are imperfect predictors of recreation resource use ; usace , for example , has higher visitation than several agencies that manage more federal land area . these differences may be due to proximity to population centers , the types of resources available on different lands , and other factors . congress has indicated general approval of the orsa and directed bea to develop regional statistics in future years ; bea included state - level prototype statistics in the 2019 release .