under the esa , two federal agencies—the u.s . fish and wildlife service ( fws ) within the department of the interior and the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) within the department of commerce ( collectively , the services ) —are primarily responsible for implementing the esa . similar to cases regarding foreseeability and scientific uncertainty , the court appeared to defer to fws's reasoned consideration of climate change effects based on evidence in the record . if fws or nmfs bases its listing decision on climate change effects , fws or nmfs must also determine whether federal actions that contribute to climate change jeopardize the species under esa section 7 or whether an entity that may contribute to climate change is "taking" the species in violation of esa section 9 . the court rejected the lower court's finding that the esa required fws to limit the critical habitat designation to specific areas that are currently used by polar bears , explaining that "[n]o such limitation to existing use appears in the esa , and such a narrow construction of critical habitat runs directly counter to the act's conservation purposes . to trigger protections and prohibitions under the esa , the services must first list a species as threatened or endangered . and it requires use of the best available technology , not perfection. the court concluded that fws properly relied on climate science and sea ice data in designating habitat that has the elements required to sustain and preserve the polar bear population . the services may tailor the section 9 "take" prohibitions for species listed as threatened under the esa by using section 4 ( d ) rules . this section reviews how the services address climate change effects when protecting listed species under esa sections 4 ( d ) , 7 , and 9 . when the esa was enacted in 1973 , congress did not consider climate change as a significant factor in conserving endangered species . although the services and the courts have acknowledged that actions taken under the esa must consider climate change effects on species and their habitats , the debate continues on whether the esa can adequately protect and conserve species threatened by climate change effects . stakeholders disagree on what role the esa should play in addressing climate change , with some arguing that the esa is not equipped to mitigate climate change effects . other stakeholders believe that the services can and should wield the esa to protect species threatened by climate change and to curb activities contributing to climate change . generally , legal scholars agree that litigation has influenced how the services factor climate change effects into esa decisions . legal challenges have helped to ensure that the services consider projected climate change effects on species in their esa decisions . in light of the judicial deference afforded to the services , the courts have not expanded the esa as a tool to protect listed species by regulating activities that contribute to climate change . under esa section 4 , the services list a species as endangered or threatened based on assessments of the risk of their extinction .