appendix a . the scrc is not currently active . the scrc was created to address economic distress in areas of virginia , north carolina , south carolina , georgia , alabama , mississippi , and florida ( figure 6 ) not served by the arc or the dra ( table 13 ) . the southwest border regional commission ( sbrc ) was created with the enactment of the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , or the 2008 farm bill ( p.l . 110-234 ) , which also created the nbrc and the scrc . all three commissions share common statutory authorizing language modeled after the arc . the sbrc was created to address economic distress in the southern border regions of arizona , california , new mexico , and texas ( figure 7 ; table 1 5 ) . the sbrc has not received an annual appropriation since it was created and is not currently active . given their geographic reach , broad activities , and integrated intergovernmental structures , the federal regional commissions and authorities are a significant element of federal economic development efforts . at the same time , as organizations that are largely governed by the respective state - based commissioners , the federal regional commissions and authorities are not typical federal agencies but federally - chartered entities that integrate federal funding and direction with state and local economic development priorities . this structure provides congress with a flexible platform for economic development efforts . the intergovernmental structure allows for strategic - level economic development initiatives to be launched at the federal level and implemented across multi - state jurisdictions with extensive state and local input , and more adaptable to regional needs . the federal regional commissions and authorities reflect an emphasis by the federal government on place - based economic development strategies sensitive to regional and local contexts . however , the geographic specificity and varying functionality of the statutorily authorized federal regional commissions and authorities , both active and inactive , potentially raise questions about the efficacy and equity of federal economic development policies . more in - depth analysis of these and other such issues related to the federal regional authorities and commissions , and their role as instruments for federal economic development efforts , is reserved for possible future companion products to this report . the ngpra's funding authorization lapsed at the end of fy2018 ; it was not reauthorized . the southeast crescent regional commission ( scrc ) was created by the 2008 farm bill , which also created the nbrc and the southwest border regional commission . all three commissions share common authorizing language modeled after the arc .