it is organized by title and part of the act . annual appropriations for esea programs are provided through the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( l - hhs - ed ) appropriations act , and are shown in this report based on the most recent data available from the u.s. department of education , budget service for fy2017 through fy2019 . table 2 provides esea appropriations for fy2016 and fy2017 to depict the transition from the esea as amended by the nclb to the esea as amended by the essa . table 3 provides authorizations of appropriations included in the esea as amended by the essa . the appendix provides a list of selected acronyms used in the report . the introductory text for esea title i includes the purpose of title i and authorizations of appropriations for fy2017 through fy2020 for each part of the title . the purpose of title i is "to provide all children significant opportunity to receive a fair , equitable , and high - quality education , and to close educational achievement gaps. the introductory text prior to title i - a also requires states to reserve funds provided under title i - a for school improvement activities and allows them to reserve title i - a funds for direct students services . as such , while these reservations of funds appear before title i - a in the esea , they are examined following the title i - a discussion to provide greater context . the introductory text prior to title i - a also provides authority for states to reserve funds for state administration for title i - a , title i - c , and title i - d . title ii includes programs centered on teachers , school leaders ( eg , principals ) , literacy , and american history and civics education . programs focused on teachers and school leaders support activities and initiatives such as professional development , staff recruitment and retention , performance - based compensation systems , and the establishment of a statewide science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) master teacher corps . other title ii programs focus on literacy education , providing grants to support literacy efforts from birth through grade 12 and supporting school library programs , early literacy services , and the provision of high - quality books to children and adolescents . it should be noted that ed considers all of the funds provided in an appropriations act for a given fiscal year , including advance appropriations provided for the following fiscal year , to be appropriations for the given fiscal year . for example , for the purposes of appropriations , ed considers all of the funds provided in the fy2019 appropriations act , including advance appropriations provided in fy2020 , to be fy2019 appropriations . table 2 provides esea appropriations for fy2016 and fy2017 to depict the transition from the esea as amended by the nclb to the esea as amended by the essa . programs authorized under the esea as amended by either the nclb or the essa are included .