amtrak's expenses exceed its revenues each year . in fy2018 , amtrak's revenues totaled $3.2 billion , against expenses of $4.1 billion , for a net loss of $868 million . that loss was covered by federal grants made to amtrak by dot ( see the discussion of funding issues later in this report ) . the operating grant could be thought of as relating to amtrak's annual cash loss , and the capital grant as relating to the depreciation of amtrak's assets , as well as an amount for amtrak debt repayments . congress changed the structure of federal grants to amtrak in title xi of the fast act . starting in fy2017 , amtrak's appropriation has been divided between funding for the operationally self - sufficient nec , which has large capital needs , and the national network , which has modest capital needs ( as the tracks are almost entirely owned and maintained by freight railroads ) but runs an operating deficit of several hundred million dollars . the change was intended to increase transparency of the costs of amtrak's two major lines of business and eliminate cross - subsidization between them ; operating profits from the nec and state access payments for use of the nec will be reinvested in that corridor , and passenger revenue , state payments , and federal grants for the national network will be used for that account . amtrak's reliance on annual appropriations has made it difficult to fund long - term capital projects . dot's inspector general has noted that the lack of long - term funding "has significantly affected amtrak's ability to maintain safe and reliable infrastructure and equipment , and increased its capital program's annual cost. amtrak's fy2020 budget request suggests a multiyear appropriation to provide some additional stability without fundamentally altering the mechanism by which amtrak receives its federal funding . most federal funding for highway and transit programs is provided by a special form of budget authority , contract authority , which allows dot to obligate funds from the highway trust fund in advance of an appropriation . this permits dot to commit to support highway projects that may take several years to complete . there have been proposals to create a similar trust fund for amtrak , in order to provide a greater level of financial stability and permit such long - term funding of capital projects . such efforts have faced objections from some members of congress opposed to amtrak receiving federal funding . there is also a practical challenge to identifying a revenue source for an amtrak trust fund . the highway trust fund , which receives revenue from taxes on motor fuels and heavy trucks , is not authorized to spend money on intercity rail services ; in any event , the revenues flowing into the fund are far below the level required to support the levels of federal highway and transit spending authorized by congress , necessitating several transfers of money from the general fund since 2008 . if a passenger rail trust fund were to be funded solely from a tax on passengers , the cost of amtrak tickets could rise by several dollars per ticket at current ridership levels , potentially contravening the purpose of the fund by reducing ridership .