appendix a . qualifying banks by cblr and state appendix b . methodology to produce the statistics and estimates presented in this report , crs used ( 1 ) information from the bank regulator notice of proposed rulemaking: regulatory capital rule: capital simplification for qualifying community banking organizations , published in the federal register on february 8 , 2019 ; and ( 2 ) data from consolidated reports on condition and income as of june 30 , 2019 , which was downloaded from the federal financial institution examination council bulk data download website on september 14 , 2019 . in the proposed rule notice , bank regulators provided this proposed format for reporting the cblr , which indicates which measures the regulators were intending to use for qualifying criteria and to calculate the cblr: the estimates in this report may differ from the actual numbers due to two challenges with data availability . first , exactly how deferred tax assets are counted in the proposals and what deductions from those figures would be permitted differ from the deferred tax asset values banks entered at call report schedule rc - r , part i , line 8 . however , crs was unable to locate the exact data identified in the proposal , and so used the deferred tax asset value available in the call report as a proxy . crs judged that using this proxy was unlikely to cause the estimated bank counts and statistics presented in this report to differ substantively from the actual figures , because the vast majority of qualifying banks reported little or no deferred tax assets . nevertheless , the difference could cause a bank near the 25% dta - to - assets qualifying threshold to be erroneously classified as qualifying or nonqualifying . in addition , using this proxy could cause the cblrs estimated for this report to be slightly different from certain banks' actual cblrs . second , while crs was able to locate values in the call report data for a number of off - balance - sheet exposures identified in the proposal , it was not able to locate others . the exposures included in the proposal are the unused portions of commitments ( except for unconditionally cancellable commitments ) ; self - liquidating , trade - related contingent items that arise from the movement of goods , transaction - related contingent items ( i.e. , performance bond , bid bonds and warranties ) ; sold credit protection in the form of guarantees and credit derivatives ; credit enhancing representations and guarantees ; off - balance sheet securitization exposures ; letters of credit ; forward agreements that are not derivatives contracts ; and securities lending and borrowing transactions .