such separation regimes are not without precedent . historically , congress and federal regulators have imposed a variety of structural prohibitions limiting the lines of business in which certain categories of firms—including railroads , banks , television networks , and telecommunications companies—can engage . commentators have justified these separation regimes on the grounds that they eliminate conflicts of interest that lead companies in key infrastructure - like sectors to discriminate against their vertical rivals . while the nondiscrimination requirements discussed above represent one means of addressing this concern , categorical separation rules are an alternative to such requirements that may prove easier to administer . enhanced scrutiny of product design decisions . finally , some observers have argued that courts should be less deferential toward defendants' justifications of allegedly exclusionary product designs , arguing that product - design decisions are often "key elements" of large technology companies' business strategies . congress could accordingly consider legislation to clarify the appropriate standards for evaluating exclusionary - design claims , perhaps by making clear that such claims are subject to full rule - of - reason scrutiny rather than the more permissive tests adopted by certain lower federal courts . as discussed , academic commentators have argued that certain digital markets possess structural characteristics that advantage large incumbent firms . in some cases , dominant firms in these markets can enhance such entry barriers by making it difficult for consumers to "multi - home" or use complementary products offered by competitors , and courts evaluating challenges to these product - design choices hesitate to hold companies liable under existing antitrust doctrine . moreover , vertically integrated technology monopolists do not face general nondiscrimination rules requiring them to deal evenhandedly with rivals in adjacent markets . some analysts have accordingly argued that large technology platforms require sector - specific regulations to address these competition concerns . these proposed regulations include "data mobility" rules giving consumers greater ability to control their data and move it to competing platforms , "interoperability" standards requiring companies to minimize technical impediments to the use of complementary products , and nondiscrimination requirements prohibiting vertically integrated technology monopolists from discriminating against rivals who use their platforms . congress could legislate such requirements , direct an existing federal agency to develop them through rulemaking , or create a new agency tasked with regulating the technology industry . a number of lawmakers and academics have also argued that the infrastructure - like features of certain digital services justify separation regimes prohibiting monopolists that provide those services from entering adjacent markets . in march 2019 , senator elizabeth warren proposed one type of separation regime for dominant technology companies , arguing that large "platform utilities"—including "online marketplaces," "exchanges," and "platforms for connecting third parties"—should be prohibited from owing companies that participate on their platforms . the chairman of the house antitrust subcommittee has also expressed support for similar separation requirements . the subsections below discuss each category of potential legislation in turn . a number of commentators have proposed that congress adopt certain changes to existing antitrust doctrine to promote competition in technology markets . these proposals include: changes to predatory - pricing doctrine .