the scope of the investigation can vary . in some instances , an entirely independent investigation may be initiated by the house . in other cases , an impeachment investigation might rely on records delivered by outside entities , such as those delivered by the judicial conference or an independent counsel . following this investigation , the full house may vote on the relevant impeachment articles . if articles of impeachment are approved , the house chooses managers to present the matter to the senate . the chairman of the house managers then presents the articles of impeachment to the senate and requests that the body order the appearance of the accused . the house managers typically act as prosecutors in the senate trial . the house has impeached nineteen individuals: fifteen federal judges , one senator , one cabinet member , and two presidents . the consensus reflected in these proceedings is that impeachment may serve as a means to address misconduct that does not necessarily give rise to criminal sanction . according to congressional sources , the types of conduct that constitute grounds for impeachment in the house appear to fall into three general categories: ( 1 ) improperly exceeding or abusing the powers of the office ; ( 2 ) behavior incompatible with the function and purpose of the office ; and ( 3 ) misusing the office for an improper purpose or for personal gain . consistent with scholarship on the scope of impeachable offenses , congressional materials have cautioned that the grounds for impeachment "do not all fit neatly and logically into categories" because the remedy of impeachment is intended to "reach a broad variety of conduct by officers that is both serious and incompatible with the duties of the office. while successful impeachments and convictions of federal officials represent some clear guideposts for what constitutes impeachable conduct , impeachment processes that do not result in a final vote for impeachment and removal also may influence the understanding of congress , executive and judicial branch officials , and the public over what constitutes an impeachable offense . a prominent example involves the first noteworthy attempt at a presidential impeachment , aimed at john tyler in 1842 . at the time , the presidential practice had generally been to reserve vetoes for constitutional , rather than policy , disagreements with congress . following president tyler's veto of a tariff bill on policy grounds , the house endorsed a select committee report condemning president tyler and suggesting that he might be an appropriate subject for impeachment proceedings . while no impeachment vote was taken by the house , the nixon experience nevertheless established what some would call the quintessential case for impeachment—a serious abuse of the office of the presidency that undermined the office's integrity . that said , one must be cautious in extrapolating wide - ranging lessons from the lack of impeachment proceedings in the house . the possibility apparently ended when the whigs , who had led the movement to impeach , lost their house majority in the midterm elections . in the years following the aborted effort to impeach president tyler , presidents have routinely used their veto power for policy reasons .