title xi of p.l . 116-94 permanently extends section 119 of the copyright act , but limits the scope of "unserved households" eligible to receive the distant signals to two categories of households . the first category includes operators of recreational vehicles and commercial trucks who have complied with certain documentation requirements . the second category , added by the act , includes households in "short markets" in the definition of "unserved household. the act defines a short market as a local market in which programming of one or more of the four most widely viewed television networks nationwide is not offered on either the primary stream or multicast stream transmitted by any network station in that market , or is temporarily or permanently unavailable as a result of an act of god or other force majeure event beyond the control of the carrier . the act also amends the copyright act to condition the eligibility of satellite operators to retransmit distant signals via a compulsory copyright license to unserved households on whether or not they retransmit local television signals in all 210 dmas . after may 31 , 2020 , satellite subscribers who fall within the two categories of unserved households described above are no longer eligible to receive distant signals pursuant to the compulsory copyright license unless their satellite operator provides local - into - local service . likewise , the other four categories of households described in " expiring provision of copyright act " are no longer able to receive distant signals pursuant to the compulsory license after may 31 , 2020 , or until their satellite operator provides local service in all 210 markets , whichever is earlier . the act also specifies that satellite operators will not lose access to the distant compulsory license if their failure to deliver local signals in all 210 markets is due to a retransmission consent impasse . as described in " must carry ; carry one , carry all ," dish currently does so , but directv does not . title x of the act permanently extends portions of the communications act set to expire at the end of 2019 , while amending others . the following provisions that had been set to expire at the end of 2019 are now permanent: a satellite operator may retransmit broadcast station signals outside of the station's local markets without retransmission consent from those stations , if the operator is retransmitting the signals pursuant to section 119 of the copyright act . broadcast stations may not enter into exclusive contracts with mvpds . broadcast stations and mvpds must negotiate retransmission consent in "good faith. in the event any party accuses another of failing to negotiate in good faith , the accusing party may petition the fcc to mediate . joint retransmission consent negotiations by separately owned broadcast stations within the same market constitutes failure to negotiate in good faith . in addition , title x amended the communications act to state that a qualified "mvpd buying group" representing smaller cable , telco , and / or satellite operators may negotiate retransmission consent with large broadcast station group owners without violating the good faith requirement . the buying group may represent only cable , telco , or satellite operators with 500,000 or fewer subscribers nationally .