successive u.s . administrations have viewed u.s. leadership of nato as a cornerstone of u.s. national security strategy that brings benefits ranging from peace and stability in europe to the political and military support of 28 allies , including many of the world's most advanced militaries . the london meeting came at a tense time for nato , however . some european allies question the trump administration's commitment to nato and have criticized the administration for a perceived unilateral approach to foreign policy issues , including the october 2019 drawdown of u.s. forces from syria . many allies also have criticized fellow nato member turkey for its military operations in syria and its acquisition of a russian - made air defense system . nato secretary general jens stoltenberg acknowledges ongoing tensions within the alliance but stresses that continued transatlantic cooperation has enabled nato to be more active today than it has been in decades . trump administration officials maintain that the united states remains committed to nato , and in london , president trump stressed that nato "has a great purpose. u.s. officials also highlight the administration's successful efforts in 2017 and 2018 to substantially increase funding for the u.s. force presence in europe and note that secretary general stoltenberg has credited president trump with playing a role in securing defense spending increases across the alliance in recent years . critics of the trump administration's nato policy maintain that renewed russian aggression has been a key factor behind such increases . at the london meeting , nato leaders stressed their commitment to advancing existing readiness and deterrence initiatives and to confronting emerging security challenges , including by declaring space as an operational domain for nato . the allies also reinforced their commitment to nato's ongoing mission in afghanistan and other counterterrorism efforts and discussed the implications for nato of china's growing investment in , and engagement with , europe . deliberations in london drew attention to heightened tension and divergent views within the alliance on a range of issues , including u.s. policy toward nato and europe , turkey's standing as a member of the alliance , eu security and defense policy , and nato's relations with russia . disagreement within the alliance on whether and how to respond to these and other issues has prompted some , including french president emmanuel macron , to question nato's strategic direction and future . many officials and analysts on both sides of the atlantic also have suggested that president trump's vocal criticism of nato and the lack of transatlantic coordination on policies related to syria and afghanistan have seriously undermined the alliance . secretary general stoltenberg and others maintain that disagreement among allies is not a new phenomenon and stress that "europe and north american are doing more together in nato today than we have for decades. in an apparent effort to address diverging views within nato , in london , the allies agreed to initiate a "forward - looking reflection process … to further strengthen nato's political dimension including consultation. on march 31 , 2020 , secretary general stoltenberg announced the appointment of a group of 10 experts tasked with recommending ways to "reinforce alliance unity , increase political consultation and coordination between allies , and strengthen nato's political role .