congress did not vote on either bill . since 2007 , the fcc has repeatedly revisited the authority of states and lfas to franchise and regulate video service providers . this process culminated in two orders issued in 2019 . while states and municipalities may regulate both video and voice services of telcos , they may only regulate video services of cable operators . congress could address regulatory parity by either deregulating traditional telcos' nonvideo services or regulating cable operators' nonvideo services . third , as the fcc and local governments include online video providers in their definitions of video providers for the purposes of evaluating competition and / or imposing franchise fees , congress could clarify whether these actions achieve its stated policy goals . for example , if , in contrast to the fcc's interpretation of the lec test for effective competition , congress intends to include only facilities - based video services in its definition of video service competition , it could delineate the definition in communications laws . likewise , as online video services become more prevalent and states and municipalities target them for franchise fees , congress could specify the authority , if any , to regulate them . finally , while the fcc has determined that competition among video programming distribution services has eliminated the need for rate regulation of the basic tier of cable services , maine enacted a law to enable consumers to pay only for video programming they choose , in lieu of bundles of channels . in the past , some members of congress have proposed statutory changes to require video programming distributors to offer individual channels to consumers in addition to bundles of channels , and congress could consider revisiting this issue , or alternatively clarifying that states and local governments lack authority to enact such laws . table 1 , as well as the following two tables , illustrate how the fcc's rules could potentially affect the franchising process in several states . the fcc's decision to extend its franchising rule to state governments for the first time will subject each of the states listed in the first three columns of table 1 ( i.e. , those that issue franchises at the state - level in all or some circumstances ) to the fcc's rules . moreover , the fcc's rules will cover states that oversee municipal franchises via either statute or state - level agencies . thus , the fcc's franchising rules will affect more video service providers , viewers , and municipal governments than ever before . these regulatory developments and industry trends raise several potential issues for congress to consider . first , congress could consider whether the fcc's interpretation of the communications act is consistent with the policy goals set forth in section 601 of the communications act ( 47 u.s.c . many of these regulatory changes have caused controversy . some local governments assert that , among other things , the fcc's actions will limit their ability to protect the public interest and deprive them of revenue . this report examines the evolving relationship between federal , state , and local regulators and identifies related policy issues that may be of interest to congress .