the fact that e.o . 13865 does not formally supersede e.o . 13744 ( which refers solely to space weather ) may create further ambiguity in cases where policies of the previous and current administrations are not in direct alignment , or else reflect differing priorities . federal agencies typically regard—and refer to—manmade emp and naturally - occurring gmds as related , but distinct phenomena . this section provides an overview of federal roles and responsibilities for space weather - related research and emergency preparedness . federal agency roles and responsibilities fall into four major categories: early warning and forecasting ; research and development ( r&d ) ; basic scientific research ; risk assessment and mitigation , including modeling and information sharing ; and response and recovery . some agencies have roles and responsibilities in more than one category . this section only includes entities that relevant executive orders or strategies have designated as the federal lead for a specific objective or requirement . this does not include agencies whose role is confined to participation in working groups , harmonizing internal policies with national strategy or directives , contributing refinements to analytical products or models produced by other agencies , or ensuring their own continuity - of - operations in case of a space weather event . each sub - section includes a summary of the department or agency mission and the relevant authorities under which it operates . if applicable , the agency - specific provisions of the two executive orders currently in force—e.o . 13865—are listed in a table , followed by information about implementing programs and activities . provisions applicable only to manmade emp threats , such as high - altitude nuclear detonations , are excluded . the 2019 plan is referenced in cases where the executive orders do not provide specific or complete guidance to given federal entities . departments and agencies are ordered alphabetically for ease of reference . a comprehensive account of total federal agency spending on space weather - related activities is not available . in a cost estimate for the space weather research and forecasting act ( s. 881 in the 116 th congress ) , cbo estimated that the federal agencies in the national space weather program and the space weather operations , research , and mitigation working group "allocated a combined total of nearly $350 million to activities related to space weather" in fy2019 . cbo estimated that the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) allocated the majority ( $264 million ) of the $350 million total . total federal agency allocations towards space weather activities may differ from year to year . other provisions in the 2020 ndaa require the national guard to clarify relevant "roles and missions , structure , capabilities , and training," and report to congress no later than september 30 , 2020 , on its readiness to respond to electromagnetic pulse events affecting multiple states . these similar but not identical bills , introduced by senator gary peters and representative ed perlmutter respectively , set forth provisions designed to improve the ability of the united states to forecast space weather events and mitigate the effects of space weather .