this is not an exhaustive list . countries are listed alphabetically in each table . bti evaluates all central and south american nations . with the exception of cuba , the dominican republic , haiti , and jamaica , bti does not evaluate caribbean nations . figure 3 shows the aggregate scores of all central and south american and caribbean countries according to the freedom house country web page for freedom in the world 2019 . countries receive 0 to 4 points on 25 indicators ( 10 political rights indicators and 15 civil liberties indicators ) for a total of up to 100 points . figure 4 shows the political rights and civil liberties scores of all central and south american and caribbean countries according to freedom house's freedom in the world 2019 . the scale used is 1-7 , with 1 indicating the most free conditions and 7 the least free . this report compiles information from the u.s. state department and data from four nongovernmental ( ngo ) indices . for a discussion about definitions of democracy and critiques of democracy indices , see crs report r45344 , global trends in democracy: background , u.s. policy , and issues for congress , by michael a. weber . table 2 compares the same reports for mexico and central america , as does table 3 for south america . each report evaluates a different number of countries , so there are missing rankings for some countries . crs does not endorse the methodology or accuracy of any particular democracy index . in parentheses following the country name in the tables below is the nature of the country's political system , as described in the u.s. state department's 2018 country reports on human rights practices . while the publication focuses broadly on human rights conditions in each country , the first sentence of each country report provides a characterization of the country's political system . this u.s. government information is included here for comparison with findings from the democracy indicators published by ngos . bertelsmann stiftung , a private foundation based in germany , has published the bertelsmann transformation index ( bti ) biannually since 2006 . key regional findings and country reports are available in english ( bti publishes the full regional report in german ) . bti 2018 evaluates the quality of democracy , a market economy , and political management in 129 developing and transition countries . the current report notes "the regional average for latin america is down to 0.51 in 2018 , bringing the region back to about 1996-levels. v - dem evaluates all central and south american nations . with the exceptions of barbados , cuba , the dominican republic , guyana , haiti , jamaica , suriname , and trinidad and tobago , v - dem does not evaluate caribbean nations . table 1 looks at caribbean countries' global democracy rankings according to eiu's democracy index 2018 , freedom house's freedom in the world 2019 , v - dem's democracy report 2019 , and bertelsmann stiftung's 2018 transformation index . figure 1 shows the global rank and classification of all central and south american and caribbean countries according to the political transformation rank , a component of the 2018 bertelsmann stiftung transformation index ( bti ) .