i will , senator . mr. perry . while this report is focused on the avenues of formal communication between the branches in hearings , there are circumstances in which the executive branch is less likely to provide public testimony to congress . while each situation is unique , there are at least three types of information that are more likely to cause such tension: national security and intelligence matters , law enforcement investigations , and executive branch deliberations . in all of these areas , administrations have sometimes refused to appear before committees or sought to limit public testimony . the legal and prudential reasons for limiting disclosure of information in each of these areas may , depending on the circumstances , have particular merit . from the perspective of an executive branch official , the costs of voluntary compliance may outweigh the benefits in some cases , and they may decline to testify . congress is under no obligation to accept such conclusions and may seek to compel those officials to testify . the first is will you be available to appear before this committee and other congressional committees to represent departmental positions and respond to issues of concern to the congress ? however , committees may choose to take these concerns into account . for instance , a committee may agree to limit the scope of a request , allow a witness to decline to testify on specific matters , or conduct a closed door session . this occurred , for example , during former special counsel robert mueller's testimony before the house committee on the judiciary and the house permanent select committee on intelligence . over the course of his testimony on july 24 , 2019 , both committees allowed mueller to decline to answer specific questions for all three of the above reasons . in this case , the committees accepted the limits put forward by mueller , and they were able to hold the hearings . some of the most broadly applicable incentives are outlined below . committees can request that executive branch officials appear before them to discuss any matter within the jurisdiction of the committee . any executive branch official , including the president , may testify before congress under most circumstances . in practice , invitations are usually formal and may lead to negotiations on the logistics , format , and scope of the testimony . committees have some discretion to define how they will receive testimony and accept or reject accommodations sought by the executive branch . the remainder of this report highlights a few important facets of current practice for each branch . as part of the annual appropriations process , agency leaders are expected to appear before appropriations subcommittees to justify their agencies' budget requests . this means that the heads of cabinet departments and other agencies are likely to testify before congress at least once per year . the statutory process for submission of the executive branch's budget request , as established by congress , makes the president the primary actor in the executive branch budget process and gives the president significant control over the final executive branch budget request submitted to congress each year .