risks to investors . like any financial instrument , leveraged loans and clos pose various types of risk to investors . in particular , they pose credit risk —the risk that loans will not be repaid in full ( due to default , for example ) . tranching distributes clo credit risk differently across investors in different tranches . up to this point in the credit cycle , the risks associated with leveraged loans and clos have largely not materialized—leveraged loan default rates have been relatively low because of low interest rates and robust business conditions . but some analysts fear that default rates could spike if economic conditions worsen , interest rates rise , or both—and these possibilities may not have been properly priced in . default rates on leveraged loans rose from below 1% to almost 11% during the last recession . an unanticipated spike in default rates would impose unexpected losses on leveraged loan and clo holders . systemic risk . investment losses associated with changing asset values , by themselves , are routine in financial markets across many types of assets and pose no particular policy concern if investors have the opportunity to make informed decisions . the main policy concern is whether leveraged loans and clos pose systemic risk ; that is , whether a deterioration in leveraged loans' performance—particularly if it were large and unexpected—could lead to broader financial instability . this depends on whether channels exist through which problems with leveraged loans could spill over to cause broader problems in financial markets . losses on leveraged loans or liquidity problems with leveraged loans could lead to financial instability through various transmission channels discussed below . during the financial crisis , problems with mortgage - backed securities ( mbs ) demonstrated how a class of securities can pose systemic risk . similar to clos , mbs are complex , opaque securities backed by a pool of underlying assets that are typically tranched , with the senior tranches receiving the highest credit rating . unexpected declines in housing prices and increases in mortgage default rates revealed that mbs—both highly rated and lowly rated tranches—had been mispriced , with the previous pricing not accurately reflecting the underlying risks . the subsequent repricing led to a cascade of systemic distress in the financial system: liquidity in the secondary market for mbs rapidly declined and fire sales pushed all mbs prices even lower . mbs losses caused certain leveraged and interconnected financial institutions , including banks , investment firms , and insurance companies , to experience capital shortfalls and lose access to the short - term borrowing markets on which they relied . ultimately , these problems caused financial panic and a broader decline in credit availability as financial institutions deleveraged —reducing new lending activity to restore their capital levels—in response to mbs losses . the resulting reduction in credit in turn caused a sharp decline in real economic activity . clos today share some similarities with mbs before the crisis , but there are important differences . similarities include the rapid growth in available credit and erosion of underwriting standards . both types of securities are relatively complex and opaque , potentially obfuscating the underlying assets' true risks .