for example , s.amdt . customer charges are additional to rates . in other words , a customer's bill would have volumetric charges ( rate times kwh consumed ) plus a fixed customer charge . some customer classes , such as large industrial facilities or institutions , consume so much electricity that utilities might make special system modifications for them . in some cases , utilities recover these costs in a demand charge that is only paid by those high - consuming customers . like customer charges , demand charges are generally additional to volumetric charges and do not typically change from month to month . epact05 encouraged states to adopt net metering , but the law did not specify how customers should be compensated . states with net metering have taken different approaches in implementing their policies , and many states have revised their compensation approaches in recent years . these decisions may affect dg markets . as one study from the national renewable energy laboratory observed , "compensation mechanisms impact dg deployment because they strongly influence the value proposition of a dg investment for individual customers. this section describes some elements of states' approaches to implementing net metering . in addition to differing in net metering compensation , state net metering policies differ in a variety of other aspects . some differences pertain to provisions on program caps , source eligibility , credit retention , and system ownership . provisions in these areas can affect deployment of dg . some members of congress have introduced legislation addressing aspects of states' net metering policies . some proposals would influence state policies directly . 3120 in the 114 th congress would have limited the ability of state regulators to move net metering customers to lower compensation rates or to add fixed charges to their bills . 3053 , also in the 114 th congress , would have required state regulators to consider the extent to which their net metering policies created cross - subsidies . 4175 in the 116 th congress would require states to consider adopting net billing policies for community solar . a full discussion is beyond the scope of this report . as an illustrative example , this section discusses typical ratemaking considerations for vertically - integrated investor - owned utilities . in its service territory , this type of utility owns and operates all parts of the electricity system , from electricity generation to transmission and distribution to customers . state regulators conduct the ratemaking process and approve rates that the utility can charge its customers . regulators design rates so that utilities can recover their costs through customers' bill payments . these costs generally include: the costs of building and operating power plants , including fuel costs and compliance with any applicable regulations ( eg , environmental , safety , reliability ) ; the costs of building and maintaining transmission and distribution systems ( i.e. , the grid ) ; regular utility operating costs , such as ensuring reliable grid operation ( i.e. , grid services ) or collecting meter data for billing ; any programmatic costs , such as bill relief for low - income consumers or implementation of other public policies ; and a return on the utility investments ( i.e.