appendix b . common service providers some organizations within dod provide common information technology services to other organizations at dod . these organizations report to higher - level organizations . for fy2018 , auditors completed 20 dod service provider examinations—14 resulted in unmodified opinions and 6 resulted in qualified opinions . see table b - 1 for more information , including auditors' opinions and the number of fy2018 nfrs issued . service provider examinations provide a positive assurance as to whether information technology control activities were designed , implemented , and operate effectively to provide management reasonable assurance that control objectives function as designed or intended in all material respects . examination procedures are limited in scope as compared to a financial audit . component - level auditors can use these examinations' results to reduce redundant testing , saving time and money ; see table 1 for the list of audited dod components . for fy2019 , dod expects to complete 23 common service provider examinations . comprehensive data for the fy2019 audit are not currently available . therefore , this report focuses on dod's fy2018 audit . congressional interest in dod's audits is particularly acute because dod accounts for about half of federal discretionary expenditures and 15% of total federal expenditures . the department of defense inspector general ( dod ig ) contracted with nine independent public accounting firms ( ipas ) to conduct the fy2018 and fy2019 audit . the ipas conducted 24 separate audits within dod ( see table 1 for each of the component - level audit opinions ) . in both fy2018 and fy2019 audits , the dod ig issued the overall agency - wide opinion of disclaimer of o pinion —meaning auditors could not express an opinion on the financial statements because the financial information was not sufficiently reliable . dod components that received a disclaimer of opinion represent approximately 56% of the reported dod assets and 90% of the reported dod budgetary resources . dod expected to receive a disclaimer of opinion for fy2018 and fy2019 . the department has stated it could take a decade to receive an u nmodified ( clean ) audit opinion . the federal government as a whole is unable to receive a clean opinion on its financial report because agencies with significant assets and budgetary costs , such as dod , the department of housing and urban development , and the railroad retirement board , have each received a disclaimer of opinion in recent years . the federal government as a whole potentially could receive a clean audit opinion without all government agencies receiving a clean audit opinion ; however , the size of the dod budget—$708 billion in fy2019—prevents an overall clean opinion without dod receiving a clean audit opinion . although the overall number of nfrs increased slightly between december 2018 and june 2019 , the number has decreased significantly in certain categories ( see table 2 , other column ) . the increase in nfrs in certain categories is an expected result of the audit process . as auditors learn more about dod and how it functions , they may continue to identify new nfrs , while dod continues to address some of the previously identified nfrs .