poverty rates fell through the 1960s . since then , they have generally risen and fallen according to the economic cycle , though during the most recent two expansions poverty rates did not fall measurably until four to six years into the expansion . historically notable lows occurred in 1973 ( 11.1% ) and 2000 ( 11.3 ) . the poverty rate in new hampshire ( 7.6% ) was lowest . when comparing poverty rates geographically , it is important to remember that the official poverty thresholds are not adjusted for geographic variations in the cost of living—the same thresholds are used nationwide . as such , an area with a lower cost of living accompanied by lower wages will appear to have a higher poverty rate than an area with a higher cost of living and higher wages , even if individuals' purchasing power were exactly the same in both areas . puerto rico and 14 states experienced poverty rate declines from 2017 to 2018: one in the midwest ( illinois ) , three in the northeast ( massachusetts , new jersey , and new york ) ; five in the south ( florida , georgia , louisiana , north carolina , and west virginia ) ; and five in the west ( arizona , california , colorado , oregon , and washington ) . connecticut was the only state to experience an increase , and 35 states , as well as the district of columbia , did not register a statistically significant change . criticisms of the official measure have led to the development of the supplemental poverty measure ( spm ) . described below are the development of the official measure , its limitations , attempts to remedy those limitations , the research efforts that eventually led to the spm's first release in november 2011 , and a comparison of poverty rates in 2018 based on the spm and the official measure . the poverty thresholds were originally developed in the early 1960s by mollie orshansky of the social security administration . rather than attempt to compute a family budget by using prices for all essential items that low - income families need to live , orshansky focused on food costs . unlike other goods and services such as housing or transportation , which did not have a generally agreed - upon level of adequacy , minimum standards for nutrition were known and widely accepted . according to a 1955 u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) food consumption survey , the average amount of their income that families spent on food was roughly one - third . therefore , using the cost of a minimum food budget and multiplying that figure by three yielded a figure for total family income . that computation was possible because usda had already published recommended food budgets as a way to address the nutritional needs of families experiencing economic stress . some additional adjustments were made to derive poverty thresholds for two - person families and individuals not living in families to reflect the relatively higher fixed costs of smaller households .