i fundamentally disagree . from the experience of our agents and officers on the ground , it is indeed both a border security—and a humanitarian—crisis . what many looking at total numbers fail to understand is the difference in what is happening now in terms of who is crossing , the risks that they are facing , and the consequences for our system . the difference mcaleenan cited refers to the characteristics of apprehended migrants at the southwest border—their origin countries , demographic characteristics , and migratory motivations—all of which have changed considerably during the past decade . in prior decades , unauthorized migrant flows involved predominantly adult male mexicans , whose primary motivation was u.s. employment . if apprehended , they were typically processed through expedited removal and quickly repatriated . relatively few migrants applied for humanitarian immigration relief such as asylum . mexican migrants now make up a minority of total apprehensions . sizable numbers of migrants from the "northern triangle"—the central american countries of el salvador , guatemala , and honduras—now make up the largest group . smaller numbers of migrants are also arriving at the southwest border from south america ( eg , venezuela , peru ) , the caribbean ( eg , cuba ) , africa ( eg , cameroon , uganda ) , central asia ( eg , uzbekistan ) , and south asia ( eg , india , bangladesh ) , among other regions . instead of being dominated by adult males , migrant flows over the course of this decade have been increasingly characterized by migrants traveling as families ( family units ) and unaccompanied alien children ( uac ) . while a sizeable proportion of unauthorized migrants seek u.s. employment , a growing proportion of arriving migrants are seeking asylum and protection from violence . studies of recent migration trends cite persistent poverty , inequality , demographic pressure related to high population growth , vulnerability to natural disasters , high crime rates , poor security conditions , and the lack of a strong state presence as factors that "push" migrants to make the risky and often dangerous journey from the northern triangle . "pull" factors include the increasing use of u.s. asylum policy that , until recently , allowed most asylum seekers to remain in the united states while they awaited a decision on their cases . lengthy court backlogs allow migrants admitted to the united states the opportunity to reunite with family members and acquire work authorization , typically six months after u.s. admission . motivations for leaving northern triangle countries and choosing the united states are often a mixture of these push and pull factors , which can be interconnected , especially for families and unaccompanied children . some observers argue that the recent migrant flows represent a failure of the rule of law . they question the legitimacy of asylum claims being made by recent unauthorized migrants and contend that many are abusing u.s. immigration laws bestowing humanitarian relief in order to gain entry into , or permission to remain in , the united states . other observers characterize the recent migrant flows as a legitimate international humanitarian crisis resulting from violent and lawless circumstances in migrants' countries of origin .