appendix a . selected legislation appendix b. cdc risk factors for intimate partner violence individual risk factors low self - esteem low income low academic achievement young age aggressive or delinquent behavior as a youth heavy alcohol and drug use depression anger and hostility antisocial personality traits borderline personality traits prior history of being physically abusive having few friends and being isolated from other people unemployment emotional dependence and insecurity belief in strict gender roles ( eg , male dominance and aggression in relationships ) desire for power and control in relationships perpetrating psychological aggression being a victim of physical or psychological abuse ( consistently one of the strongest predictors of perpetration ) history of experiencing poor parenting as a child history of experiencing physical discipline as a child relationship factors marital conflict: fights , tension , and other struggles marital instability: divorces or separations dominance and control of the relationship by one partner over the other economic stress unhealthy family relationships and interactions community factors poverty and associated factors ( eg , overcrowding ) low social capital: lack of institutions , relationships , and norms that shape a community's social interactions weak community sanctions against ipv ( eg , unwillingness of neighbors to intervene in situations where they witness violence ) societal factors traditional gender norms ( eg , women should stay at home , not enter workforce , and be submissive ; men support the family and make the decisions ) appendix c. acronym . the military services collect data at the installation level . options to remedy concerns about commander response may be to require higher - level review of ipv complaints , or to enhance protections from retaliation against those who report ipv . each installation's fap enters data into its respective service registry and then submits reports to the dmdc , which maintains the registry for all of dod . data elements include demographic information , individual identifiers ( i.e. rules of evidence —military rules or evidence established the evidential procedure for judicial proceedings at a court - martial ( part iii , mcm ) . criminal code —punitive articles in the ucmj criminalize specific conduct ( part iv , mcm ) . the mcm also includes the procedure for nonjudicial punishment ( njp ) and maximum punishment information for each punitive article . the consequences of intimate partner and domestic violence to servicemembers and families can be severe and even fatal . congress has taken a number of actions over the past three decades to expand the provision of prevention and support responses , improve data collection and monitoring of ipv prevalence , deepen civilian and military collaboration on addressing and monitoring ipv , among other things . in the 116 th congress , there have been several proposals to augment services for military - connected ipv victims . nevertheless , recent reports and testimony have identified several ongoing issues for oversight . these include community coordination , coverage and access to victim services , law enforcement response , data collection federal reporting requirements , and mitigating risk factors . in many ipv cases involving the military , the abused or the abuser is a civilian , and incidents happen both on and off military installations .