these elements are discussed below . the appalachian regional commission ( arc ) is the only federal agency that continues to receive regular appropriated funding for energy transition activities under the power initiative designation . while the power initiative was launched as a multi - agency effort , only the arc chose to designate its contributions as the power initiative . the energy information administration projects that coal production overall will continue to decline as a consequence of falling market demand . in particular , the eia forecasts coal to account for 24% of u.s. electric energy generation in 2019 and 2020 , down from 28% in 2018 . by 2050 , coal is projected to decline to 17% of u.s. electricity generation , nuclear is projected to account for 12% , renewables 31% , and natural gas 39% , according to eia projections . coal's decline is a function of market forces , particularly its higher cost relative to natural gas and renewable energy options . in the future , under current policies , coal's cost disadvantage is expected to continue , and could be accelerated if policies are adopted to reduce ghg emissions that contribute to climate change . even with federal incentives to invest in carbon capture , utilization , and storage as a means to mitigate fossil fuel - related emissions , coal may still not be competitive in many situations . as a result of falling demand , noncompetitive coal producers and their communities are expected to face continued economic dislocation . should it wish to broaden or intensify federal efforts to address energy transition in local communities , congress may have several options . in the past , congress has demonstrated bipartisan interest in the federal government providing assistance to populations adversely affected by the ongoing energy transitions . it has done so through its appropriations for the arc's power initiative , the eda's acc program , and the aml investments . in combination with evidence of unmet demand for federal assistance , as measured by unfunded requests to the arc ( table 5 ) , congress may consider reviewing the balance among needs , appropriations , and effectiveness of past efforts . congress could conduct a review of the power initiative and the efficacy of its performance and resources . this potential review suggests some particular considerations: geography : while the acc is available for the nation as a whole , the arc's power initiative is restricted to the arc's service area in the appalachian region . congress may consider expanding the power initiative to be available more broadly across the nation , or in a more targeted fashion as demonstrated by the arc's program . alternatively , funding could be made available nationwide to any eligible coal community , such as through other federal regional commissions and authorities and / or eda regions . funding : projections of u.s. coal production ( cited earlier ) suggest that the ongoing transition in u.s. energy systems may lead to further localized economic distress without the development of new regional opportunities . congress may consider the level of funding for power initiative programs in the context of those economic needs .