the term n.a . indicates that the requirement does not apply to the specified market segment , regardless of whether the plan is a grandfathered or transitional plan . the use of exempt in the table indicates that the grandfathered or transitional plan is exempt from complying with the requirement . for example , the aca's rate review requirement applies only to fully insured small - group plans and individual market plans . grandfathered plans do not have to comply with the requirement , which is why the table indicates that grandfathered fully insured small - group plans and grandfathered individual plans are "exempt" from the requirement . transitional plans do have to comply with the requirement , which is why the table has check marks for these plans . the rate review requirement does not apply to fully insured large - group plans or self - insured plans ; as such , the table indicates that the requirement is not applicable ( n.a. ) to grandfathered versions of these plans . each state farm bureau provides member benefits . the benefits include discounts on a variety of products and services , such as hotel stays , farm equipment , and membership in air ambulance networks . additionally , many state farm bureaus assist their members with obtaining insurance , including health insurance . the assistance with health insurance takes different forms . many state farm bureaus have agents available to assist their members with finding and enrolling in a health plan ; some state farm bureaus sponsor coverage that is available to their members ; and at least one state farm bureau is divided in two parts , with one part being an insurance company that serves the farm bureau's members . iowa and kansas passed their laws recently—in 2018 and 2019 , respectively—and tennessee passed its law in 1993 . the farm bureaus in iowa and tennessee currently offer such coverage ; the kansas farm bureau's coverage became available for purchase beginning october 1 , 2019 , with coverage starting as early as january 1 , 2020 . as explained above , the arrangements sponsored by farm bureaus in iowa , kansas , and tennessee are not considered insurance in their respective states and do not have to comply with state requirements that apply to insurance . this report identifies and describes arrangements within these two categories . the report is intended to help congressional policymakers better understand the scope of these health coverage arrangements that are available to individuals in the united states private health insurance markets and to provide information about the limitations of the application of federal health insurance requirements . the arrangements discussed in this section have the following in common: they meet a federal definition of health insurance ( i.e. , they meet the federal definition of health insurance coverage or group health plan ) , but they are exempt from compliance with some or all applicable federal health insurance requirements . for most of the arrangements discussed in this section , the exemption is explicit in federal statute , regulations , or guidance ( see table 1 ) .