â§2808 authority . those military construction projects located at non - u.s. locations ( $1.8 billion ) would be deferred first , followed later by projects within the united states . ( $1.8 billion ) . officials stated the intent is prioritizing funds in this manner is to provide time to work with congress to determine opportunities to restore funds , as well as work with our allies and partners on improving burden sharing for overseas construction projects . usace has noted that the pace for obligating military construction ( milcon ) funds for border barrier construction projects will be highly dependent on project location , since land must first be administratively transferred to the department of the army before work can proceed . construction on land that currently falls under the jurisdiction of dod can be undertaken relatively quickly , since the military effectively manages the parcels . projects in locations that fall under one or more other federal jurisdictions may be delayed while transfers are negotiated . projects on private land are expected to take the longest to complete , since the government must first obtain administrative jurisdiction of the land by either purchase or condemnation . on september 18 , 2019 , department of the interior ( doi ) issued public land orders that transferred jurisdiction of land required for five of projects for a period of three years to dod . this section provides a detailed overview of key documents related to the administration's use of 10 u.s.c . 2808 to fund border barriers . the tables that follow each include a summary of source documents , citations , and links that allow readers to access the associated materials directly . ( due to technical considerations , documents are only made available to congressional users. ) table 1 , crs document compilations , contains a collection of reference documents that crs has compiled for the convenience of users . these include court declarations that do not fit neatly into a chronological framework and documents that describe activities that may be grouped as a single action ( eg , multiple reprogramming actions on the same date for an identical purpose ) . where table 1 documents are cited elsewhere in this report , they are identified by the record's "short title" shown in the indicated column . table 2 , chronology of 10 u.s.c . 284 decisionm aking , and table 3 , chronology of 10 u.s.c . 2808 decisionmaking , summarize actions related to each respective authority . the separate tables reflect the fact that interagency decisionmaking has generally operated along separate tracks ; deliberations related to 10 u.s.c . 2808 were kept separate from correspondence related to 10 u.s.c . â§2808 was the result of approximately eight months of additional deliberations . these deliberations included two assessments by the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff ( cjcs ) to determine whether the construction of border barriers qualified as a legitimate use under the requirements of 10 u.s.c . the statute specifies that new construction must support the use of armed forces mobilized to address a national emergency declared by the president .