the provisions in h.r . 3167 and s. 2187 are listed in table 1 at the end of the report . in a 2017 report , gao examined actions which congress and fema could take to reduce federal fiscal exposure and improve national resilience to floods , and recommended that congress should consider comprehensive reform covering six areas: ( 1 ) outstanding debt ; ( 2 ) premium rates ; ( 3 ) affordability ; ( 4 ) consumer participation ; ( 5 ) barriers to private sector involvement ; and ( 6 ) nfip flood resilience efforts . as a public insurance program , the goals of the nfip were originally designed differently from the goals of private - sector companies . as currently authorized , the nfip also encompasses social goals to provide flood insurance in flood - prone areas to property owners who otherwise would not be able to obtain it , and reduce government's cost after floods . the nfip also engages in many "non - insurance" activities in the public interest: it disseminates flood risk information through flood maps , requires communities to adopt land use and building code standards in order to participate in the program , potentially reduces the need for other post - flood disaster aid , contributes to community resilience by providing a mechanism to fund rebuilding after a flood , and may protect lending institutions against mortgage defaults due to uninsured losses . the benefits of such tasks are not directly measured in the nfip's financial results from underwriting flood insurance . from the inception of the nfip , the program has been expected to achieve multiple objectives , some of which may conflict with one another: to ensure reasonable insurance premiums for all ; to have risk - based premiums that would make people aware of and bear the cost of their floodplain location choices ; to secure widespread community participation in the nfip and substantial numbers of insurance policy purchases by property owners ; and to earn premium and fee income that , over time , covers claims paid and program expenses . gao concluded that the sequence of actions taken by congress in nfip reform is important ; for example , requiring full - risk rates for all policyholders and expanding the mandatory purchase requirement would create affordability concerns which would warrant having an affordability assistance program already in place . according to gao , when addressing barriers to private sector involvement , it would be important to protect nfip's flood resilience activities at the same time ; and addressing the outstanding debt would be best accompanied by premium rate reform to help reduce the likelihood of a recurrence of another unpayable debt buildup . as congress considers a long - term reauthorization of the nfip , a central question may be who should bear the costs of floodplain occupancy in the future . the nrc study on affordability concluded that the costs of floods can be borne in three possible ways , or in some combination of them . the first scenario is that individual policyholders ( whether nfip or private ) bear location cost in the form of insurance premiums paid and damages falling within policy deductible amounts .