the u.s. supreme court reversed and remanded . supreme court : in the opinion , justice sotomayor focused on two concepts—notice of appeal and waiver of appeal—to rebut that garza's filing a notice of appeal would breach his plea agreements and deny him their benefits . she explained that a notice of appeal is ministerial being "a simple , nonsubstantive act that is within the defendant's prerogative. she noted: ( 1 ) any "waiver of appeal" is limited to the language of the particular agreement ; ( 2 ) some appellate issues cannot be waived ; and ( 3 ) matters that are within the scope of the waiver are only binding if the prosecution elects to stand on its rights . thus , she concluded , "simply filing a notice of appeal does not necessarily breach a plea agreement , given the possibility that the defendant will end up raising claims beyond the waiver's scope . and in any event , the bare decision whether to appeal is ultimately the defendant's , not counsel's , to make. justice sotomayor further found that idaho's approach was inconsistent with precedent . justice sotomayor recalled the flores - ortega holding that "'a lawyer who disregards specific instructions from the defendant to file a notice of appeal acts in a manner that is professionally unreasonable.' she stated: " flores - ortega 's reasoning shows why an appeal waiver does not complicate [a] straightforward application" and further commented: "as the court explained , given that past precedents call for a presumption of prejudice whenever 'the accused is denied counsel at a critical state' it makes even greater sense to presume prejudice when counsel's deficiency forfeits an 'appellate proceeding altogether.' she noted , "[a]fter all , there is no disciplined way to 'accord any presumption of reliability … to judicial proceedings that never took place,'" concluding "[t]hat rationale applies just as well here because … garza retained a right to appeal at least some issues despite the waivers he signed . in other words , garza had a right to a proceeding and he was denied that proceeding altogether as a result of counsel's deficient performance. two decisions sought to discern congressional intent in cases involving firearms and sex offenders . an ineffective of assistance of counsel decision rounded out the term . the supreme court examined the scope of federal statutes that establish various criminal offenses in two cases . in the first , the court held that , in order to convict a foreign national unlawfully present in the united states with knowingly possessing a firearm , the government must prove that the defendant knew both that he was in possession of a firearm and that he was unlawfully present in the country ( rehaif v. united states ) . in the second , the justices held that congress had validly authorized the attorney general to apply the sex offender registration and notification act ( sorna ) to offenders convicted before sorna's enactment ( gundy v. united states ) . five decisions in the supreme court's most recent term dealt with pre - trial matters . one confirmed the continued validity of the double jeopardy dual sovereign doctrine ( gamble v. united states ) .