, solar leasing ) . some of those costs are then transferred to taxpayers . the following discussion focuses on electricity costs only from a consumer's point of view . consumers' electricity costs can be measured in two ways . the first way is the electricity rate , typically expressed in cents per kilowatt - hour ( cents / kwh ) . the second way is the electricity bill , typically the total costs for electricity that consumers pay each month expressed in dollars . in most cases , an electricity bill reflects the costs to produce electricity ( typically , the applicable electricity rate times the amount of electricity consumed ) , the costs to deliver electricity to the consumer , and any other fees as determined by state or local regulators ( eg , contributions to funds that provide bill relief to low - income households ) . electricity rates can go down while bills go up , and vice versa . multiple factors can determine how solar energy might affect what consumers pay for electricity . many of these factors vary based on local circumstances . they can also change over time as the profile of electricity sources changes . one potential reliability concern for solar energy is due to its variable nature , dependent on the availability of sunlight . this was not generally the case a few years ago . policies aimed at promoting solar energy make an assessment of costs more complex . for example , tax incentives , as discussed in the section " what federal tax incentives support solar energy development ? ," can reduce the ownership costs for businesses or individuals that purchase solar energy systems . for example , solar pv systems cannot produce electricity at night , and their output can vary during the day depending on local weather conditions ( eg , cloudiness ) . the physical requirements of the electricity system are such that the supply and demand of electricity must equal each other at all times . currently , to ensure reliability , other sources of electricity generation are used when solar energy is not available . pv module costs increased between 2017 and 2018 as a result of tariffs discussed in the section " how are u.s. tariffs affecting domestic solar manufacturing ? ," offsetting cost declines in other system components , according to the nrel report . generalizing the cost impacts to consumers for solar systems is challenging because costs for these systems vary across the united states . additionally , solar system costs are declining in both absolute terms ( as discussed in the previous section ) and relative to other sources of electric power . in parts of the country , new solar systems are sometimes among the least cost - options for generating electricity . expanding other types of electricity system infrastructure , such as transmission lines or energy storage assets , could also address this limitation . this situation is often referred to as the "duck curve" because the shape of the plot showing the difference between demand and output from solar generators resembles a duck . not all electricity generators are capable of quickly changing their output , and their deployment may not match the levels of deployment of solar generators .