these funds are not appropriated by congress . they are available for obligation and included in the president's budget to calculate the gross budget authority . 302 ( a ) and 302 ( b ) allocations in general practice , the maximum budget authority for annual appropriations ( including dhs ) is determined through a two - stage congressional budget process . in the first stage , congress sets overall spending totals in the annual concurrent resolution on the budget . subsequently , these totals are allocated among the congressional committees , usually through the statement of managers for the conference report on the budget resolution . these amounts are known as the 302 ( a ) allocations . they include discretionary totals available to the committees on appropriations for enactment in annual appropriations bills through the subcommittees responsible for the development of the bills . in the second stage of the process , the appropriations committees allocate the 302 ( a ) discretionary funds among their subcommittees for each of the appropriations bills . these amounts are known as the 302 ( b ) allocations . these allocations must add up to no more than the 302 ( a ) discretionary allocation and form the basis for enforcing budget discipline , since any bill reported with a total above the ceiling is subject to a point of order . the 302 ( b ) allocations may be adjusted during the year by the respective appropriations committee issuing a report delineating the revised suballocations as the various appropriations bills progress toward final enactment . table a - 1 shows comparable figures for the 302 ( b ) allocation for fy2020 , based on the adjusted net discretionary budget authority included in division a of p.l . 116-6 , the president's request for fy2020 , and the house and senate subcommittee allocations for the homeland security appropriations bill for fy2020 . a series of amendments were offered and adopted in the house full committee markup of the fy2020 dhs appropriations bill that , according to cbo , put the bill $3.066 billion over its 302 ( b ) discretionary allocation . this scoring was later revised to $1.9 billion . these provisions were not included in the final fy2020 dhs annual appropriations act . the budget control act , discretionary spending caps , and adjustments the budget control act established enforceable discretionary limits , or caps , for defense and nondefense spending for each fiscal year from fy2012 through fy2021 . subsequent legislation , including the bipartisan budget acts of 2013 , 2015 , 2018 , and 2019 , amended those caps . most of the budget for dhs is considered nondefense spending . in addition , the budget control act allows for adjustments that would raise the statutory caps to cover funding for overseas contingency operations / global war on terror , emergency spending , and , to a limited extent , disaster relief and appropriations for continuing disability reviews and control of health care fraud and abuse . three of the four justifications outlined in the budget control act for adjusting the caps on discretionary budget authority have played a role in dhs's appropriations process . two of these—emergency spending and overseas contingency operations / global war on terror—are not limited .