some provisions in h.r . 4674 would increase aid availability by expanding eligibility . title iv of the hea specifies provisions for the operation of three federal student loan programs: the william d. ford federal direct loan ( direct loan ) program , the federal family education loan ( ffel ) program , and the federal perkins loan program . currently , however , new loans are authorized to be made only through the direct loan program . the authority to make new loans through the ffel program expired june 30 , 2010 , and the authority to make new loans through the federal perkins loan program expired september 30 , 2017 . 4674 would make a variety of student loan reforms that apply to both the ffel and direct loan programs , the discussion herein will focus on the direct loan program , as it is the primary federal student loan program currently in operation , is the only program currently making new loans to students and their families , and would be the primary student loan program in operation under the hea as amended by the caa . the direct loan program is authorized under hea , title iv , part d , and is the largest federal program that makes available financial assistance to support students' postsecondary educational pursuits . the direct loan program is a federal credit program for which permanent indefinite mandatory appropriations are provided for loan subsidy costs , and annual discretionary appropriations are provided for administrative costs . direct loans are made to students and their families using funds borrowed by the department of education ( ed ) from the u.s. treasury . the ihe a student attends originates and disburses direct loans , while federal contractors hired by ed perform loan servicing and collection functions . several types of loans are made available through the program: direct subsidized loans to undergraduate students , direct unsubsidized loans to undergraduate students and graduate students , direct plus loans to graduate and professional students and the parents of undergraduate dependent students , and direct consolidation loans , which enable individuals who have previously borrowed federal student loans to combine them into a single new loan . loan terms and conditions ( eg , interest rates , borrowing limits ) are specified in statute and may vary depending on the type of loan borrowed . ed estimates that in fy2020 , 15.9 million new loans totaling $100.2 billion will be made through the direct loan program . in addition , ed estimates that 755,000 direct consolidation loans totaling $46.4 billion will be made to existing borrowers of federal student loans . as of the end of the third quarter of fy2019 , $1.2 trillion in principal and interest on direct loan program loans , borrowed by or on behalf of 34.3 million individuals , remained outstanding . 4674 would make a variety of borrower - focused reforms to the direct loan program .