reporting . what has been the impact of congressionally mandated reporting on policy or outcomes ? how , if at all , does congress use these reports ? what are the most and least useful reports that congress receives on u.s. military and development efforts in afghanistan ? how , if at all , does congress require agencies to evaluate their programs , and how does this inform reports to congress ? has there been any evolution in specific monitoring and evaluation requirements ? bureaucracy . how has congress shaped executive branch structure ? have these efforts been helpful ? how direct a role should congress play in mandating the establishment or nature of offices or other bureaucratic structures within the executive branch that work on afghanistan ? personnel issues . to what extent have u.s. efforts in afghanistan been hampered by the frequent personnel turnover cited by many sigar interviewees ? how , if at all , have congressional actions improved , undermined , or otherwise affected the ability of federal agencies to train and deploy capable workforces in afghanistan ? what congressional action , if any , is needed to help the executive branch , or individual departments , address this issue ? recommendations . what are the most important things that congress could have been doing over the past 18 years to ensure u.s. success in afghanistan ? what can ( and should ) congress do going forward ? u.s aid: budgeting . to what extent has congress scrutinized executive branch funding requests ? have appropriated u.s. funding levels differed from those requests and if so , what changes have been made and why ? to what extent have congressional budgeting decisions in afghanistan been made due to political expediency ? congressional oversight . members of congress have conducted oversight of executive branch policy through various means , including appointing a special inspector general , public and closed hearings , member and staff delegations to afghanistan , letters to executive branch officials , and public statements . what conditions has congress imposed on u.s. aid to afghanistan and why ? how , if at all , have those conditions impacted the delivery of u.s. aid , afghan government actions , u.s. - afghan relations , and congressional interactions with the executive branch ? what kinds of changes , if any , to the foreign assistance act or other relevant pieces of legislation might make u.s. development assistance more effective ? what have been the most and least effective methods of congressional oversight ? how , if at all , can members of congress insulate budgeting or other policymaking processes from political pressures ? u.s. aid: conditionality . u.s. strategy . what role , if any , has congress played in compelling successive executive branch administrations to articulate u.s. strategy and / or policy goals in afghanistan ? what are the means by which congress has attempted to shape or influence those goals ? what have been the most and least effective of those means ? these apparent shortcomings contributed to several outcomes that either were difficult to assess or did not fulfill stated u.s. objectives .