2328 , which are compared in the appendix ) . as implied by the policy impacts of these types of proposals on premiums , different policies also could have varying effects on national health expenditures . relatedly , new york implemented an arbitration - type surprise billing law ( independent dispute resolution , or idr ) for emergency physician services and other specified non - emergency services . from 2015 to 2018 , different provider types participated in the idr process differently . for example , plastic surgery providers submitted 40% of emergency service idr disputes and neurosurgery providers submitted 31% of the specified non - emergency service idr disputes . the colorado and new york examples highlight the likelihood that a federal surprise billing policy will affect individual actors within a market differently , which is the result of existing dynamics between insurers and providers within each specific market ( eg , market concentration and network participation ) . cbo accounted for this effect in its scoring of the two bills from the 116 th congress . this idea is further compounded by the fact that each state has its own set of regulations ( potentially including surprise billing laws ) . therefore , the effects of federal surprise billing proposals also will have varying impacts on insurers and providers across states . this appendix provides a side - by - side comparison of surprise billing provisions included within two federal bills that have gone through markup procedures . specifically , the sections of the bills included in the appendix are title i of s. 1895 ( alexander ) , which went through a senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions markup session on june 26 , 2019 , and title iv of the amendment in the nature of a substitute ( ans ) to h.r . 2328 , which went through a markup session held by the house committee on energy and commerce on july 17 , 2019 . the language from each bill summarized in this appendix addresses multiple medical billing situations , such as services furnished at an in - network facility by out - of - network providers , services related to an emergency medical condition , and / or air ambulance services . as each bill addresses more than one type of situation , this appendix refers to different situations as scenarios . for each proposal , different scenarios are identified numerically in the "applicable health services and providers" row . where applicable , each subsequent cell under a given proposal refers back to the terminology used in the "applicable health services and providers" row to indicate how a given requirement in the proposal applies to each scenario addressed within that specific proposal . in some instances , the requirement may apply solely to one scenario , apply differently across multiple scenarios , or apply similarly to all scenarios .