in 1952 , as part of p.l . 82-465 , congress further increased the maximum amount taxpayers could deduct , raising the limitation to 20% of agi . table 2 summarizes these changes . over the past 100 years , congress has generally increased the amount that eligible taxpayers can deduct for their charitable donation . the history of the charitable deduction illustrates two main policy objectives of this benefit . in its early years , the charitable deduction served to ensure that resources given to charity would not be treated as income for the purposes of taxation . when the charitable deduction was created , the income tax was in its early years , and applied only to the very top of the income distribution . thus , when the deduction was created , it could be viewed as having been designed to "protect voluntary giving to public goods by rich industrialists who had made their fortunes in business. today , many policymakers are focused on the charitable deduction's impact on giving , and its efficacy at inducing additional giving . according to one commentator , "the big idea of the '86 act was to pare away deductions and credits to broaden the base so you could bring the top rates down . and that was a pretty powerful tide and the nonitemizer [deduction] just wasn't strong enough to swim against that current. as part of the deficit reduction act of 1984 ( p.l . 98-369 ) , congress increased the contribution limits on donations of cash or ordinary income property to private nonoperating foundations from 20% of agi to 30% of agi . ( donations of long - term capital gain property to private nonoperating foundations remained limited to 20% of agi. ) in explaining this increase , jct noted the following: because as a general rule public charities and operating foundations directly carry out charitable function and programs , expend charitable donations more promptly and have public involvement , support , and supervision , the congress concluded that a tax preference for contributions to public charities and operating foundations [50% agi limitation] continues to be appropriate . however , acknowledging the substantial role of many grant making foundations in private philanthropy , the congress believed that the extent of this tax preference should be narrowed by increasing to 30 percent the deduction limitation for gifts by individuals of cash and ordinary - income property to nonoperating foundations . at the end of 2017 , president trump signed into law p.l . 115-97 , often referred to as the tax cuts and jobs act ( tcja ) , which made numerous changes to the federal income tax for individuals and businesses . among the many changes , the law temporarily increased the agi limit for cash donations made to public charities from 50% to 60% . this change went into effect in 2018 , and is scheduled to expire on december 31 , 2025 . according to the house ways and means committee report that accompanied h.r . 1 ( the house - passed version of p.l . 115-9 ) : the committee believes that a robust charitable sector is vital to our economy , and that charitable giving is critical to ensuring that the sector thrives .