section 232 tariffs " ) . the importance of the u.s. - japan security relationship may also have factored into japan's decisionmaking . japan relies heavily on the united states for its military defense . the two countries' agreement on how to share the costs of the roughly 50,000 u.s. troops stationed in japan is due to be renegotiated in 2020 as the current agreement expires at the end of march 2021 . president trump has called for japan to significantly increase its contributions , perhaps by as much as fourfold . japan , some analysts suggest , may see a bilateral trade agreement as way to reduce tension in the bilateral relationship , in light of other pressing security issues . additionally , the trump administration may try to use the cost - sharing negotiations to extract concessions from japan in proposed stage - two trade negotiations , or vice versa . as the united states' fourth - largest trading partner and the world's third - largest economy , japan routinely features prominently in u.s. trade policy . the agreement may have a modest overall effect on the u.s. economy , given that it covers a small share of bilateral trade , but it could be significant for the u.s. agricultural exporters that will enjoy improved access to japan's highly protected market . key questions for congress may include how do these stage one agreements with japan affect the ability of the united states to negotiate a more comprehensive agreement in the future ? do staged trade negotiations adhere to congress's negotiating objectives in tpa , and should congress support this staged approach in future u.s. trade negotiations ? congress delegated authority to the president to enact tariffs under section 232 specifically to address possible threats to u.s. national security . president trump , however , has stated that his use of tariff authorities have been a critical tool in getting u.s. trade partners to the negotiating table , and japan's foreign minister , toshimitsu motegi , who negotiated the phase - one deal for japan , highlighted the importance of avoiding section 232 auto tariffs as a key outcome of the u.s. - japan negotiations . the administration has yet to publish the commerce department's report outlining the national security threat posed by auto imports , despite direct requests from congress and legal requirement to do so . some trade analysts caution that u.s. use or threat of trade barriers as negotiating leverage undermines existing global trade rules and could set a precedent used by other countries against the united states in the future . many members of congress have questioned the security rationale behind the president's proposed and implemented tariff actions , and some support legislation revising section 232 authorities . key questions for congress may include does the use of section 232 tariff authorities as leverage in broader trade and tariff negotiations represent an appropriate use of the delegated authorities ? what are the potential long - term implications to u.s. and global trade policy of using the threat of tariff increases as leverage in trade liberalization negotiations ?