congressional interest and support continues . in the 116 th congress , several hearings have addressed kosovo in part or in whole , including an april 2019 house foreign affairs committee hearing on kosovo's wartime victims and recent hearings on western balkan issues held by the senate armed services committee and the senate foreign relations committee's subcommittee on europe and regional security cooperation . given kosovo's geography , history , and current challenges , the country also factors into wider u.s. foreign policy issues in which congress remains engaged . such issues include transitional justice , corruption and the rule of law , combatting human trafficking and organized crime , u.s. foreign assistance , security in europe , and eu and nato enlargement . some repatriated persons were indicted on terrorism - related charges . kosovo has a sister - state relationship with iowa that grew out of a 2011 state partnership program ( spp ) between the iowa national guard and the kosovo security force . that relationship has been hailed as a "textbook example" of the scope and aims of the spp . congressional interest in kosovo predates yugoslavia's disintegration . through resolutions , hearings , and congressional delegations , many members of congress highlighted the status of ethnic albanian minorities in yugoslavia , engaged in heated debates over intervention during the clinton administration , urged the george w. bush administration to back kosovo's independence , and supported continued financial assistance . u.s. efforts currently center on bringing the two parties back to negotiations . as mentioned , u.s. officials criticized the reciprocity principles that acting prime minister kurti announced in april 2020 alongside the conditional lifting of tariffs . the direct u.s. role in brokering the recent transportation agreements and greater u.s. involvement in efforts to normalize kosovo - serbia relations is largely a departure from the approach taken under previous administrations , which strongly supported eu - led efforts to normalize relations but did not play a formal , direct role . news of the january 2020 u.s. - brokered agreements reportedly came as a surprise to some european officials , who in turn have underscored the eu's long - standing role in the normalization process and appointed an eu special representative for the dialogue . some analysts , while welcoming greater u.s. involvement , assert that the united states is more effective in engaging the western balkans when its actions and positions are aligned with those of its european allies ; they contend that recent gaps between the united states and allies such as germany on the kosovo - serbia dialogue , as well as on the march 2020 no - confidence session , have undercut overall engagement efforts . some observers and several members of congress have expressed concern over recent u.s. policies toward kosovo's government , such as pausing implementation of a $49 million millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) threshold program and delaying the development of its proposed compact program , until kosovo rescinds the tariffs . some kosovo officials expressed dismay over what they describe as u.s. pressure on kosovo to lift tariffs against serbia without equivalent pressure on serbia to cease its campaign to undercut kosovo's international legitimacy .