card use increased sharply as agencies implemented these reforms . have agencies established appropriate dollar thresholds for various categories of cardholders ? are agencies invalidating purchase cards when an employee terminates employment or is transferred to another component ? the cigie report noted another potential weakness—approximately 8.6% of the high - risk transactions sampled involved purchase card activity on closed accounts . the extent of agency compliance with these and other purchase card requirements will not be known without additional , timely information . in addition to agency efforts , an evaluation of the effectiveness of smartpay bank services and tools might be useful . as noted , agencies have reported that merchant block codes do not always prevent transactions from being approved at prohibited merchants . in addition , gao found that smartpay banks did not always retain records for the amount of time required by their contracts , in part due to confusion over which records were considered part of the transaction . an evaluation of bank services might identify additional issues that need to be addressed . it also might include a comparison of the technologies different agencies utilize and discuss what benefits they have realized . given the potential for technology to enhance oversight , reduce administrative burden , and mitigate the risk of improper purchases , an assessment of smartpay bank services may help agencies identify potentially useful technologies they have not yet incorporated into their charge card programs . purchases at or below the threshold were exempted from the provisions of a number of procurement laws . this reform obviated the need for procurement officials to make small purchases . to further streamline procedures for the smallest acquisitions , title iv also established a "micro - purchase" threshold of $2,500 ( which was increased to $3,000 in 2006 , and again to $10,000 in 2017 ) . fasa further exempted micro - purchases from sections of the buy american act and the small business act , and they could be made without obtaining a competitive bid , if the cost was deemed reasonable by the cardholder . at the same time , the clinton administration took steps to increase the use of purchase cards . 12931 directed agency heads to ( 1 ) expand purchase card use ; and ( 2 ) delegate the micro - purchasing authority provided in fasa to program offices , which would enable them to make purchases whose value did not exceed the micro - purchase threshold . the npr was a clinton administration initiative that sought to "reinvent" the federal government by making government operations both less expensive and more efficient . one of the npr's objectives was to identify opportunities to streamline a number of government - wide processes , including procurement . drawing on input from experts in the public and private sectors , the npr's initial report recommended expanding the use of purchase cards across the government , a step it said would "lower costs and reduce bureaucracy in small purchases. in a separate report that focused solely on procurement , the npr estimated that if half of all small acquisitions were made using purchase cards , the government would realize $180 million in savings annually .