figure 1 . fema pre - disaster mitigation funding and post - disaster mitigationâ fundingfy2014-fy2018source: data obtained from fema , data feeds , https: / / www.fema.gov / data - feeds . notes: pdm denotes fema's pre - disaster mitigation program . hmgp denotes fema's hazard mitigation grant program . fma denotes fire management assistance provided by fema's fire management assistance grants . funding for pre - disaster mitigation , however , may increase with the enactment of the disaster recovery reform act of 2018 ( drra , division d of p.l . section 1234 of drra authorized the national public infrastructure pre - disaster mitigation fund ( npipdm ) , which allows the president to set aside 6% from the disaster relief f und ( drf ) with respect to each declared major disaster under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( stafford act , p.l . 93-288 , as amended ; 42 u.s.c . â§â§5121 et seq. ) this 6% "set aside" is the aggregate amount funded by the following sections of the stafford act: 403 ( essential assistance ) ; 406 ( repair , restoration , and replacement of damaged facilities ) ; 407 ( debris removal ) ; 408 ( federal assistance to individuals and households ) ; 410 ( unemployment assistance ) ; 416 ( crisis counseling assistance and training ) ; and 428 ( public assistance program alternative procedures ) . although post - disaster and pre - disaster mitigation are not mutually exclusive , there are reasons why one may be favored over the other . the following section provides the underlying rationale for the two approaches to mitigation . over the years , scholars , researchers , and policymakers have debated whether mitigation is more effective before or after an incident . the following sections list the rationales for each approach . based on findings similar to the one issued by the national institute of building sciences , congress in 1999 passed p.l . 106-24 which amended the small business act to include a pre - disaster mitigation ( pdm ) pilot program . the program authorized sba to make low - interest ( 4% or less ) fixed - rate loans of no more than $50,000 per year to small businesses to implement mitigation measures designed to protect small businesses from future disaster - related damage . section 1 ( a ) of p.l . 106-24 authorized the sba during fiscal years 2000 through 2004 , to establish a predisaster mitigation program to make such loans ( either directly or in cooperation with banks or other lending institutions through agreements to participate on an immediate or deferred ( guaranteed ) basis ) , as the administrator may determine to be necessary or appropriate , to enable small businesses to use mitigation techniques in support of a formal mitigation program established by the federal emergency management agency , except that no loan or guarantee may be extended to a small business under this subparagraph unless the administration finds that the small business is otherwise unable to obtain credit for the purposes described in this subparagraph .