a recent d.c . circuit decision struck down the fcc's attempt to preempt "any state or local requirements that are inconsistent with [the fcc's] deregulatory approach" to broadband internet regulation . additionally , in a recent opinion concurring in the u.s. supreme court's denial of a petition for certiorari in a case involving a state's effort to regulate voice over internet protocol service , justice thomas , joined by justice gorsuch , voiced concerns about allowing the fcc's deregulatory policy to preempt state regulatory efforts . circuit and justices thomas and gorsuch expressed skepticism that the fcc has statutory authority to preempt state and local regulation in areas where the fcc itself has no statutory authority to regulate . cities and local franchising authorities may seize on the reasoning in these opinions to argue that title vi's preemption provision cannot extend to non - cable services that fall outside title vi's purview . lastly , along with statutory interpretation and administrative law issues , challengers to the third order may assert constitutional arguments . as mentioned , the third order prevents state and local governments from relying on state law to regulate non - cable services provided by cable operators . however , some commenters have argued that the third order violates the anti - commandeering doctrine , a constitutional rule that prohibits the federal government from compelling states to administer federal regulations . the supreme court recently clarified the anti - commandeering doctrine in murphy v. ncaa . in murphy , the court struck down the professional and amateur sports protection act of 1992 , which prohibited states from legalizing sports gambling . justice alito , writing for the court , reasoned that the anti - commandeering doctrine prohibits congress from "issu[ing] direct orders to state legislatures," compelling them to either enact certain legislation or to restrict them from enacting certain legislation . the court explained that the anti - commandeering doctrine promotes accountability , because , when states regulate at congress's command , "responsibility is blurred. justice alito further explained that the doctrine "prevents congress from shifting the costs of regulation to the states. the court contrasted unlawful commandeering with permissible "cooperative federalism" regimes . under such regimes , congress allows , but does not require , states to implement a regulatory program according to federal standards , and a federal body implements the program when a state refrains from doing so . according to some commenters , the fcc's third order violates the anti - commandeering doctrine because it "effectively command[s] local government[s] to grant right - of - way access on the terms the commission , not local government or the states set. further , some commenters , including the national association of telecommunications officers and advisors and national league of cities , argue that the third order would violate the accountability and cost - shifting principles animating the anti - commandeering doctrine , as explained in murphy .