obliterates in legal contemplation the offence itself. however , in subsequent decisions , the court backed away from the broad proposition that a pardon erases both the consequences of a conviction and the underlying guilty conduct . most notably , in carlesi v. new york , the court determined that a pardoned offense could still be considered "as a circumstance of aggravation" under a state habitual - offender law , and then in burdick v. united states , the court noted that a pardon in fact "carries an imputation of guilt ; acceptance a confession of it. based on this more recent supreme court case law , multiple federal courts of appeals have concluded that the "historical language" from early cases "was dicta and is inconsistent with current law. modern cases instead recognize a distinction between the punishment for a conviction , which the pardon obviates , and "the fact of the commission of the crime," which may be considered in subsequent proceedings or preclude the pardon recipient from engaging in certain activities . a pardon will accordingly relieve the recipient of legal disabilities that "would not follow from the commission of the crime without conviction," such as possession of a firearm or the right to vote , but the conduct and circumstances of the offense may still be considered for purposes of , among other things , certain benefits or licensing determinations or as a basis for censure under rules of professional conduct . relatedly , courts have held that a pardon does not automatically expunge the record of the conviction itself or require that the court's orders be vacated . despite the judicial trend toward a narrower understanding of the legal effect of a pardon , however , the supreme court has not directly revisited its broad language from garland , and thus its precise meaning in relation to later pronouncements from the court remains somewhat unclear . whether a president may pardon himself is an unresolved legal question that has been a subject of renewed interest following president trump's statement in 2018 that he has "the absolute right" to do so . no past president has issued a self - pardon , and , as a result , no federal court has directly addressed the matter . that said , legal scholars and commentators have debated the question extensively and reached differing conclusions . proponents of the view that the president may pardon himself tend to emphasize the lack of limitation in the constitutional language , as well as certain historical views and pronouncements of the supreme court as to the breadth of the president's pardoning power in general . by contrast , those asserting that the president lacks the power of self - pardon raise competing textual arguments and suggest that self - pardons would be inconsistent with other constitutional provisions , such as the article i provision stating that officials convicted in an impeachment trial "shall . be liable and subject to indictment , trial , judgment , and punishment , according to law.