there is unmet demand in some rural areas . in others , even where there is access , that may not translate into widespread adoption . observers cite a range of factors . on average , rural areas are less wealthy than urbanized areas , and have older populations with lower educational attainment—factors which negatively correlate with demand for broadband service . related barriers to adoption , such as lower perceived value , affordability , computer ownership , and computer literacy , have persisted over many years . rural areas with relatively favorable geography and demographics may attract significant investment in broadband service , but even subsidies may fail to spur buildout in less - attractive rural markets . this report complements separate crs analyses of major federal subsidy programs on the supply side of the market by providing an analysis of demand - side issues at the nexus of infrastructure buildout and adoption . it focuses exclusively on demand for fixed broadband among rural households and small businesses . it also includes discussion of broadband - enabled services , such as telemedicine and precision agriculture , which may incentivize more rural households and small businesses to adopt broadband service . the report begins with a discussion of the rural broadband market—specifically , the characteristics of demand in rural households and small businesses , and how these affect private - sector infrastructure investments . it then provides a survey of federal broadband programs and policies designed to spur broadband buildout and adoption , with a discussion of how demand - side issues may impede achievement of these goals . it concludes with a discussion of selected options for congress . according to the u.s. census bureau , 60 million americans , or 19.3% of the total population , live in rural areas , defined as "all population , housing , and territory not included within an urbanized area or urban cluster. as of 2010 , urbanized areas and urban clusters occupied about 3% of the u.s. land mass , yet contained more than 80% of the u.s. population . as a result , fixed broadband network infrastructure , which largely relies on wireline connections to the physical addresses of subscribers , is geographically concentrated . urban areas have benefited from this concentration , especially areas with favorable geographic locations and economic conditions . for example , the city of huntington beach , ca , charges broadband providers rent for access to its utility poles—$2,000 per pole per year—and leases access to city - owned fiber - optic cable ( fiber ) infrastructure . "we continue to have a lot of carriers wanting to site on our poles in our downtown area which is next to the beach," a city official said during a 2019 webinar , noting that other , less favorably located cities had not been able to duplicate huntington beach's development model . "[an] inland city is not going to get what we get here on the coast. in contrast , in many rural areas , the cost of providing broadband service may approach—or even exceed—the predicted return on investment . broadband providers may not be willing to serve these areas without support from direct government subsidies , grants , or loans .