the dcoi was updated in june 2019 . among other requirements , the updated dcoi placed a freeze on funds or resources to build new agency - owned data centers or significantly expand existing agency - owned data centers without approval from omb . it also requires agencies to evaluate options for the consolidation and closure of existing data centers , in alignment with the cloud smart strategy . in april 2019 , the government accountability office ( gao ) published a report examining the status of cloud adoption at 16 agencies . gao found that 10 of the agencies reported increasing their use of cloud services from fy2016 through fy2019 . all 16 agencies had made progress in implementing cloud services , meaning they had established assessment guidance , performed assessments , and implemented services , but the extent of their progress varied . for example , not all had followed omb guidance that directs agencies to review all it investments for compatibility with cloud services . gao also found that 16 agencies reported an increase in their cloud service spending since 2015 . 13 of the 16 agencies saved a total of $291 million to date from using cloud services . 15 of the 16 agencies identified significant benefits from acquiring cloud services , including improved customer service and the acquisition of more cost - effective options for managing it services . 15 of the 16 agencies identified nine cloud investments that enhanced the availability of weather - related information ; facilitated collaboration and information sharing among federal , state , and local agencies related to homeland security ; and provided benefits information to veterans . in collecting the information requested by gao , agency cios identified the following challenges: spending data were not consistently tracked . different methods were used to calculate cloud spending costs . interpreting changes in omb and related guidance created confusion regarding what spending data should be tracked . as a result of these challenges , gao concluded that agency - reported cloud spending and savings figures were likely underreported . gao made one recommendation to omb on cloud savings reporting , and 34 recommendations to the 16 agencies on cloud assessments and savings . to omb , gao recommended that agencies be required to explicitly report , at least on a quarterly basis , the savings and cost avoidance associated with cloud computing investments . the 34 recommendations to the agencies included directing cios to establish guidance to assess new and existing it investments for suitability for cloud computing services ; complete an assessment of existing it investments for suitability for migration to a cloud computing service ; and establish a consistent and repeatable mechanism to track savings and cost avoidances from the migration and deployment of cloud services . congress has conducted ongoing oversight of it acquisitions , including cloud computing activity , for many years . this section summarizes cloud - related legislation and hearings in the 116 th congress .