, disabled ) . states use the highest income and resource standard of a separate eligibility group covered by the state plan under which an individual would otherwise qualify if institutionalized . for example , states that offer the special income level pathway described above can extend eligibility to waiver program participants with income up to 300% of the ssi fbr . states must use the income - and resource - counting methodologies used to determine eligibility for this same eligibility group . states may also apply section 1902 ( r ) ( 2 ) 's more liberal income - counting rules to this group . states may establish an independent eligibility pathway into medicaid through the home and community - based services ( hcbs ) state plan option . this option is made available by extending the required and optional medicaid state plan services , sometimes referred to as "traditional" medicaid services , to individuals who are also receiving a targeted package of hcbs state plan services . in general , receipt of the medicaid hcbs state plan option is conditional on an individual having a need for long - term care ( i.e. , individuals must meet certain level - of - care criteria ) . unlike section 1915 ( c ) hcbs waiver programs , which require that eligible individuals need the level of care provided in an institution ( eg , hospital or nursing facility ) , the hcbs state plan option delinks this requirement so that individuals with long - term care needs are not required to meet an institutional level of care need . the hcbs state plan option was first enacted under the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra ; p.l . 109-171 ) and amended under the aca . the income standard for the hcbs state plan option applies to individuals who have income no higher than 150% of the fpl . for individuals who otherwise meet the requirements for an approved waiver program , the income standard can be no higher than 300% of the ssi fbr . states may choose to cover individuals under either or both income standards . generally , states use ssi income - counting methodologies ; however , states have some discretion to apply alternative methodologies , subject to the approval of the secretary of hhs . there are no resource standards for this eligibility group , with the exception for those individuals who seek to establish eligibility based on an approved waiver program . for these individuals , states must use the same income and resource standards and counting methodologies as applied to those individuals eligible under the applicable waiver program . states may also use section 1902 ( r ) ( 2 ) of the ssa to disregard additional income or resources . in 2018 , the most recent year for which data are available , 15 states and the district of columbia offered at least one section 1915 ( i ) hcbs state plan option ; however , only two states ( indiana and ohio ) used this state plan authority as an independent eligibility pathway to medicaid .