about a third of those have children . cohabitating partners are more likely than roommates to fully enjoy the consumption of joint goods that would equate them to married couples . the 2017 tax revision continued , and in some cases expanded , the favorable treatment of families with children in the lower and middle income levels on an ability - to - pay basis . which circumstances are more characteristic of the economy ? note first that , although people refer to the marriage penalty for a particular family situation or the aggregate size of the marriage penalty , it is really not possible , in many cases , to determine the size of the penalty or bonus . the effect of the assignment of a child is demonstrated in table 8 and table 9 , but other features matter . only when a married couple has only earned income , no dependent children , and no itemized deductions or other special characteristics , and only if it is assumed that their behavior would not have been different if their marital status had been different , can one actually measure the size of the marriage penalty or bonus . there is no way to know which of the partners would have custody of the children and therefore be eligible for head - of - household status and the accompanying personal exemptions and child credits . if the marriage bonus is viewed instead as a singles penalty on cohabitating partners , the share of the population affected is limited to less than 10% of households . at the lowest incomes , this treatment was maintained largely due to the eitc's preexisting effects , although increasing the refundable child tax credit added to this favorable treatment . more favorable treatment was increased and extended up through the income classes because of the increase in the child tax credit amount and the increase in the income level at which the credit is phased out . at the highest income levels , rate changes tended to favor joint returns over singles and heads of household , largely due to the rate structure . as was the case with prior law , marriage bonuses occur through most income brackets , but penalties can exist at the lower end of the income distribution , particularly for families with children in which the lower income earner has custody of children , due to the earned income credit and the child credit . the rate structure continues to lead to a potential marriage penalty at high income levels . the 2017 revisions also introduced a new provision that could contribute to the marriage penalty at high incomes: the $10,000 limit on itemized deductions for state and local taxes , which is the same amount for married and single individuals . some amounts will change in the future as they are indexed for inflation . the revision also changed the measure used to index for inflation to the chained consumer price index ( cpi ) rather than the basic cpi . the chained cpi takes into account changes in the mix of spending , and because spending tends to increase for goods with smaller price increases , the chained cpi is smaller than the basic cpi .