listed . once endangered and threatened species are listed , the esa directs federal agencies to "conserve" them and their ecosystems . as shown in figure 2 , the act provides two types of mechanisms to conserve listed species and facilitate their recovery . first , as shown in the protections box of figure 2 , it protects the species by prohibiting certain acts with respect to endangered species ; similar prohibitions may also be extended to threatened species . the act further protects listed species by requiring federal agencies to consult with the services when their actions , or actions they approve or fund , could affect listed species—often called section 7 consultations . through this process , federal agencies assess the potential effects of their actions on any endangered or threatened species and evaluate , as necessary , alternatives that would mitigate the impact . second , as shown in the recovery tools box in figure 2 , the esa provides tools to facilitate the recovery of the species . the act generally requires the secretary to develop and implement a recovery plan for each listed species unless such a plan would "not promote the conservation of the species. the recovery plan includes any site - specific management actions needed to conserve the species , objective and measureable criteria that would merit delisting the species if met , and estimates of timelines and costs . in addition to recovery plans , congress amended the esa in 1982 to allow the services to reintroduce experimental populations of listed species , which are regulated as threatened species regardless of the listed species' status . experimental populations must be "wholly separate geographically" from existing natural populations of the species . as shown in the review status box in figure 2 , the secretary must review the status of a listed species every five years —or pursuant to a petition to reclassify or delist the species that may be warranted —to determine whether it still qualifies as an endangered or threatened species . species are reclassified or delisted based on the same criteria used to list species , as shown in the status box in figure 2 . post - d elisting . once a species is delisted , the states in which the species resides resume control over management of the recovered species . the secretary and the states monitor the status of a recovered species for at least five years after delisting . in this period , if the secretary determines that there is a significant risk to the well - being of the species , the secretary must exercise emergency powers to restore the act's protections to the species for 240 days , during which time the secretary may begin rulemaking proceedings to relist the species . the gray wolf has a long history as a listed species under the esa and its predecessors . as discussed in this section , from the initial listing to the present , nearly every element of the listing and delisting legal framework has been implicated in regulating the gray wolf under the act . ( see " listing and delisting species under the endangered species act " section. )