for example , s. 113 and h.r . 2797 in the 112 th congress would have applied the proportional formula to all beneficiaries ( both current and future beneficiaries ) after 1985 and provided a no - benefit - cut or hold harmless provision to beneficiaries who had worked in noncovered positions prior to one year after the bill's enactment . in a somewhat different approach , h.r . 4540 in the 116 th congress would apply the proportional formula to beneficiaries becoming eligible after a certain date , such as december 31 , 2021 ; provide a rebate to beneficiaries affected by the current - law wep ; and mandate a no - benefit - cut provision for some or all future beneficiaries . the above two bills introduced in the 116 th congress also include provisions to require ssa to show noncovered as well as covered earnings records on social security statements and to require studies on ways to facilitate data exchanges between ssa and state and local governments to improve current - law wep administration . this proposal was recommended by the national commission on social security and included in section 301 of h.r . 3207 , the social security amendments of 1981 as introduced in the 97 th congress . other proposals called for a modified benefit formula that would change the first replacement factor in the regular benefit formula for workers with pensions based on noncovered work , which is similar to current law . for example , a may 1981 reagan administration proposal would have substituted the 90% replacement factor in the regular benefit formula with a 32% replacement factor for affected beneficiaries . the proposal would have guaranteed that the social security benefit reduction could not exceed one - half of the noncovered pension . in january 1983 , the national commission on social security reform ( ncssr , better known as the greenspan commission ) recommended eliminating the windfall portion of benefits for individuals who received a pension based on noncovered employment . the two methods discussed above were suggested: ( 1 ) the proportional formula based on covered and noncovered earnings , and ( 2 ) the modified benefit formula , substituting the 90% replacement factor with 32% . in the same year , ssa offered comments on the two methods . the agency indicated that the proportional formula would be the most conceptually appropriate , but would require ssa to maintain detailed records on workers' noncovered earnings in a manner comparable to the current covered earnings record operations , which would have required extensive data reporting , maintenance , and correction processes , and could likely not have been done with limited cost at that time . in contrast , ssa indicated the modified benefit formula based on the replacement factor would achieve the proportional formula's approximate results and be vastly easier to administer . ssa also recommended lowering the 90% replacement factor to 61% ( the midpoint between the 90% factor and the 32% factor ) , as the 32% replacement factor would overadjust for the windfall .