no further changes have been made to the impeachment rules . the rules , formally titled the "rules of procedure and practice in the senate when sitting on the trial of impeachments" are printed in the senate manual as well as in a 1986 senate document that also describes precedents and practices at an impeachment trial , procedure and guidelines for impeachment trials in the united states senate . the presiding officer of an impeachment trial does not possess any more independent control over proceedings than the presiding officer does during the more common senate deliberations on legislation or nominations . while the presiding officer , in either case , may rule on the proper interpretation of the rules and procedures of the senate , that ruling can be challenged by any senator . in legislative or executive sessions of the senate , if any senator appeals a ruling by the presiding officer , the full senate considers the question , "shall the decision of the chair stand as the judgment of the senate ? the committee did not recommend any major changes to the rules or report any new rules . as the accompanying committee report explained , "there appeared to be a consensus among the members that for the most part the existing rules should be retained and that amendments thereto should be proposed only with the most valid justification. impeachment rule vii states that "the vote shall be taken in accordance with the standing rules of the senate. that means these questions could be settled by roll call vote , but only if that request for the yeas and nays is supported by 1 / 5 of a quorum ( 11 senators ) , or , if the senate recently voted , 1 / 5 of the senators who voted . the impeachment rules make several other references to the presiding officer of the trial . impeachment rule iv restates the constitutional requirement that when the president of the united states has been impeached , the chief justice of the united states shall serve as the presiding officer . impeachment rule iii tasks the presiding officer with administering the oath to senators . rule v grants him general power to execute decisions of the senate where necessary ( which would include , for example , signing a summons the senate ordered to be issued to the person impeached , or signing a subpoena that the senate had agreed to issue ) . rule xiii directs the presiding officer to cause the proclamation to be declared at the start of each day commanding those present to keep silent . rule xvi requires that the parties to the case—the house managers and the impeached officer and his counsel—address the presiding officer when proposing motions , objecting to proceedings , or making any request related to the trial . as mentioned above , rule xix requires the presiding officer to read aloud any question submitted in writing by a senator . the presiding officer also puts the question on the vote on the articles of impeachment , pursuant to rule xxiii and as described above . the presiding officer of the trial can vote when he or she is a senator .