regarding joint resolutions . a concurrent resolution evidencing the will of congress to direct the president to withdraw from hostilities that the war powers resolution asserts is already unauthorized may nonetheless have less than the desired effect , as it is in one conception merely a reiteration of congressional interpretation of the limits of presidential war powers , an interpretation already rejected in most instances by the president . using a joint resolution rather than a concurrent resolution as a vehicle to direct the president to cease action against iran , s.j.res . they will pay a very big price ! on january 2 , 2020 , the u.s. department of defense announced in a statement that the u.s. military had killed irgc - qf commander major general qasem soleimani in a "defensive action. the statement cited soleimani's responsibility for "the deaths of hundreds of americans and coalition servicemembers" and his approval of the embassy blockade in baghdad , and asserted that he was "actively developing plans to attack american diplomats and servicemembers in iraq and throughout the region. according to subsequent media reports and administration statements , soleimani was killed in a u.s. drone strike while leaving baghdad international airport early on the morning of january 3 local time ; kh founder and iraqi popular mobilization forces ( pmf ) leader abu mahdi al muhandis and other iranian and iraqi figures also were killed in the strike . soleimani was widely regarded as one of the most powerful and influential figures in iran , perhaps second only to supreme leader ali khamene'i , to whom soleimani reportedly had a direct channel . as head of the irgc - qf , soleimani was the driving force behind iran's external military operations , including the campaign to keep the asad government in power in syria . some analysts argue that his death is likely to have a dramatic impact on iran's capabilities , with one expert describing him as "the military center of gravity of iran's regional hegemonic efforts" and "an operational and organization genius who likely has no peer in the upper ranks of the islamic revolutionary guard corps. others contend that while soleimani was undoubtedly important , "he was only the agent of a government policy that preceded him and will continue without him. u.s. officials have explained the timing and rationale behind the strike in a number of ways . administration officials claim that soleimani posed a direct threat and that he was involved in planning an "imminent" attack that would put u.s. lives at risk . some members of congress have challenged that assertion , publicly contesting the evidence presented by the administration in a classified setting . president trump said in a january 10 interview that he believed soleimani was involved in planning "large - scale attacks" on "four embassies," while secretary esper said on january 12 that he "didn't see" specific intelligence indicating such a threat . some members of congress have also challenged this rationale in light of reports that another irgc - qf commander was targeted in yemen on the same day as the soleimani strike ( see below ) . the administration has also argued that striking soleimani was an attempt to deter future iranian aggression .