voters . some federal public education campaigns , such as those to counter disinformation in elections , are aimed at individual voters . overall , however , much of the federal role in campaign and election security emphasizes communication among government agencies or , in some cases , the private sector . if it determines that the status quo is inadequate , does congress want to task federal agencies—and if so , which ones—with additional responsibility for educating voters about campaign and election security ; to provide funding for nongovernmental organizations to do so , etc. sectors . coordination . various agencies have reported to congress that they have improved coordination among themselves , particularly through working groups or task forces . less clear , at least from publicly available information , is specifically how such coordination works and whether current coordinating mechanisms are sufficient or whether agencies need additional resources or mechanisms to improve coordination . if it determines that the status quo is inadequate , does congress want to exercise oversight in this area , provide additional information - sharing authorities , funding , etc. , or does it consider current coordination authorities and mechanisms sufficient ? much of the federal government's attention to campaign and election security appears to emphasize outreach to election administrators in states , territories , and localities . with respect to the private sector ( such as political campaigns and equipment manufacturers ) , is federal agency support sufficient ? to what extent are information - sharing practices among federal agencies and the private sector ( or voters ) similar to or different from those that shape communication between federal agencies and state , territorial , or local governments ? if it determines that the status quo is inadequate , does congress want to encourage or require additional federal agency support for nongovernmental entities in campaign and election security , or reporting requirements for those entities to the federal government ? the scope of potential campaign and election security threats , and the federal government's role in responding to those threats , has changed substantially in less than five years . communication . similarly , do state , territorial , and local elections officials feel that they have or need clear points of contact within federal agencies , and do they know which agencies to contact in various circumstances ? if it determines that the status quo is inadequate , does congress want to encourage or require different reporting protocols , agency outreach , etc. the foreign interference revealed during the 2016 cycle—and widely reported to be an ongoing threat—has renewed congressional attention to campaign and election security and raised new questions . whatever congress determines about whether these or other questions are relevant for its consideration of campaign and election security policy , the issue is likely to remain prominent for the foreseeable future . does congress want to encourage or require additional information sharing about campaign and election security matters between the federal government and nonfederal elections agencies ? highlights of recent legislative activity include the following . other departments and agencies , primarily with responsibilities for other areas of public policy , support campaign and election security in specific cases . some agency roles developed from a january 2017 "critical infrastructure" designation .