103-3 , as amended ) . employer provision of paid family leave in the private sector is currently voluntary , and in march 2019 such leave was available to 18% of private - industry employees , according to data from the bureau of labor statistics . as of january 2020 , five states—california , new jersey , new york , rhode island , and washington state—have active programs . women are more likely than men to experience time out of the workforce while raising children . in march 2017 , the labor force participation rate was 63.1% for mothers with children under the age of 3 , 65.1% for mothers with children under the age of 6 , and 76.0% for mothers with children aged 6 to 17 . comparable rates for men were 95.1% , 94.4% , and 91.5% , respectively . women also are more likely than men to be caregivers , provide more hours of care , and provide more hands - on care . women caregivers are less likely to be in the labor force than women who are not caregivers , whereas among men , the labor force participation rate for caregivers is essentially the same as the labor force participation rate for noncaregivers . options include providing caregivers with a number of dropout years ( eg , up to five years ) to be excluded from the social security benefit formula , providing earnings credits ( eg , tied to a fraction of the average wage index for a given year or a fraction of the worker's prior earnings ) to caregivers for years of caregiving ( eg , up to five years ) , and supplementing the retired worker benefit for caregivers in households with limited income ( eg , up to 125% of the federal poverty threshold ) . related are ongoing policy discussions about establishing a system for paid family leave , which refers to partially or fully compensated time away from work for specific and generally significant family caregiving needs , such as the arrival of a new child or serious illness of a close family member . the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2020 ( p.l . 116-92 ) conferred a paid parental - leave benefit on certain federal employees covered by the family and medical leave act of 1993 ( p.l . several other policy changes proposed for other vulnerable groups would aid widows who are members of those targeted groups . brief descriptions follow , along with references for more detailed information . under current law , the social security program has a special minimum benefit ( smb ) for workers with many years of low earnings . however , the smb grows with prices rather than wages , and thus affects fewer beneficiaries every year . in december 2018 , 35,505 beneficiaries received the smb , with an average monthly benefit of just over $900 . this report focuses on widows and social security policy levers to aid them . the earnings threshold for a year of coverage in 2019 is $14,805 ( by comparison , in 2019 a worker earns four quarters of coverage for traditional social security benefits with annual earnings of $5,440 ) .