a bipartisan bill ( h.r . 1359 ) directs executive branch agencies to partner with domestic and foreign partners to "encourage the efforts of developing countries to improve and secure mobile and fixed access to the internet in order to catalyze innovation , spur economic growth and job creation , … promote free speech , democracy , and good governance… and the multi - stakeholder approach to internet governance. understanding the potential long - term impact of the splintering internet on the u.s. economy . without agreement on the underlying rules or convergence on international norms , the risk of a fractured global internet increases . congressional oversight could examine the value , both economic and political , of u.s. leadership and u.s. norms governing the global internet . congress could consider asking the u.s. itc to investigate the economic impact of this fracturing on u.s. businesses and consumers . congress could analyze the different approaches and commitments related to internet governance contained in eu or chinese ftas , and how they differ from u.s. agreements and objectives . more immediately , congress could examine the economic impact of the recent technology trade restrictions in china and other countries on u.s. companies . overseeing ongoing efforts to establish global standards and rules through u.s. participation in sdos , international forums , and recent and ongoing trade negotiations . for example , congress could hold hearings on u.s. government and private sector involvement in standard - setting and china's increasing role in international standards discussions . congress could probe executive branch agencies about specific u.s. objectives and engagement in ongoing negotiations related to internet governance and examine if the united states needs a clear strategy for outreach to international partners to build consensus on issues in advance of formal meetings and conferences . similarly , congress may consider promoting hosting of some standards meetings and international discussions so that more u.s. stakeholders could participate and provide direct feedback . examining efforts by the united states to counter china's digital policies . for example , investments by the new u.s. international development finance corporation ( dfc ) could focus on telecommunications and internet infrastructure and policy . some analysts have suggested that congress establish a digital development fund dedicated to shaping global norms and developing countries' internet regimes . exploring china's digital authoritarianism and its impact on the digital economy and global rules . this could include the effect on u.s. firms doing business in china , as well as the effect on other countries' internet regimes , including identifying which countries or sectors are emulating china's digital rules or technical standards . congress previously held hearings on the threat to free speech and security aspects posed by prc internet sovereignty . congress may explore the value of digital trade provisions in potential new bilateral trade negotiations . this report will compare some aspects of various national internet regimes and then examine the ongoing wto e - commerce negotiations and certain international forums that present an opportunity to establish global rules and technology standards and to minimize or prevent potential problems created by diverging systems .