the pra fundamentally changed the status of presidential records as publicly owned materials . the pra is explicit: "the united states shall reserve and retain complete ownership , possession , and control of presidential records ; and such records shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. in passing the pra , congress required that "public access to the materials would be consistent under standards fixed in law. the pra provides records maintenance requirements and permissions depending on whether a presidency is in progress or has concluded . the pra's effectiveness relies on its ability to be enforced , both in terms of accessing presidential records for oversight purposes through the mechanisms described in statute and in terms of maintaining the records themselves so that they may be accessed . in light of the presidential and federal records act amendments of 2014 requirement to collect presidential records regardless of their media but based on their content , questions regarding the volume and the meaning of an electronic record's completeness are creating policy implications that may be suitable for congressional consideration . these matters may be of particular interest to congress as it carries out its oversight activities and ensures that emerging formats of presidential records are effectively collected and controlled . this definition of presidential records is distinct from federal records and excludes a president's personal records . because of these additional restrictions on presidential records versus federal records , it is important to identify which organizations within the eop create presidential records instead of federal records . additionally , the time during a president's life in which the documents are created may help differentiate between personal , private records and presidential records . policies concerning the custody of presidential materials informs the way such information is controlled , accessed , and released during and after a president's time in office . prior to the pra's enactment , presidential papers were traditionally the private property of the president , who would then donate the materials to institutions for public consumption . the volume of presidential records has increased exponentially in the digital age , as indicated by reporting on the amount of such records at the conclusion of a presidency . as a result of the presidential and federal records act amendments of 2014 , all government records ( both presidential and federal ) are assessed for preservation not by the media used to store the information but rather by the content of the information itself . in the pra's case , documentary materials , of which presidential records are a part , includes "all books , correspondence , memoranda , documents , papers , pamphlets , works of art , models , pictures , photographs , plats , maps , films , and motion pictures , including , but not limited to , audio and visual records , or other electronic or mechanical recordations , whether in analog , digital , or any other form. if the content of any documentary material meets the criteria of a presidential record , the information must be preserved according to the pra regardless of the information's format . presidential records are additionally protected and restricted from public consumption for a set period of time .