for example , h.r . 1317 in the 116 th congress would provide definitions for natural , nature - based , and nonstructural features to be used as criteria for new noaa financial assistance programs . s. 2284 would establish the carbon dividend trust fund with requisite fund transfers to federal agencies . as proposed in s. 2284 , noaa's portion of the fund transfer would support several programs , including a coastal resiliency program that would be required to prioritize the consideration of natural and nature - based infrastructure . however , some members of congress have argued that the establishment of new grant programs , such as the living shoreline grant program in h.r . 3115 , are "duplicative and wasteful," as congress already appropriates funding to noaa that may be used to support nature - based infrastructure . sage is a "community of practice" and aims to share advances in the science , engineering , policy , and financing of nature - based infrastructure across organizations . for example , organizations , including noaa , have been a part of sage pilot projects in selected locations working to address issues such as shoreline loss using nature - based infrastructure . sage also brings organizations together to discuss technical , policy , and financial issues through periodic meetings and serves as a public resource aggregator by compiling links to technical guidance , conference proceedings , research , and other materials . congress may deliberate whether and how to direct noaa to manage nature - based infrastructure activities within the agency or with non - noaa organizations in specific ways . for example , congress may require noaa to coordinate its nature - based infrastructure within an intra - agency working group or task force . alternatively , congress could establish an advisory board or similar group to provide recommendations for better intra - agency , interagency , and interorganizational coordination . for coordination with organizations outside of noaa , congress may authorize in statute an already established working group , such as sage , or create a new group focused on nature - based infrastructure . some stakeholders may argue that a statutory requirement for noaa to coordinate with federal and nonfederal partners may facilitate information sharing , promote the efficient use of available funding , and streamline permitting across federal agencies . others may argue that unless congress specifically authorizes noaa to support nature - based infrastructure activities , the agency should ( 1 ) focus resources solely on meeting current congressional directives and / or ( 2 ) coordinate at their own discretion . congress funds noaa to support , research , restore , and conserve natural resources primarily through the annual appropriations process . noaa reports its spending to congress on a program - by - program basis , but nature - based infrastructure activities are not tracked specifically as line items in either the agency's annual budget request or in congressional appropriations bills and reports . for example , congress appropriated $68 million to the national sea grant college program in fy2019 ; however , noaa does not track what portion of that funding was used to support nature - based infrastructure activities .