and receives mandatory funding . each of the past three farm bills—p.l . 115-334 ( 2018 ) —has included a separate title to modify crop insurance program provisions . u.s. agricultural production got off to a late start in 2019 due to prolonged cool , wet springtime conditions throughout the major growing regions , particularly in states across the northern plains and eastern corn belt . saturated soils prevented many farmers from planting their intended crops ( see text box below ) . such acres are referred to as "prevent plant" ( ppl ) acres . in addition to the unplanted acres , sizeable portions of the u.s. corn and soybean crops were planted later than usual , especially in illinois , michigan , missouri , ohio , wisconsin , and north and south dakota . traditionally , 96% of the u.s. corn crop is planted by june 2 , but in 2019 by that date 67% of the crop had been planted ( figure 1 ) . similarly , the u.s. soybean crop was planted with substantial delays . by june 16 , 77% of the u.s. soybean crop was planted , whereas an average of 93% of the crop has been planted by that date during the previous five years ( figure 2 ) . in addition to the ppl acres , large portions of the corn and soybean crops were planted two to four weeks later than usual ( figure 1 and figure 2 ) . such late planting meant that initial crop development would be behind normal across much of the major growing regions and that eventual yields would depend on beneficial weather extending late into the fall to achieve full crop maturity . the late planting also rendered crop growth vulnerable to an early freeze in the fall . widespread wet conditions continued into the fall , especially in the northern plains and western corn belt . north dakota recorded the wettest september on record in 2019 , while iowa recorded the wettest october . ultimately , much of the corn crop was harvested under wet conditions with high moisture content that required drying . an early cold spell in the upper midwest had already heightened the demand for propane that , in addition to serving as the primary energy source for drying corn , is used to heat hog barns and for other farm operations . this resulted in limited supplies and higher prices for propane . many farmers chose to leave their corn in the field until more beneficial market conditions emerged . as of december 16 , 2019—the date of usda's final weekly crop progress report for 2019—an estimated 8% ( or 7.2 million acres ) of the u.s. corn crop had yet to be harvested , adding further to the uncertainty of yields and harvested acreage for the 2019 corn crop ( table 3 ) . saturated soil conditions heading into the winter months suggest a continuation of wet conditions into the 2020 planting season and the potential for a repeat of planting difficulties in the months ahead .