the extent of this problem is not known . starting in january 2019 , ed established a reconsideration process for anyone whose grant had been converted to a loan and who met or was on track to meet the teach grant service requirements within the eight - year window . in february , ed emailed teach grant recipients who were eligible for a teach grant reconsideration . if a qualifying recipient did not receive an email from ed , he or she could still request a reconsideration by calling or emailing the ed - contracted loan servicer . the loan servicer makes a determination of whether a reconsideration request is accepted and to reconvert loans back to grants ; however , it is unclear whether any other actions are taken such as helping to repair any damage to the recipient's credit as a result of the grant - to - loan conversion . as of may 2019 , of the nearly 6,000 recipients who applied for reconsideration , about 38% had been approved for a reconversion and less than 0.3% had been denied . other changes were proposed in negotiated rulemaking that concluded earlier this year . the resulting draft consensus language would not only establish a reconsideration process in regulation but would also require three other actions by ed as a result of an erroneous grant - to - loan conversion: ( 1 ) crediting any qualifying teaching service performed while the grant was wrongly in loan status toward the recipient's service requirement ; ( 2 ) granting a suspension of the eight - year service obligation period equal to the amount of time that the grant was wrongly in loan status ; and ( 3 ) providing support to help recipients repair any damage to their credit that resulted from the grant - to - loan conversion . several bills propose to codify a formal appeals process in circumstances in which teach grants were wrongfully converted to loans , and allow grants to be reinstated if an error was made . additionally , one such bill proposes that , for grants that are found to have been erroneously converted into loans , ed would be required to extend the recipient's eight - year service obligation period by the amount of time his or her grants were wrongly in loan status . apart from the legislative changes mentioned in the preceding sections , there have been a number of additional proposals concerning the teach grant program . most bills propose to keep but amend the program , while others would replace or repeal it . some legislative proposals that would retain but amend the teach grant program seek to allow partial payback of the award on a prorated basis based on the length of service completed for recipients who do not complete their full service requirement . the noyce scholarship currently implements this practice , and the paul douglas teacher scholarship program used it as well . this might lessen the risk to recipients of accepting the grant and , therefore , encourage more students to participate in the program and enter into teaching . it may also reduce the financial burden on those who had fulfilled some part of their service in a high - need classroom and field .