, no shared electrons ) bonds . this process can be technically quite complicated . for instance , compounds in a final drug product may convert to other compounds through chemical reactions inside the body before arriving at the site of the therapeutic effect , and related but distinct drug molecules may be clinically indistinguishable or convert into the same pharmacologically or physiologically active component inside the body . this phenomenon raises the question of which molecule—the one existing before or after ingestion—should be the relevant molecule for purposes of determining active ingredient . alternatively , two drug molecules with the same core compound may have different compounds appended to them by either covalent ( i.e. , shared electrons ) or noncovalent ( i.e. for example , replacing a hydrogen atom in an acid molecule with "a metal or its equivalent" forms a salt , whereas replacing the hydrogen atom with "an organic radical" forms an ester . these derivatives may or may not vary from each other in clinically significant ways , raising the question of which derivative ( s ) , if any , should be considered as the same active ingredient as the core or base molecule . generally , a more expansive interpretation of the phrase "active ingredient," that is , one that considers more types of derivatives to be the same active ingredient , reduces the number of drugs eligible for nce regulatory exclusivity by expanding the drug ingredients considered previously approved , which , in turn , allows for earlier introduction of generic versions of those drugs . as discussed in more detail below , historically , for purposes of the exclusivity provisions , fda has interpreted "active ingredient," as the term appears in statute , to mean "active moiety," as defined by fda regulations . fda generally defines active moiety as the core molecule or ion of a drug ( i.e. , the drug molecule without certain appendages ) that is "responsible for the physiological or pharmacological action of a drug substance. fda's interpretation has generated disputes between fda and pharmaceutical companies , as fda's approach tends to exclude some drugs from being afforded five - year nce exclusivity under the fd&c act . in 2015 , a federal district court rejected fda's interpretation as inconsistent with the statutory language , though it did not explicitly invalidate fda's regulations . this report discusses fda's interpretation of the fd&c act as referring to active moieties , judicial review of fda's interpretation , and how fda's rationale has changed over time . in the 116th congress , legislation has been introduced that would generally codify fda's current approach to evaluating nce exclusivity and extend that approach to other provisions under the fd&c act that include the phrase "active ingredient ( including any ester or salt of the active ingredient ) . multiple provisions of the fd&c act use the phrase "active ingredient ( including any ester or salt of the active ingredient ) .