the constitution itself does not mention immigration . it does not expressly confer upon any of the three branches of government the power to control the flow of foreign nationals into the united states or to regulate their presence once here . to be sure , parts of the constitution address related subjects . the supreme court has sometimes relied upon congress's enumerated powers over naturalization and foreign commerce , and to a lesser extent upon the executive's implied article ii foreign affairs power , as sources of federal immigration power . significantly , however , the court has also consistently attributed the immigration power to the federal government's inherent sovereign authority to control its borders and its relations with foreign nations . it is this inherent sovereign power , according to the court , that gives congress essentially unfettered authority to restrict the entry of nonresident aliens . the court has determined that the executive branch , by extension , possesses unusually broad authority to enforce laws pertaining to alien entry , and to do so under a level of judicial review much more limited than that which would apply outside of the exclusion context . recent events have generated congressional interest in the constitutional division of responsibilities between congress and the executive in establishing and enforcing policies for the exclusion of aliens . through three iterative executive actions in 2017 , commonly known as the "travel ban," the president provided for the exclusion of broad categories of nationals of specified countries , most of which were predominantly muslim . these executive actions relied primarily upon a delegation of authority in the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) allowing the president , by way of proclamation , to exclude "any aliens" or "any class of aliens" whose entry he determines would be "detrimental to the interests of the united states. in june 2018 , the supreme court upheld the third iteration of the travel ban as likely lawful , rejecting claims that it was motivated by unconstitutional religious discrimination and that it exceeded the president's authority under the ina . since that decision , some members of congress have proposed curtailing executive authority to craft exclusion policy or subjecting executive exclusion decisions and policies to more stringent judicial review . this report provides an overview of the legislative and executive powers to exclude aliens . first , the report discusses a gatekeeping legal principle that frames those powers: nonresident aliens outside the united states cannot challenge their exclusion from the country in federal court because congress has not expressly authorized such challenges . but aliens at the threshold of entry have more access to judicial review of exclusion decisions , compared to aliens abroad , because of statutory provisions and other considerations . next , the report analyzes the extent to which the constitutional and statutory rights of u.s. citizens limit the exclusion power . specifically , the report examines a line of supreme court precedent , starting with kleindienst v. mandel and ending with trump v. hawaii , that makes a highly curtailed form of judicial review available to u.s. citizens who claim that the exclusion of one or more aliens abroad violates the u.s. citizens' constitutional rights .