disclosure . another issue in the context of disclosure is the degree of familiarity with the required labels that consumers may have . consumers unfamiliar with the term bioengineered may have questions about what this means on foods bearing disclosure . public reaction to implementation of the various types of disclosure may generate calls for these options to be revised based on their success or failure to provide consumers with easily accessible and useful information . administrative provisions . an issue for potential consideration is the extent to which additional federal resources will be required to implement the standard in both the voluntary and mandatory compliance periods . in its regulatory impact analysis ( ria ) , ams broadly estimated that it may need $2 million annually to implement the standard , without differentiating potential expenses during the voluntary and mandatory compliance periods . ams proposed that it would use such funds to update the list ; conduct audits and hearings ; manage complaints and inquiries ; and provide training , education , outreach and programmatic support . ams may need to assign staff and develop new processes to implement the standard's provisions related to audits , examinations , hearings , and publications of findings . congress may be asked to consider allocating new resources to support continued implementation of the new standard . in addition , congress may assess the cost and administrative overhead that regulated entities expend to identify and maintain records on foods subject to disclosure and to adjust labels on food packaging . estimates for administrative costs to regulated entities , which ams presents in its ria , range from a lower bound of $459 million to an upper bound of nearly $3.6 billion for the first year . ams anticipates that these costs will greatly reduce in subsequent years as potentially regulated entities replace bioengineered ingredients with non - bioengineered ingredients . regarding enforcement , the rule largely relies on a public notification mechanism to influence the compliance of regulated entities and correct violations of the standard . stakeholders may or may not view this mechanism as successful , depending on the extent and frequency of any such violations . interested parties may petition congress to strengthen existing enforcement mechanisms or identify new ones to enhance compliance with the new standard . market demand for bioengineered versus non - bioengineered products . in the ria , ams indicates that it cannot accurately predict how consumers will react to bioengineered disclosures on food labels . consumers may avoid foods labeled as bioengineered , they may prefer them , or such labels may make no difference to consumer purchasing behaviors . in the ria , ams assumes that manufacturers will avoid labeling 20% of their products as bioengineered , by replacing bioengineered with non - bioengineered ingredients , due to potential consumer reactions . ams selected 20% for purposes of estimating costs and benefits in the ria following consideration of existing studies and surveys of consumer behavior and consideration of the requirements of the standard . depending on how consumers respond , implementation of the standard may influence manufacturer and retailer demand for bioengineered and non - bioengineered foods . applicability .