in the 115 th congress , p.l . 115-97 increased the cap to $650 million for fy2020 and fy2021 . in addition to changing the cap , some members have advocated to increase the percentage of revenues shared with the gulf coast states and to increase the set of qualified leases from which revenues can be shared , as well as to add an additional state ( florida ) to the revenue - sharing arrangement . other bills have proposed new uses of gulf oil and gas revenues for various federal programs and purposes outside of revenue sharing , and some stakeholders have proposed to end gomesa state revenue sharing altogether . some members of congress and other stakeholders have made the case that the coastal states should receive a higher revenue share , given costs incurred by these states and localities to support extraction activities . these stakeholders have compared gomesa revenue sharing with the onshore federal revenue - sharing program , where states receive a higher share of the federal leasing revenues than is provided under the gomesa framework . other members of congress , as well as the obama and trump administrations at times , have contended that revenues generated in federal waters belong to all americans , and revenue distribution should reflect broader national needs . this report provides brief background on gulf of mexico oil and gas development , discusses key provisions of gomesa , and explores issues related to the eastern gulf moratorium and gulf state revenue sharing . the report discusses various legislative options and proposals for amending gomesa , as well as scenarios for future leasing if the law continues unchanged . the gulf of mexico has the most mature oil and gas development infrastructure on the u.s. outer continental shelf ( ocs ) , and almost all u.s. offshore oil and gas production ( approximately 98% ) takes place in this region . some members of congress seek to amend gomesa—either to extend the moratorium or to mandate lease sales in the area—rather than deferring to the ocsla's authorities for executive branch decisionmaking . at stake are questions of regional and national economic priorities , environmental priorities , energy security , and military security . with respect to gulf oil and gas revenues , gomesa's current revenue - sharing provisions take into account multiple priorities: mitigating the impacts of human activities and natural processes on the gulf coast ( through state revenue shares directed to this purpose ) ; supporting conservation and outdoor recreation nationwide ( through the lwcf state assistance program ) ; and contributing to the treasury . additionally , the gulf contains the highest levels of undiscovered , technically recoverable oil and gas resources of any u.s. ocs region , according to boem . the office of natural resources revenue ( onrr ) estimated federal revenues from offshore oil and gas leases in the gulf at $5.51 billion for fy2019 , out of a total of $5.57 billion for all ocs areas ( table 1 ) .