mendez . , or other reports . issues that were considered previously are designated with an asterisk in the relevant section titles of this report . in 2019 , the marines graduated the first gender - integrated boot camp class at marine recruit depot parris island in south carolina . in a statement to congress , lieutenant general david berger noted that there were no significant variations in the performance of gender - integrated units relative to gender - segregated units . section 561 of the house bill would prohibit gender segregated marine corps recruit training at marine corps recruit depot parris island no later than five years after the date of enactment , and at marine corps recruit depot san diego no later than eight years after the date of enactment . historically , the military services have administered the mtfs , while the defense health agency ( dha ) administered the private sector care program of tricare . dha is a combat support agency that enables the army , navy , and air force medical services to provide a medically ready force and ready medical force to combatant commands in both peacetime and wartime . in 2016 , congress found that the organizational structure of the mhs could be streamlined to sustain the "medical readiness of the armed forces , improve beneficiaries' access to care and the experience of care , improve health outcomes , and lower the total management cost. section 702 of the fy2017 ndaa ( p.l . 114-328 ) directed significant reform to the mhs and administration of mtfs by october 1 , 2018 . reforms include: transfer of administration and management of mtfs from each respective service surgeon general to the dha director ; reorganization of dha's internal structure ; and redesignation of the service surgeons general as principal advisors for their respective military service , and as service chief medical advisor to the dha . in june 2018 , dod submitted its implementation plan to congress . the implementation plan details how dod is to reform the mhs to a "streamlined organizational model that standardizes the delivery of care across the mhs with less overhead , more timely policymaking , and a transparent process for oversight and measurement of performance. congress later revised the mhs reform mandate by further clarifying certain tasks relating to the transfer of mtfs , the roles and responsibilities of the dha and the service surgeons general , and by extending the deadline for implementing reform efforts to september 30 , 2021 . dod later revised its plan to accelerate certain tasks . on october 1 , 2019 , the military services transferred the administration and management of their u.s. - based mtfs to the dha . the military services are to continue to administer their overseas mtfs until transfer to the dha in 2020–2021 . discussion: the enacted bill includes a number of provisions clarifying certain responsibilities for dha and other medical entities with service - specific responsibilities , such as administering and managing mtfs , providing health service support to combatant commanders , performing medical research , recruiting and retaining medical personnel , and establishing military - civilian partnerships . organizational management . section 711 of the enacted bill amends 10 u.s.c .