those requirements are discussed below . notably , however , agencies have a great deal of discretion in determining the specifics of their procedures for receiving , considering , and responding to petitions . rulemaking petitions have several potential benefits , such as that they can provide additional , low - cost opportunities for public participation in federal rulemaking . the subsections below identify and discuss several potential benefits of rulemaking petitions . however , as discussed in the last subsection below , responding to rulemaking petitions could potentially require agencies to allocate resources they would otherwise use elsewhere . nonetheless , considering and responding to rulemaking petitions can be time - and resource - intensive for agencies . in 2013 , the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) published a proposed rule to amend its procedures for receiving and considering petitions . in the document , the agency cited an increase in the number of rulemaking petitions it had received recently , stating that this "presented a significant resource challenge to the nrc. such allocation of resources could cause delays in other activities at an agency , such as issuing other regulations . the use of resources to respond to a petition varies widely depending on the nature and content of the petition , however . the effectiveness of , and timing of response to , a petition for rulemaking likely depends on many factors , including the quality and nature of the arguments presented , the policy preferences of the agency and the administration , any statutory requirements or constraints the agency faces , the evidence available to the agency and its ability to justify taking any particular action , and whatever preferences the agency and administration may have for prioritization of resources at the agency . many of these factors are outside of the control of a petitioner , but there are certain steps a petitioner might take to make a stronger case to the agency . some outside groups have offered advice to the public for how to petition agencies more effectively . for example , the center for effective government suggested that a petition for rulemaking should include information such as an explanation of the proposed action ; the language the petitioner would like to propose for a new or amended rule or eliminate from a rule ; information and arguments that support the petitioner's proposed action , including relevant technical and scientific data ; specific facts or circumstances that support the proposed action ; and relevant legal information about any specific laws or statutory provisions that is relevant to the petition and the rule in question . individual agencies may provide guidance , or even requirements , for petitioners on their websites or in their regulations . for example , some of the suggestions provided by the center for effective government above are from the federal aviation administration's ( faa ) regulations and guidance , which are on its website . similarly , the nrc has regulations and detailed information on its website on how to submit petitions , as well as information tracking petitions that have been submitted to it , including visual information on the number and status of the petitions that have been submitted .