red planet capital . in september 2006 , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) announced a partnership with red planet capital , inc. , a non - profit organization , to establish a venture capital fund , red planet capital ( rpc ) . the fund was "to support innovative , dual - use technologies [to] help nasa achieve its mission , [and] better position these technologies for future commercial use. what are the strengths and weaknesses of these potential models ? what are the opportunities and risks of developing a new entity for federal r&d using one of these models ? the varied organizational arrangements of the executive branch have resulted from more than two centuries of legislative and administrative actions . these arrangements reflect a diversity of viewpoints , policy preferences , and political goals among the thousands of elected and appointed officials who have played a role in creating and shaping them . during the middle of the 20 th century , hybrid organizational forms—incorporating both public and private characteristics—began to grow in number . these organizational forms , sometimes collectively referred to as "quasi - governmental entities," differ from one another in their specific features , relationship to the federal government , funding mechanisms , purposes , levels of accountability to elected officials , and use of private sector incentives and efficiencies , among other characteristics . agency - related nonprofit research foundations and corporations fall into this category of organizations . congress has created a number of agency - related nonprofit research foundations and corporations to advance the r&d needs of the federal government and to overcome perceived barriers associated with federal agencies' ability to partner or otherwise engage with industry , academia , and other entities . the stated goals and potential benefits of these quasi - governmental r&d support organizations are that they may: provide a flexible and efficient mechanism for establishing public - private r&d partnerships ( see the box , "what are public - private partnerships ? for more information ) ; enable the solicitation , acceptance , and use of private donations to supplement the work performed with federal r&d funds ; increase technology transfer and the commercialization of federally funded r&d ; improve the ability of federal agencies to attract and retain scientific talent , including through the use of fellowships , personnel exchanges , and endowed positions ; and enhance public education and awareness regarding the role and value of federal r&d . the following sections provide a brief overview of the purpose and intent , governance structure , and federal funding of selected congressionally mandated , federal agency - related nonprofit research foundations and corporations . the foundations discussed include those connected with the work of the national institutes of health ( nih ) , the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , the u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) , the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , and the uniformed services university of the health sciences ( usu ) . nonprofit research and education corporations associated with the work of the department of veterans affairs ( va ) are also discussed .