finke and langdon . as indicated earlier , some states have common laws that impose a fiduciary standard of care on brokers , but many do not . by surveying broker - dealer registered representatives subject to differing state common law - based fiduciary requirements , finke and langdon , two academics , exploited those differences to ascertain whether a relatively stricter fiduciary standard of care affected brokers' willingness to provide advisory services to retail consumers . among other things , the 2012 research found that the number of registered representatives conducting business within a state as a percentage of total households did not significantly change whether or not a state had a stricter fiduciary standard . it also found no significant differences among such financial professionals in states with a strict fiduciary standard compared with states that did not have a fiduciary standard with respect to ( 1 ) whether they were limited in their ability to recommend certain products or to serve clients with limited wealth ; ( 2 ) the percentage of clients with lower incomes and higher levels of wealth ; ( 3 ) their ability to provide a broad range of investment products including those that involve commission - based compensation ; and ( 4 ) the ability to provide tailored customer advice . bhattacharya , padi , and illanes . the researchers analyzed patterns of sales behavior for annuities issued by a large national financial company sold between 2013 and 2015 by broker - dealers based in adjacent counties separated by state lines . released in 2019 , the analysis hinged on the fact that some of the counties were in states with common law - based broker fiduciary standards , but adjacent counties were in states without such standards . among other things , they found that subjecting brokers to a fiduciary duty shifted the suite of investment products that they sell to retail investors . relative to counties without broker fiduciary obligations , brokers in counties with fiduciary standards saw increased costs of doing business , but the jurisdictions also witnessed direct improvements in the quality of the financial advice . major parts of the rules were not to be implemented until 2018 . in making the case for the reform , the obama administration argued that the definition of investment advice needed to be revised given the changed nature of how americans were readying themselves for retirement after erisa's enactment in 1975 . more specifically , the number of participants in traditional defined benefit ( db ) plans had significantly declined , whereas the number of participants in defined contribution ( dc ) plans , such as 401 ( k ) plans , had surged . like the wide - ranging comments that followed the release of the proposed reg bi in 2018 , the adoption of the final 2019 rule also elicited an expansive range of responses . this section first identifies the three broad reactions to the reform . it then provides quoted excerpts from various observers and stakeholders that either ( 1 ) provide support for or ( 2 ) are critical of several concerns regarding reg bi , including its failure to provide for a broker - dealer fiduciary standard .