appendix a . food additive petition process and gras notification submission food additive petition process fda has determined that cbd cannot be added to any food that is sold in interstate commerce . fda is authorized to issue a regulation , after notice and comment , approving the use of a drug ( eg , cbd ) as a food additive , although the agency has never done so for any substance . the ffdca does not specify a process for fda to issue such a regulation , other than that it must be after notice and comment . in regard to the process for food additive approval , fda is authorized to "by order establish a regulation" that prescribes the conditions under which a food additive may be safely used . the issuance of such regulation may be proposed by fda on its own initiative or by an interested person via submission of a food additive petition . a food additive petition must include , in addition to any explanatory or supporting data , the following information: the name and all pertinent information relating to the food additive , including its chemical identity and composition ( if possible ) ; a statement of the conditions of its proposed use , including directions , recommendations , and suggestions , and the proposed labeling ; "all relevant data bearing on the physical or other technical effect such additive is intended to produce , and the quantity of such additive required to produce such effect" ; a description of methods for determining the quantity of such additive in or on food , and any substance formed in or on food , because of its use ; and full reports of safety investigations , including the methods and controls used in conducting such investigations . fda may request that the petitioner also provide information about the manufacturing methods , facilities , and controls , as well as samples of the food additive ( or articles used as its components ) and samples "of the food in or on which the additive is proposed to be used. fda has said that it "does not have a policy of enforcement discretion with respect to any cbd products," although this is expected to change in light of language included in the explanatory statement accompanying the fy2020 enacted appropriation ( see " what could congress do to allow cbd to be marketed as a food additive or dietary supplement ? some industry stakeholders are recommending that , absent an fda regulatory framework for cbd products , manufacturers and marketers of dietary supplements or foods that contain hemp or cbd comply with federal regulations for supplements and food in the interim to help ensure the quality of these cbd products . such compliance would include facility registration , adherence to cgmps , and meeting labeling requirements . in an effort to establish industry - wide standards , one organization has established its own third - party certification program designed for hemp food , dietary supplements , and cosmetic companies . this certification program is independent of federal requirements , and fda has not validated or verified any third - party certification program for hemp .