further , p.l . 115-334 repeals some rural development programs and makes technical corrections to statutory language authorizing other programs . this report provides a brief overview of federal rural development programs . it then analyzes issues that influenced the development of rural development provisions in the 2018 farm bill . exempts from certain freedom of information act requirements information submitted by internet service providers in response to public notices . includes language regarding assessing unserved communities for rural broadband access program eligibility . under the program , usda gives priority to unserved communities —communities that lack residential broadband service at speeds of at least 10 / 1 mbps . section 6207 directs usda to coordinate with the fcc and ntia , obtain data from any other relevant source , and perform site - specific testing to verify that communities given priority are eligible for program funding . requires loan or grant recipients to report annually to usda , rather than semiannually as under prior law . the provision also adds reporting requirements for middle mile projects . it directs usda to submit a single report to congress each year detailing assistance provided under all usda rural broadband loan and grant programs . authorizes not less than 3% and not more than 5% of funding appropriated for certain rural broadband programs be set aside for oversight , reporting , and accountability measures . section 6210 authorizes recipients of certain rd loans , loan guarantees , or grants authorized by the rural electrification act or the conact to use up to 10% of the award amount for rural broadband infrastructure projects . recipients can use funding only for projects in areas that lack broadband service at speeds of at least 25 / 3 mbps . the provision also directs usda not to provide funding if it would result in competitive harm to another recipient of rd loans or grants . section 6206 moves language regarding default and deobligation from the section authorizing the rural broadband access program to a new section of the rural electrification act . it also authorizes usda to establish a deferral period of not shorter than the project buildout period in order to support the financial feasibility of a project . section 6209 moves existing language regarding refinancing telecommunications loans to a new section of the rural electrification act and amends this language . prior law allowed a loan recipient to use any usda telecommunications loan to refinance another usda telecommunications loan if refinancing would support broadband deployment in rural areas . the amended language allows a loan recipient to refinance any outstanding loan that would have been used for an eligible telecommunications purpose under the rural electrification act . sections 6211 and 6502 of p.l . 115-334 amend section 922 of the rural electrification act , which authorizes usda to make loans for rural telephone service . section 6211 authorizes telephone loans to be used to refinance other loans authorized by the rural electrification act . it removes the limit that 40% or less of the telephone loan may be used to refinance other loans . section 6502 removes the word rural from the section title of the rural electrification act , amending it to read , "loans for telephone service.