it has been extended a number of times . most recently , the deduction was extended through december 31 , 2020 , in the taxpayer certainty and disaster tax relief act of 2019 , enacted as division q of the further consolidated appropriations act , 2020 ( p.l . these income limits are not adjusted for inflation . the above - the - line deduction for qualified tuition and related expenses was enacted temporarily by the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act of 2001 ( p.l . one criticism of education tax benefits is that the taxpayer is faced with a confusing choice of deductions and credits and tax - favored education savings plans , and that these benefits should be consolidated . some tax reform proposals have consolidated these benefits into a single education credit . taxpayers may claim the tuition and fees deduction instead of education tax credits for the same student . the lifetime learning credit ( 20% of up to $10,000 ) is not limited in years of coverage . these credits are generally more advantageous than the deduction , except for higher - income taxpayers , in part because the credits are phased out at lower levels of income than the deduction . for example , for single taxpayers , the lifetime learning credit begins phasing out at $59,000 for 2020 . the deduction benefits taxpayers according to their marginal tax rate . students usually have relatively low incomes , but they may be part of families in higher tax brackets . the maximum amount of deductible expenses limits the tax benefit's impact on individuals attending schools with comparatively high tuitions and fees . because the income limits are not adjusted for inflation , the deduction might be available to fewer taxpayers over time if extended in its current form . the distribution of the deduction in table 2 indicates that some of the benefit is concentrated in the income range where the lifetime learning credit has phased out , but also that significant deductions are claimed at lower income levels . because the lifetime learning credit is preferable to the deduction at lower income levels , it seems likely that confusion about the education benefits may have caused taxpayers not to choose the optimal education benefit . the credit for health insurance costs of eligible individuals , commonly known as the health coverage tax credit ( hctc ) , reduces the cost of qualified health insurance for eligible individuals . after 2020 , under current law , the floor is scheduled to increase to 10% of agi for all taxpayers . a complicated set of rules governs the expenses eligible for the deduction .