in reality , the process can be more complicated . cp b receives a direct payment for its content from users . both edge providers pay the isp a termination fee to bring the content to the terminal point , the user . users pay the isp a subscription fee to access the data provided by cp a and cp b . an edge provider may rely on a different isp than its users' isps , in which case the content would travel through the internet backbone . the internet backbone consists of various networks linking servers and multiple isps together . in the latter case , how should user data be "priced" ? should all edge providers that rely on digital advertising be compared to each other in one market , or should these edge providers be separated based on content ? on june 3 , 2019 , the house judiciary committee announced that it would begin an investigation into competition in digital markets . it has held five hearings , which have raised questions and discussions including or related to the topics covered in this report . among the major questions related to edge providers that congress may wish to consider are the following: how does vertical integration among isps and edge providers affect competition ? one of the difficulties in answering this question is the inability to evaluate how the market would have developed absent vertical integration . for example , vertical integration may lead to greater innovation in some cases , but to less innovation in others . it is also unclear how the effect of vertical integration on competition should be measured . as many users of edge providers' services do not pay for those services in a monetary sense , price effects , which are traditionally used to evaluate the extent of competition , may not be a sufficient measure . how could inequities in the amount of consumer data obtained by edge providers affect competition in the future ? consumer data may become increasingly important as machine learning and artificial intelligence technologies are further refined . it could be used to predict behavior among consumers or provide other competitive advantages for edge providers with large amounts of consumer data . should competition among edge providers be regulated , and if so , to what extent ? while the doj and ftc examine specific companies on a case - by - case basis for consumer protection or antitrust violations , the establishment of a regulatory framework could help prohibit anticompetitive practices . however , regulations may also disadvantage potential entrants while strengthening incumbents , and may impede innovation . edge providers offer a wide variety of products and services , which could complicate the establishment of a single regulatory framework . however , other aspects of competition among edge providers , such as their relations with isps , are a matter relevant to all edge providers . on june 15 , 2015 , consumer watchdog , a nonprofit organization that advocates for taxpayer and consumer interests , filed a petition requesting the fcc to regulate edge providers and prevent them from "tracking personal information and web activity without consumers' knowledge and permission.