, gdp ) . the value - added contribution to total economic output of minerals mined on federal lands is not known , as not all of the underlying data are recorded by the bureau of land management ( blm ) or reported by mine operators . using available data , the u.s. department of the interior ( doi ) estimates that coal and solid minerals mined on federal lands supported $13.9 billion in value added , $24.2 billion in economic output , and 81,700 jobs in fy2018 . the usgs may conduct geological surveys to increase this information . this bill would also establish a research and development program in the department of energy ( doe ) to increase efficiencies in the critical mineral supply chain , to identify substitutes for critical minerals , and to promote the use of recycling as a source of critical minerals . this research also includes producing forecasts related to critical minerals for a 10-year period , including expected demand , market conditions , and possible substitutes for critical minerals . this bill would repeal the national critical materials act of 1984 and authorize $50 million per year for 10 years to fund its activities . this bill also includes identical language to s. 1052 ( discussed below ) . 4410 , among other provisions , would establish a federal cooperative and a federal corporation related to rare - earth minerals and thorium ; both federal charters would be privately funded and operated . the cooperative would process domestic and international sources of rare - earth minerals and materials into products for sale . the corporation would accept all radioactive material ( eg , thorium ) produced by the cooperative , sell any valuable materials , and could conduct research on new uses of such materials . s. 1052 , among other provisions , would direct the doe to authorize an ongoing program to develop technologies for the extraction of rare - earth elements ( ree ) from coal and coal byproducts . the bill would authorize $23 million per year for eight years to fund this program . according the committee report accompanying this bill , "congress appropriated funding in 2014 for [the national energy technology lab] to develop extraction technologies for rees from coal byproducts . s. 1052 formally authorizes the program. 2531 , among other provisions , would treat mineral exploration and mining projects related to critical minerals as high - priority infrastructure projects , as defined by e.o . 13807 , and would attempt to reduce the time to issue permits to 30 months by allowing the lead agency to determine that nepa requirements have been met or do not apply to the project . 3405 , among other provisions , would instruct the secretary of the interior to remove uranium from the list of critical minerals , as prepared by the usgs pursuant to e.o . a previous version of this bill , introduced on june 21 , 2019 , finds that the united states has reserves of uranium , and that 52% of uranium is imported from stable trading partners .