in an address to the u.s . naval academy in august 2019 , secretary of defense mark esper described the indo - pacific as "our priority theater" and stated … allies and partners want us to lead … but to do that we must also be present in the region.… not everywhere , but we have to be in the key locations . this means looking at how we expand our basing locations , investing more time and resources into certain regions we haven't been to in the past . counter to these statements' emphasis on allies and partners , however , the trump administration has appeared to some less - engaged on regional issues , sending lower - level officials to key regional summits , withdrawing from the proposed trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) trade agreement , and canceling joint exercises with south korea . in addition , president trump has openly questioned the value many of the united states' alliance relationships , particularly with japan and south korea . as a result , some observers note that u.s. allies and partners also may be increasingly concerned over aligning too closely with the united states at a time when the united states' commitment to the region is questioned , even as many in the region hope that the united states continues to play a dominant or balancing role in asia . for many in asia , the strategic picture has been complicated further by the trump administration's trade policies , which are sometimes perceived as asking partners to choose between the united states and china—both critical trade and investment relationships that have been crucial to their economic successes over the past few decades . in response to these developments , some allies and partners are expanding their defense budgets , embarking on major arms purchases , and looking to create new defense and security networks to strengthen their collective ability to maintain their independence from chinese influence . 115-409 ) , states: "without strong leadership from the united states , the international system , fundamentally rooted in the rule of law , may wither... . it is imperative that the united states continue to play a leading role in the indo - pacific. congress may assess how growing military spending and new security arrangements affect that goal . within this evolving context , regional states are adjusting their strategic calculations . a number of trends appear to be emerging across the indo - pacific: several regional states have sought to develop new intra - asian security partnerships to augment and broaden existing relationships . japan , australia , and india are among the most active in this regard ; numerous asian states have adopted an "indo - pacific" conception of the region , strategically linking the indian and pacific ocean regions . however , the concept remains vague and not all states agree on what it means ; many regional states have increased defense spending , although spending as a percentage of gdp has been relatively steady , and some have adopted more outward - looking defense strategies .