dod certified spacex to compete for nss launches in 2015 . the falcon 9 flew its first nssl mission on december 23 , 2018 , which delivered the global positioning system ( gps ) iii to orbit . spacex developed a more capable launch capability in the falcon heavy , which dod certified in june 2018 and later awarded nss missions under phase 1a of the nssl program . a large number of key suppliers for ula are spread throughout 46 states . spacex maintains three launch sites , one at cape canaveral air force station , fl ( space launch complex 40 ) ; one at kennedy space center ( launch complex 39a ) ; and one at vandenberg air force base , ca ( space launch complex 4e ) . on october 10 , 2018 , the air force awarded three launch service agreement ( lsa ) other transaction authority ( ota ) agreements to space launch companies . the lsa ota agreements are "public - private partnerships [that] leverage industry's commercial launch solutions to ensure those systems meet nss requirements. they also "facilitate development of three nssl launch system prototypes and maturing those launch systems prior to selecting two nss launch service providers for launch service procurements beginning in fy2020. the air force released request for proposals ( rfp ) in may 2019 for phase 2 of the nssl program , with plans to award two separate launch service procurement ( lsp ) contracts in the summer of 2020 . the selected companies will be responsible for launching national security satellites through 2027 . however , the air force acquisition strategy of down - selecting no more than two launch providers may mitigate short - term risk but could have second - and third - order effects for resiliency in the future . congress may consider whether the strategy's cost - benefit analysis warrants further research . should no more than two launch providers be chosen for lsp contracts in phase 2 , the companies not selected would lose the lsa funds received from the air force and could potentially be faced with ( 1 ) the choice of abandoning nssl development to focus on competing in the commercial launch sector or ( 2 ) investing vast company reserves to continue development on its own . furthermore , dod investment in only two launch providers could mean fewer options for an increasingly diverse range of national space security missions and possibly limit competition , once again , in the launch market . several interrelated factors created uncertainty over the air force's ability to continue with the three - phased eelv acquisition strategy . these included ongoing concerns over program and launch costs , u.s. national security vulnerability from dependence on a russian component in the eelv program ( the rd - 180 main engine ) , legal challenges to the acquisition strategy , and legislation that could change the eelv program . although there are important differences in how to achieve it , widespread support appears to exist across the space community and within congress for the nss requirement for robust competition and assured access to space .