army modernization . when does the army expect to fully resource programs related to its modernization priorities ? how can the army provide more transparency in identifying sources of funding from these reviews ? why does funding for programs related to the army's six modernization priorities account for a relatively small share of its overall acquisition budget ? how is the army reviewing potential ways to control military personnel or operations and maintenance costs to be able to spend more on rdt&e and procurement in support of programs related to its modernization strategy ? including funding planned for fy2020 and fy2021 as part of the fy2020 president's budget request , the army has an outstanding balance of $120.6 billion ( in then - year dollars ) for current major defense acquisition programs . while the commission's finding is directed at dod as a whole , it suggests there are questions concerning how modernization priorities and plans support the national defense strategy and , by association , the national security and military strategies as well . what would be some challenges in doing so ? how much of the army's overall acquisition budget should go toward modernization priorities , current acquisition programs , and legacy programs ? some programs related to the army's six modernization priorities , such as future vertical lift , saw a higher percentage increase in requested funding for fy2020 than others , such as air and missile defense . do the percentage increases reflect the level of priority the army is assigning these individual programs—or rising costs associated with new stages of development ? the army's fy2020 unfunded priorities list included $242.7 million for "modernization requirements" and $403.9 million for "lethality requirements," among funding for other requirements . should the army devote a larger share of its overall acquisition budget to its six modernization priorities ? why was the service unable to fund these requirements in its regular budget request ? the service projected $57.3 billion in rdt&e and procurement funding for programs related to its six modernization priorities over the fydp from fy2020 through fy2024 . this amount , if authorized and appropriated by congress , would reflect an increase of $33.1 billion ( 137% ) from projections for the five - year period in the fy2019 budget request . see table 2 for a breakdown of the projected cost by program . for the five - year period through fy2024 , the army projected a total of $187.5 billion for its acquisition accounts ( in nominal dollars ) , including $58.7 billion for rdt&e and $128.8 billion for procurement . notably , for the fy2020 fydp , funding for programs related to the army's six modernization priorities accounts for less than a third ( 31% ) of its overall acquisition budget . in addition to the previous list , potential questions for policymakers include: how realistic are the army's assumptions for funding programs related to its six modernization priorities , given uncertainty about their long - term costs and the projected decrease in real terms ( i.e. , inflation - adjusted dollars ) in army procurement and rtd&e funding over the future years defense program ? should the level of planned funding change for certain programs to reflect different priorities ?