of course , some people are poorer than others . attention is also paid to living arrangements . because poverty is measured at the family level , considerations such as whether someone lives alone , or whom someone lives and potentially shares resources with , influence economic well - being . other factors that affect family well - being , and that influence individuals' attachment to and success in the labor market , are important for considering individuals' experiences of poverty but are beyond the scope of this report . this snapshot looks at the composition of people in poverty—what groups comprise what share of the poverty population—rather than at poverty rates among different groups . this provides a different perspective in viewing poverty . a large population group such as non - hispanic whites might have relatively low poverty rates , but because of the group's size in the overall population it represents a relatively large share of the poverty population . a small population , such as american indians and alaska natives , might have relatively high poverty rates , but because of the group's size it represents a relatively small share of the poverty population . both perspectives on poverty are valid and relevant to public policy . as the conversations about poverty and public policy continue , it may be useful to consider the question: who are the people who are poor in the united states ? in 2018 , an estimated 38.1 million people had pre - tax money income below the poverty threshold . as this report shows , certain groups are over - represented among those living in poverty relative to the total population . in 2018 , an estimated 17.3 million persons , close to half of all people in poverty ( 45.3% ) , were counted as living in deep poverty . the population of people living in poverty comprised individuals of all ages and sexes , and across all racial and ethnic groups . for children , this income is based on the work of their parents or other family members . for working - age adults , it is their own work that generally determines their poverty status . for aged adults , who are often retired from the workforce , it is primarily their past work or the work of those they live with that determines their status . however , sometimes earnings from work are not enough to prevent poverty . as shown in figure 1 , people who were poor accounted for 11.8% of the total noninstitutionalized population . the number and percentage of people in poverty reflect those whose family income fell short of the poverty threshold by any dollar amount . one area of policy focus has been on the very poor: those considered to be in "deep poverty. deep poverty is usually defined as having income below 50% of the poverty threshold . poverty raises different public policy considerations for children , working - age adults , and aged adults . children are not expected to support themselves economically—they are dependents of their parents or other adult caretakers who are assumed to fulfill that responsibility . policies affecting the family income and poverty status of children generally apply to their parents or other adult caretakers .