figure 1 . selected timeline of events related to u.s. - eu agricultural tradesource: crs . actions related to the u.s. - eu trade agreement negotiations are shown in red.note: ustr = u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) . wto = world trade organization . eu27 includes the current 27 eu member states , excluding the united kingdom ( uk ) . eu28 includes the uk . following are trade data and statistics for the current 27 eu member states ( eu27 ) . unless otherwise noted , these figures exclude the united kingdom ( uk ) , which formally exited the eu in january 2020 . moving forward , u.s. trade negotiations with the eu are expected to exclude the uk , which may enter into trade discussions with the united states separately . trade data presented here are compiled from u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) trade statistics for "agricultural and related products. as defined by usda , this product grouping includes agricultural products ( including bulk and intermediate products and also consumer - oriented products ) and agricultural - related products ( including fish and shellfish products , distilled spirits , forest products , and ethanol and biodiesel blends ) . additional information on the various data sources is discussed in the t ext box . the united states and the eu are the world's largest trade and investment partners . while food and agricultural trade between the united states and the eu27 accounts for less than 1% of the value of overall trade in total goods and services ( figure 2 ) , the eu27 remains a leading market for u.s. agricultural exports . it accounted for about 8% of the value of all u.s. exports and ranked as the fifth - largest market for u.s. food and farm exports in 2019—after canada , mexico , china , and japan . data depicted in figure 2 do not reflect trade in fish and seafood , distilled spirits , and bioenergy products . during the past two decades , growth in u.s. agricultural exports to the eu has not kept pace with growth in trade to other u.s. markets . u.s. agricultural imports from the eu27 currently exceed u.s. exports to the eu27 . in 2019 , u.s. exports of agricultural and related products to the eu27 totaled $12.4 billion , while u.s. imports of agricultural and related products from the eu27 totaled $29.7 billion , resulting in a u.s. trade deficit of approximately $17.3 billion . this reverses the u.s. agricultural trade surpluses with the eu27 during the early 1990s ( figure 3 ) . leading u.s. agricultural exports to the eu27 were corn and soybeans , tree nuts , distilled spirits , fish products , wine and beer , planting seeds , and processed foods . leading u.s. imports from the eu27 were wine and spirits , beer , drinking waters , olive oil , cheese , and processed foods . while data shown in the graphic reflect total trade in "agricultural and related products," including agricultural products , fish and shellfish products , distilled spirits , and other agricultural related products , the trade picture may vary by product category ( as shown in table 1 ) .