energy assistance is entirely discretionary . the exceptions are the broad - purpose tanf block grant and snap . tanf is best known as a program that provides cash assistance to needy families with children . 111-148 as amended ) medicaid expansion . the largest programs providing benefits and services to low - income people are mandatory spending programs . these are programs where spending is controlled by the terms of their authorizing laws—such as entitlements either to individuals or states—rather than the annual appropriation process . discretionary spending is generally determined through annual appropriations . figure 3 shows federal spending in fy2018 on benefits and services for people with low income by category and budget classification ( mandatory , discretionary , or some programs have spending classified as both ) . the largest categories ( health , cash aid , and food aid ) are dominated by mandatory spending . housing is almost entirely discretionary spending , determined through annual appropriations . education is split between discretionary spending and the pell grant program , which has both mandatory and discretionary components . social services and employment and training have a mix of mandatory spending ( much of it coming from the broad - based temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant ) and discretionary funding . of the $917.8 billion spent by the federal government on benefits and services for people with low income in fy2018 , $741.2 billion ( 81% ) was spent on programs or activities receiving only mandatory funding and $139.7 billion ( 15% ) was spent on programs or activities receiving only discretionary funding . the remaining $37.0 billion of spending occurred in programs receiving both mandatory and discretionary funding . snap was the largest food assistance program ( $63 billion in food assistance in fy2018 ) , but it also contributed $441 million in employment and training expenditures in fy2018 . health care is a major source of mandatory spending: 94% of all health care spending discussed in this report was mandatory spending in fy2018 . table 2 shows spending for federal benefits and services to low - income persons by program for fy2008 to fy2018 . the programs were classified into the eight categories of spending noted above , and are ranked within each category by fy2018 spending . note that in many categories , spending is dominated by a few large programs . for example , in fy2018 , medicaid accounted for 85% of health care spending , supplemental security income and two refundable tax credits for low - income workers ( the earned income tax credit and the refundable portion of the child tax credit ) accounted for 93% of all cash aid , supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) accounted for 67% of all food aid , and pell grants plus aid to school districts with large shares of disadvantaged children accounted for 81% of all education aid . most programs had spending that was classified in a single category . tanf accounted for $5.2 billion in federal spending on cash aid in fy2018 , making it the fourth - largest cash program and representative of 4% of cash spending .