appendix a . appendix b . supplementary table . farm payments flow down through these arrangements to individual recipients . despite their longevity , payment limits are not universal among programs . payment limits are also enforced differently for different types of legal entities ( as mentioned earlier and summarized below ) . for example , certain program limits may be expanded depending on the number of participants , or they may be subject to exceptions , or they may not exist . the major categories of farm program support and the applicability of annual payment limits , if any , are briefly discussed below . limitations on farm program payments raise a number of issues that have led to debate among farm policymakers and agricultural stakeholders and may continue to be of interest to congress as it considers issues of equity and efficiency in farm programs . theoretically , market prices—based on relative supply and demand conditions under competitive market conditions —provide the most useful signals for allocating scarce resources . in other words , in a situation where no policy support is available , most producers would make production decisions based primarily on market conditions . subsequent levels of attribution are related to those legal entities in which an individual has an ownership share . if a person meets his or her payment limit at the first level of attribution ( i.e. , on his or her own personal farming operation ) , then any payments to legal entities at lower levels of attribution are reduced by that person's pro rata share . when the eligibility criteria—including aef , agi , conservation compliance , and others—are met , the cumulative benefits across certain farm programs are subject to specific annual payment limits ( detailed in table a - 1 ) that can be received by an individual or legal entity in a year . explicit payment limits date back to the 1970s . if these conditions hold , then tighter payment limits ( i.e. , a smaller role for government support policies and production incentives ) would imply that more land would be farmed based on market conditions and less land would be farmed based on policy choices . supporters of payment limits use both economic and political arguments to justify tighter limits . economically , they contend that large payments facilitate consolidation of farms into larger units , raise the price of land , and put smaller , family - sized farming operations and beginning farmers at a disadvantage . even though tighter limits would not redistribute benefits to smaller farms , they say that tighter limits could help indirectly by reducing incentives to expand , thus potentially reducing upward price pressure on land markets . politically , they believe that large payments undermine public support for farm subsidies and are costly . in the past , newspapers have published stories critical of farm payments and how they are distributed to large farms , nonfarmers , or landowners . limits increasingly appeal to urban lawmakers and have advocates among smaller farms and social interest groups .