appendix a . data sources and resources lists the united nations children's fund ( unicef ) and fundaciã³n para la educaciã³n en contextos de multilingã¼ismo y pluriculturalidad ( the foundation for education in multilingual and multicultural contexts or funproeib ) gathered data in 21 latin american and caribbean countries in 2009 for its report in two volumes titled atlas sociolingã¼ã­stico de pueblos indã­genas en amã©rica latina . the report notes the limitations of using national censuses . in 2014 , the united nations' economic commission for latin america and the caribbean ( eclac ) gathered population data from 17 latin american countries using national censuses for guaranteeing indigenous people's rights in latin america: progress in the past decade and remaining challenges . the report notes that most countries ask people to self - identify as indigenous with the exception of peru , which asks people if they speak an indigenous language . in 2015 , the world bank gathered data in 16 countries using national censuses and household survey data in order to publish indigenous latin america in the twenty - first century: the first decade . the report notes that the definition of who is indigenous has become increasingly controversial and "underscores the complexity of identifying indigenous people across the region and argues that the conditions of indigeneity vary over time and are , in some cases , context - and country - specific. the current edition of ethnologue documents language counts for each country and divides them into indigenous and non - indigenous categories . indigenous languages figures were used in table 2 as non - indigenous is defined as "a language that did not originate in the country , but which is now established there either as a result of its longstanding presence or because of institutionally supported use and recognition. only living languages were included in the count , not languages classified as extinct . ethnologue's "about" section provides details on the methodology , language names , and status of usage . the world bank's latin america and caribbean equity lab provides data on poverty , access to services , education and labor ( last updated in october 2018 ) . the world bank notes that ethnic identity is based on self - reported data . statistics may vary from official statistics reported by governments as the world bank uses sedlac , "a regional data harmonization effort that increases cross - country comparability. the web page of the inter - american commission's human rights rapporteurship on the rights of indigenous peoples provides detailed information on hearings and court cases related to indigenous peoples' rights . the data on drivers of forest loss in latin america are from: philip g. curtis , christy m. slay , nancy l. harris , alexandra tyukavina , matthew c. hansen , "classifying drivers of global forest loss," science , vol . 361 , issue 6407 , pp . 1108-1111 , september 14 , 2018 , at https: / / science.sciencemag.org / content / 361 / 6407 / 1108 . there are multiple methodologies for each driver of forest loss using map - based estimates and sample - based estimates . for each table below , sources are listed in reverse chronological order with the year in parentheses following the title .