the slower growth has been widespread throughout the country . the only regions not affected by the slowdown were the southwest , rocky mountains , and new england . although economic growth has slowed recently , it has not been negative or close to zero in any quarter since the fourth quarter of 2015 . investment spending on structures , which include office buildings , factories , and power and communication infrastructure , fell from a growth rate of 3.7% in the former period to a 6.5% contraction in the latter period . the decline in structures has been widespread , but has been particularly notable in the category of mining exploration , shafts , and wells—a category of spending that is highly sensitive to commodity prices . the slowdown in equipment spending has been most notable in transportation equipment . other components of gdp have not grown rapidly recently , but nevertheless do not explain the slowdown . growth in personal consumption spending ( specifically , services ) has slowed , but by less than overall growth has slowed . residential investment ( new house construction ) shrank by about 1% in both periods , having no effect on the overall difference between the two . growth in government purchases was a little higher—thereby boosting growth—in the latter period . import growth was lower in the latter period , which , in national accounting , increased growth . although growth fluctuates considerably from quarter to quarter , economists believe that the economy can grow no faster than its internal speed limit—called the potential or trend growth rate —over longer periods of time . over shorter periods of time , the primary determinant of growth is the business cycle . the business cycle refers to the repeated pattern of recessions ( contractions in economic activity ) followed by ( longer ) expansions , which are then followed by another recession , and so on . average growth over an entire business cycle of normal length would be expected to be close to the potential growth rate . after recessions , in which output has fallen considerably , there is scope for a period of rapid catch - up growth that brings unused labor and capital resources back into use . the current economic expansion is already the longest recorded expansion in u.s. history , so at this point it would not be expected that the economy could grow faster than its potential growth rate for a sustained period because there is no scope for catch - up growth—the economy's labor and capital inputs are close to fully employed . in these conditions , growth may temporarily exceed trend growth , but it would be expected to return to trend growth fairly quickly . at this point , the main debates are what the trend growth rate is and whether it can be raised through structural policy changes . growth can rise or fall over a period of time for cyclical or structural reasons . cyclical contributions to growth are mainly demand driven—they are a function of how fast spending in the economy is growing . the government can temporarily influence spending through fiscal and monetary policy .