30-minute break . fmcsa is seeking information on alternatives to , and the impact of eliminating , the required minimum 30-minute rest break after no more than 8 hours have passed since the driver either ( a ) came on duty or ( b ) spent a period of at least 30 minutes in the sleeper berth of a truck . fmcsa added the 30-minute break requirement to the hos rule in 2011 based on evidence from several studies that for a period after taking a break from driving a driver is less likely to be involved in a crash . split sleeper berth time . a driver in a truck with a sleeper berth can divide the minimum 10 off - duty hours into 2 separate periods totaling at least 10 hours ; one of those periods must include at least 8 hours spent in the sleeper berth . fmcsa initially planned to conduct a pilot program giving drivers more flexibility in the length of the sleeper berth periods , in order to collect data regarding the impact of providing such flexibility on driver rest and alertness . in october 2018 , fmcsa announced that it was cancelling the proposed pilot program , saying it already had enough data and research on the topic and wanted to fast - track its proposed changes to the hos rule . the public comment period on the potential changes closed in october 2019 . fmcsa has not indicated when proposed regulations may be published . one of the industry segments that has objected most strenuously to being subjected to more stringent compliance with the hos rule due to the eld mandate is livestock hauling . these drivers transport living creatures that require food and water and that are subjected to increased stress and risk of injury by the process of being loaded onto and unloaded from a vehicle as well as by the experience of transport . also , federal law provides that livestock being transported across state lines can be confined in a vehicle for a maximum of 28 consecutive hours , after which they must be unloaded for feeding , watering , and rest . the law , however , is apparently frequently ignored and not rigorously enforced by the u.s. department of agriculture . the livestock hauling industry already had several hos exemptions prior to the eld mandate: the private transportation of agricultural commodities ( including livestock , bees , and horses ) to or from a farm or ranch by the owner or operator of the farm or ranch , family members , or employees is exempt from the hos rule . during agricultural planting and harvesting seasons ( as determined by each state ) , haulers of agricultural commodities , including livestock , bees , and horses , who operate within a 150 air - mile radius of the source of the commodities , are exempted from the hos rule . this area within which this exemption can be claimed was expanded from a radius of 100 air miles to 150 air miles in 2012 , more than doubling the exempted area .