is provided in table 1 below . the exact language from the c.f.r . after an agency receives a request , the agency is to inform the requester of its receipt . as of march 26 , 2020 , crs identified statements by 13 agencies regarding covid - 19's impact on foia request processing . government information requests through foia may be impacted by covid - 19 in two ways: ( 1 ) certain types of information related to the outbreak may be eligible for expedited consideration ; and ( 2 ) processes for locating information may change due to employees working remotely or on administrative leave . while challenges in locating responsive information may occur at any agency , responses to requests for information during the covid - 19 outbreak have varied . the table should be considered a snapshot in time , as agencies may update or change their statements . of the 13 agencies identified , 8 altered the transmission method by which a foia request should be submitted . some statements also discuss current operating status , and mention anticipated delays due to covid - 19 . six of the identified agencies have additional allowances for expediting requests: u.s. air force , department of housing and urban development , department of labor , department of veterans affairs , national archives and records administration , and office of government information services . of the six agencies that established additional allowances for expediting requests , five permit expediting cases where due process rights would be impacted , four permit expediting cases where there exist possible questions affecting public confidence in the federal government's integrity , one permits expediting due to humanitarian needs , and one permits expediting at the discretion of the agency's foia officer . table 1 presents these recent statements regarding the impact of covid - 19 or simply changes in agencies' abilities to process foia requests , provides code of federal regulations ( c.f.r. ) citations to each agency's policy regarding expedited foia requests , and notes whether the agency has made additional allowances for expediting requests . crs performed a search of federal department websites and their components . this report provides an overview of the foia request process and actual and potential foia request processing changes within federal government agencies as a result of covid - 19 . foia does not require requests for agency information to be submitted in a particular format , only that the request reasonably describes the records sought and complies with agency regulations . most agencies accept requests via mail , email , web form , or fax . the statute also requires the affirmative disclosure of certain categories of agency information , such as "substantive rules of general applicability," "rules of procedure," and , since 2016 , records requested three or more times . while the text of foia does not specifically dictate the method in which the public must request information from an agency , foia does prescribe how an agency is to respond to the request .