screening prisoners . screening employees . bop is instituting advanced health screenings of employees at prisons in areas with "sustained community transmission" as determined by the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) . advanced health screening involves self - reporting of possible exposure to covid - 19 and temperature checks . volunteers , contractors , attorneys , and tour participants who are granted access to a prison are subject to the same screening procedures . bop maintains an infectious disease management program as a matter of course , but in response to the covid - 19 pandemic bop has instituted practices specific to mitigating the spread of the disease in its facilities . all new arrivals to the prison are to be screened for covid - 19 exposure risk factors and symptoms , asymptomatic prisoners with noted exposure risk factors are quarantined , and symptomatic prisoners with noted exposure risk factors are to be isolated and tested for covid - 19 . modifications to operations . bop is making modifications to its operations , if the facility's population and physical layout make modifications feasible , to allow for social distancing and to limit group gatherings . for example , prisons might stagger meal and recreation times . usms has not released a covid - 19 prevention plan , but as discussed above , usms does not operate its own jail system and prisoners are subject to any plans developed and implemented by the facility in which they are housed . however , if a prisoner develops complications from covid - 19 that could not be adequately treated in the facility in which he or she is housed , usms would assume the cost of transporting the prisoner to a local medical facility and covering the cost of the medical care provided . doj lacks the authority to grant early release to prisoners for the specific purpose of mitigating the transmission of a communicable disease . however , there are authorities that may provide avenues for some federal prisoners to be released in response to the covid - 19 pandemic . these authorities include statutory provisions allowing ( 1 ) federal courts to reopen pretrial detention hearings or permit temporary release of prisoners under certain circumstances , ( 2 ) for federal prisoners to be released before completing their sentences , and ( 3 ) for federal prisoners to be placed in the community to serve the final portion of their sentences . additionally , the president retains constitutional authority to grant clemency for federal offenses , which can include commuting a prisoner's sentence to time served . as of april 6 , 2020 , attorney general william barr has issued three memoranda that provide direction on doj's response to the covid - 19 pandemic . two of the memoranda were to bop , and they outlined how bop should use its home confinement authorities to reduce the spread of covid - 19 in federal prisons . the other memorandum was to all components of doj , including all u.s. attorney's offices , and it provides guidance regarding when prosecutors should seek pretrial detention for federal defendants in light of the risks some people might face if they were jailed pending adjudication of their cases .