some mof congress have voiced their agreement . u.s. agricultural exports increased slightly in 2018 . in 2019 , however , u.s. agricultural exports declined about 2% , due to lower global demand for affected u.s. agricultural products and downward pressure on prices of some commodities . in the short run , retaliatory tariffs contributed to price declines for certain u.s. agricultural commodities and to a reduction in exports , particularly for soybeans . declining prices and export sales , combined with rising input and farm machinery costs , contributed to a 16% decrease in u.s. net farm income in 2018 , which prompted usda to provide trade aid payments to the farm sector in 2018 and 2019 . during 2018 and 2019 , the secretary of agriculture used his authority under the commodity credit corporation charter act to initiate two ad hoc trade assistance programs in response to foreign trade retaliation targeting u.s. agricultural products . the trade aid packages were part of the administration's effort to provide short - term assistance to farmers for the temporary loss of important international markets . on july 24 , 2018 , usda announced the first "trade aid" package , which targeted production of selected agricultural commodities in 2018 and was valued at up to $12 billion . on may 23 , 2019 , usda announced a second package , which targeted production of an expanded list of commodities and was valued at up to an additional $16 billion . thus , the two years of combined trade assistance were valued at up to $28 billion . several factors have contributed to this trade imbalance including a relatively open import regime and lower average tariffs in the united states , increased competition from low - cost or government - subsidized producing countries , and non - tariff trade barriers to u.s. exports in some countries . additionally , other market factors , such as exchange rate fluctuations and structural changes in the u.s. food industry , as well as increased u.s. overseas investment and diversification in market sourcing by u.s. companies , have contributed to the trade imbalance . increased domestic and year - round demand for fruits and vegetables as well as opportunities for counter - seasonal supplies through imports have also contributed to this trade situation . despite u.s. efforts to address some of these issues as part of recent fta discussion , a number of these issues are unresolved . other u.s. concerns include import competition regarding seasonal produce from mexico , long - standing suspensions agreements between the u.s. and mexico involving fresh tomatoes , and regulatory requirements regarding retail wine sales in canada . in 2019 , exports of u.s. livestock and poultry products totaled $24.1 billion , and imports totaled $14.2 billion . foreign demand for u.s. animals and products supports prices of domestic livestock and poultry producers , while imports supplement u.s. consumer demand for a variety of livestock and poultry products . recent trade agreements with canada and mexico , china , and japan will facilitate increased livestock and poultry product exports to these four markets , which accounted for 65% of the value of total u.s. exports of these products in 2019 .