, plug - ins ) . figure 3 demonstrates the differentiations between the three broad categories of evs: hybrid - electric vehicles ( hevs ) , plug - in hybrid - electric vehicles ( phevs ) , and all - electric vehicles ( aevs ) . consequently , a manufacturing shift toward aevs may disrupt parts manufacturing and maintenance in the automotive industry due to changing demands for parts and differing required skillsets for laborers in the production and maintenance of aev parts . batteries in plug - in electric vehicles—phevs and aevs—can be charged using a standard residential outlet . providing a full charge in this manner takes hours due to the low voltage available from a home electrical service . the slow pace of charging is one factor currently affecting consumer acceptance of evs ; most motorists are used to filling up a tank with gas in a matter of minutes . current technology ( table 2 ) offers three rates of charging , differentiated by the voltage of the electrical current: level 1 at 120 volts alternating current ( ac ; see shaded box on alternating current versus direct current ) ; level 2 at 240 volts ac ; and level 3 ( also called dc fast charging ) at 500 volts direct current ( dc ) . level 1 and level 2 are the most widely accessible , with both voltages often available in a standard home . connectors and charge ports for ac charging use the sae j1772 standard , a result of the sae international standards process documenting common engineering practices . most plug - in electric vehicles come with a level 1 cordset with a standard three - prong plug on one end and a j1772 connector on the other that plugs into a vehicle's corresponding charge port . some vehicles come with a level 2 cordset , which has a plug for a 240-volt outlet , such as that used for a clothes dryer . for drivers charging at home , no additional cost is required if the selected outlet is served by a dedicated circuit . lower voltages mean longer charging times . level 3 offers the highest voltages and faster charging rates than level 1 and level 2 . the level 3 charging unit has a charger that converts ac from the electric grid to dc , enabling direct charging of the battery pack . ordinarily , evs use an on - board charger to perform this conversion . as an emergent technology , level 3 connectors and charge ports are not currently standardized and include chademo ( used by kia , mitsubishi , and nissan ) ; sae combined charging system ( ccs ; used by bmw and chevrolet ) ; and tesla supercharger ( proprietary to tesla vehicles ) . due to the high voltage , level 3 is not available for residential installation and is only accessible at charging stations . since the first modern evs were introduced in the 1990s , use of ev technology and supporting infrastructure has grown . as an emergent technology area , a number of factors remain under consideration . a range of federal policies affect the purchase and use of evs .