enforcement . the sec has brought enforcement actions against securities token issuers and digital asset traders and asset managers , among others . the sec established a new cyber unit and increased its monitoring of and enforcement actions against illicit cyber - based transactions . no - action letter s . the sec uses no - action letters to provide relief for digital - asset - related businesses and to signal its regulatory intentions to capital markets . for example , the sec issued a no - action letter to turnkey jet , a business - travel startup , stating that its issued tokens are not securities . this was the sec's first no - action letter for an ico . the letter triggered a wave of industry discussions and could set a precedent for future digital asset activities . solicitation for public input . the sec released a letter to the industry in march 2019 to solicit public input regarding digital asset custody . the comments may help the sec understand the challenges the industry faces and assess investor - protection risks . new product approval . the sec could approve or reject new digital asset products . for example , the sec has reviewed bitcoin etf proposals in recent years and has consistently rejected such proposals as of 2019 . digital assets and their use in capital markets are a growing presence in the financial services industry's development . they raise policy questions , including whether new digital - asset - related practices have outgrown or are sufficiently overseen by the existing regulatory system ; how the regulatory frameworks can achieve a level playing field where the same businesses and risks could be subject to the same regulation ; and how to protect investors without hindering innovation . a fundamental understanding of innovative trends and the appropriate timing of the related policy actions are also important for digital asset regulation . in analyzing technological changes , some commentators suggest that society tends to overestimate a technology's effects in the short run and underestimate its effects in the long run . this illustrates the delicate balance between social pressure for change and the appropriate timing for policy responses in the face of innovation . securities laws require all securities offers and sales to either be registered under their provisions ( as a public offering ) or qualify for an exemption from registration ( as a private offering ) . icos can take many forms . this section explains key examples of digital asset developments and use cases , focusing on policy issues and legislative proposals in the securities regulation context . the most salient digital asset - related policy issues include regulatory oversight and investor protection . regulatory o versight . digital asset issuers and investors face a steep learning curve in comprehending the regulatory landscape and determining how or if securities laws apply to them . it may not always be clear whether a digital asset is a security subject to sec regulation . multiple agencies apply different regulatory approaches to digital assets at the federal and state levels .