phase two . the second phase occurs during the remaining second through fourth years of the pilot program . during these years , rmoms program award recipients implement the models based on the recipients' work plans . in addition , the recipients are to provide mothers and infants with case management and care coordination services . the recipients would collaborate with hrsa to identify the data elements to monitor and measure through the model . the state maternal health innovation ( mhi ) program is a maternal health program that funds up to nine cooperative agreements for state - focused demonstration projects , with the goal of improving u.s. maternal health outcomes . state mhi award recipients are to establish demonstration projects within a state or group of states . the demonstration projects are responsible for converting recommendations on smm and maternal mortality into actionable items that can be implemented by the states or groups of states . recommendations—such as providing maternal women with continuous team - based support , improving quality of maternity health care services , and engaging in productive collaborations—derive from hrsa's maternal mortality summit , held in june 2018 . state mhi program recipients are required to collaborate with other hrsa program awardees of programs such as aim , the healthy start program ( healthy start ) , and maternal , infant , and early childhood home visiting ( miechv ) programs in their state . the fy2019 state mhi program has a five - year performance period , september 30 , 2019 , through september 29 , 2024 . the supporting maternal health innovation ( mhi ) program funds up to one cooperative agreement to help states , stakeholders , and recipients of hrsa - administered awards reduce and prevent u.s. cases of smm and maternal mortality , and improve u.s. maternal health outcomes . states and stakeholders include state health agencies , community - based organizations , and pregnant and postpartum women and their families . hrsa recipients include those of the initial aim program , aim–community care initiative , healthy start , and mch services block grant program . supporting mhi program award recipients aim to achieve the following three program objectives by calendar year 2024: ensure that 75% of hrsa award recipients report improvement in their ability to implement evidence - informed strategies , with the goal of reducing and preventing maternal morbidity and mortality . support the state mhi program by ensuring that 75% of hrsa award recipients that aim to improve maternal health outcomes can access the peer - to - peer learning opportunities and resources available through the state mhi program . support the aim–community care initiative by ( 1 ) increasing the dissemination of resource materials to support the adoption of nonhospital - focused maternal safety bundles , and ( 2 ) increasing the dissemination of evidence - informed strategies in communities that experience disparities in u.s. maternal morbidity and mortality . the fy2019 supporting mhi program has a five - year performance period , september 30 , 2019 , through september 29 , 2024 . the state mhi program funds a single project that undertakes two core functions: ( 1 ) providing capacity - building assistance , and ( 2 ) establishing a national resource center .