when will the economic effects peak ? how much economic activity will be lost as a result of the viral outbreak ? what are the most effective monetary and fiscal policies at the national and global level to address the crisis ? what temporary and permanent effects will the crisis have on how businesses organize their work forces ? many of the public health measures taken by countries such as italy , taiwan , south korea , hong kong , and china have sharply impacted their economies ( with plant closures , travel restrictions , and so forth ) . how are the tradeoffs between public health and the economic impact of policies to contain the spread of the virus being weighed ? initial efforts at coordinating the economic response to the covid - 19 pandemic across countries have been uneven . governments are divided over the appropriate response and in some cases have acted unilaterally , particularly when closing borders and imposing export restrictions on medical equipment and medicine . an emergency meeting of g - 7 ( canada , france , germany , italy , japan , the united kingdom , and the united states ) finance ministers on march 3 , 2020 , fell short of the aggressive and concrete coordinated action that investors and economists had been hoping for , and u.s. and european stock markets fell sharply after the meeting . however , on march 16 , 2020 , the leaders of the g - 7 countries held an emergency summit by teleconference to discuss and coordinate their policy responses to the economic fallout from the global spread of covid - 19 . in the joint statement released by the g - 7 leaders after the emergency teleconference summit , the leaders stressed they are committed to doing "whatever is necessary to ensure a strong global response through closer cooperation and enhanced cooperation of efforts. the countries pledged to coordinate research efforts , increase the availability of medical equipment ; mobilize "the full range" of policy instruments , including monetary and fiscal measures , as well as targeted actions to support workers , companies , and sectors most affected by the spread of covid - 19 ; task the finance ministers to coordinate on a weekly basis , and direct the imf and the world bank group , as well as other international organizations , to support countries worldwide as part of a coordinated global response . g - 7 coordination has not been without problems , however , including disagreement among g - 7 foreign affairs ministers about how to refer to the virus ( coronavirus or the "wuhan virus" ) and concerns about collaboration on vaccine research . the g - 20 , which has a broader membership of major advanced and emerging - market economies representing 85% of world gdp , was slower to respond to the pandemic .