what information should be included in such estimates ? if so , what will be the threshold for major ? past rules have used a measure equal to 0.25% of gdp . these effects are referred to subsequently as demand - side effects . supply - side effects occur if potential output is altered due to changes in investment or savings that increase the capital stock , labor supply , or productivity . the crowding - out ( or - in ) effect occurs when an increase ( or decrease ) in the deficit reduces ( or increases ) funds available for private investment and hence reduces ( or increases ) the capital stock . and if the rule applies to spending , will it apply to discretionary spending that varies from the baseline as well as direct / mandatory spending ? currently , no house or senate rules explicitly require the preparation or use of dynamic estimates , and congress may choose to examine what rules changes , if any , are needed in the area of dynamic estimates . while committees and members continue to have the ability to request that cbo or jct provide dynamic estimates for certain policies or legislative proposals , at some point congress may choose to reinstitute explicit rules related to such dynamic estimates . these requirements could be articulated as formal direction from the committees of jurisdiction or leadership to jct and cbo . alternatively , as was done previously , these requirements might be included in chamber rules or in budget resolutions , or might be included in a standing order or in statute . if congress were to reinstitute explicit rules related to dynamic estimates , it may choose to consider many facets of such potential rules: will there be a threshold for the creation of such estimates ? should the proposal also allow the legislation to be designated as "major" by either majority or minority committee and / or chamber leadership ? should cbo and jct provide dynamic estimates only for "major proposals," such as those that have a large estimated budgetary impact ? would the effect on gdp be measured by the entire legislation , or would it be triggered by an individual provision or group of provisions ( such as revenue raisers or revenue losers in a tax bill ) that met the threshold ? the latter approach would capture revenue - neutral legislation that nevertheless made significant changes that could affect gdp . should rules for dynamic estimates apply to spending as well as revenue proposals since both have the potential to cause notable macroeconomic effects ? practices prior to 2015 provided insight into how sensitive the results were to choice of model and parameters . the jct has also continued to present information on the parameters of its models that lead to behavioral responses . the justification for assigning model weights might also be addressed in more detail . should dynamic estimates be used only for informational purposes , or also for enforcement purposes ? dynamic estimates allow congress to weigh the merits of the legislation—should they also be used to determine whether the legislation complies with the budgetary rules that congress has created for itself ?