citizen. the department of justice maintained that the census , not a survey like the acs , was "the most appropriate vehicle for collecting" citizenship data "critical to the department's enforcement of section 2 of the voting rights act" and its "protections against racial discrimination in voting. opponents of the citizenship question expressed concern that it might depress immigrants' census response rates or cause them to falsify data , especially if their status in the united states , or that of their friends or families , was illegal . census bureau fieldworkers in 2017 noted heightened anxiety about data confidentiality among certain foreign - born respondents and reluctance to answer questions , particularly about citizenship status . six former bureau directors signed a january 26 , 2018 , letter to secretary ross , opposing the late - date introduction of a citizenship question that , at the time , had not been tested for the 2020 census . multiple lawsuits were filed to block the question . judge jesse furman , u.s. district court for the southern district of new york , ruled on july 26 , 2018 , that a consolidated suit by the state of new york and others could proceed . the u.s. supreme court heard the case as department of commerce et al . even if a person participated in a census test , the person still is obligated to answer the 2020 census questions and can be part of the census count only by doing so . even though people will be able to answer the census online , an accurate master address file , with the addresses , geocodes , and other attributes of living quarters , will be , as in past decades , the foundation for contacting the public and conducting a good census . it will enable the bureau to notify the public about the census and , as necessary , send census forms and enumerators to nonresponding households . for the 2010 census , the bureau hired about 150,000 "address canvassers" to walk 11 million census blocks , updating addresses and maps as they went . in preparation for 2020 , the bureau created block assessment , research , and classification application software to compare satellite images of the united states at successive times . using this software , the bureau could identify new housing developments , changes in existing houses , and other houses that were built after 2010 . the bureau could compare , too , "the number of housing units in current imagery with the number of addresses on file for each block. satellite imagery enabled the bureau to verify 65% of addresses without going into the field , leaving 35% for field verification . the bureau recruited and trained about 32,000 temporary workers to verify more than 50,000 addresses nationwide , covering about 1.1 million census blocks . on august 12 , 2019 , the bureau announced the start of this work , the first major field operation of the 2020 census . the operation ended on october 11 , 2019 . the bureau expects to hire up to 500,000 temporary census field workers . enumerators for the nonresponse follow - up operation , beginning in may 2020 and continuing through early july , are the main example .