ad law and practice . economic analysts in particular note that ad policy is trade distorting . for example , ad duties deflect trade , by causing exporters to seek out markets where their goods are not subject to ad duties . as one pair of economists noted , the suspension agreement on fresh tomatoes from mexico caused mexico to make more tomato paste to ship to the united states and to ship more fresh tomatoes to canada , which in turn shipped more fresh tomatoes to the united states . many scholars also conclude that ad duties depress consumer activity by raising costs for consumers and propping up unproductive businesses . according to one survey , ad policies globally affect somewhere between 3% and 8% of a country's total imports , making them one of the most costly commercial policies . there is also a general consensus that ad duties , when analyzed economically without consideration of their political benefits for encouraging trade liberalization , depress overall trade . congress has generally been supportive of ad duties , and reform efforts have been limited despite the generally negative view of the practice held by many economists . phillip swagel , the now - director of the congressional budget office and former assistant secretary of the treasury for economic policy , recently referred to antidumping as the "third rail of trade policy," arguing that "few politicians of either party [are] willing to point out its broadly negative impact. while many argue that ad laws are economically inefficient if evaluated on their face , some of those critics have conceded "that even if ad is the largest and most frequently used contingent trade remedy ( and the most costly single commercial policy ) , ad may nevertheless be a desirable policy as it serves an important role in promoting overall trade liberalization by acting as a pressure release valve. as congress considers its overall goals with respect to trade policy , it might weigh dumping's economic costs against its potential role in supporting trade liberalization . congress could , for example , encourage ( in committee hearings ) or direct ( through legislation ) commerce to change the de minimis thresholds for finding that dumping has taken place or that the dumped goods have caused an injury . such changes could reduce or encourage the use of the policy . during the negotiations over the establishment of the wto , the united states persistently advocated for the establishment of robust dispute settlement provisions and congress required the president to ensure that dispute resolution provisions were included in the final agreement . the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) asserts that this method allows the united states to "focus on those transactions in which dumping occurs. as a result , the agreements establishing the wto included the dispute settlement understanding ( dsu ) , which provides for an enforceable means by which members can resolve disputes over wto commitments and obligations . in recent years , however , several administrations have been critical of the wto's dispute settlement system in general and with the role of the appellate body ( ab ) in particular .