wages are associated with educational achievement . a decline in labor mobility appeared to make a small contribution . college graduates are 15% of the bottom quintile and almost 80% of the top quintile . this section discusses some policy options for those left behind by economic growth that might be considered if there is a desire to increase lower - and middle - income individuals' incomes or reduce inequality . numerous targeted tools exist that the federal government could use to intervene to affect the income distribution . these policies include direct taxes and transfers that increase after - tax earnings ; other policies that might increase pretax wages , such as wage subsidies and the minimum wage ; and a variety of policies that might potentially provide more equality , such as education and training programs and relocation assistance . this discussion is intended to provide a review of a broad sweep of proposals . other proposals have been largely untried ( such as a federal job guarantee and wage insurance ) ; a job guarantee could cost several hundred billion dollars a year , according to estimates , and present some potentially problematic effects on the private economy , as well as difficulties in administering the program . some of the more limited proposals may be successful but have small effects . in 2016 , for workers over 25 , those with less than a high school diploma had median weekly earnings of $504 . median weekly earnings were $1,156 for those with a bachelor's degree , $1,380 for a master's degree , $1,745 for a professional degree , and $1,664 for a doctoral degree . the wage premium for a college degree ( the ratio of average wages for those with a college degree compared to those with a high school diploma ) rose from 134% in 1979 to 168% in 2016 ; the premium for an advanced degree rose from 154% to 213% over that same period . the wage premium for a college degree rose steeply until about 2000 then continued to rise slightly after 2000 . over the 1979-2016 period , the share of workers with a college degree also increased ( from 23% to 40% ) . these programs involve potentially large costs and may require raising taxes on higher - income individuals . there is only limited evidence of the effects of a universal basic income and it would be costly if not phased out . past evidence on a phased - out program found some negative effects on work effort . experience with the minimum wage , at least at prior levels , has indicated an ability to transfer income with relatively small effects on unemployment , although the effectiveness of increases in the federal minimum wage is limited by widespread state adoption of higher minimum wage rates . this increase in the skill premium suggests that the demand for skilled workers rose relative to the supply over this time frame . using the cpi , real wages of men with a high school diploma or less declined significantly between 1979 and 1999 , while women with a high school diploma experienced small , but generally positive , growth during that period .