116-94 , respectively . congress funds most u.s. international food assistance programs through two annual appropriations bills—the agriculture appropriations bill and the sfops appropriations bill . the following sections detail each account in the agriculture and sfops appropriations bills that funds international food assistance and the programs funded through these accounts . table 1 lists each international food assistance account along with the respective appropriations bill , funded programs , primary delivery method , and implementing agency . division b of p.l . 116-94 provided $1.945 billion for international food assistance programs in agriculture appropriations , including $1.725 billion for the food for peace ( ffp ) title ii program and $220 million for the mcgovern - dole international food for education and child nutrition program . division g of p.l . 116-94 provided an estimated $2.146 billion for international food assistance programs in sfops appropriations . this included an estimated $2.066 billion for the emergency food security program ( efsp ) and $80 million for the community development fund ( cdf ) . this report provides an overview of accounts in the agriculture and sfops appropriations bills that fund international food assistance programs . it summarizes the trump administration's fy2020 budget request for international food assistance . the report then details the international food assistance provisions in the fy2020 enacted agriculture and sfops appropriations bills—division b and division g of p.l . figure 1 depicts each u.s. international food assistance program by authorizing and appropriations committee jurisdiction and implementing agency . for the third year in a row , the trump administration's fy2020 budget request proposed eliminating mcgovern - dole and ffp title ii . however , unlike in the fy2018 and fy2019 requests—in which the president proposed shifting all funding for international food assistance to the ida account within the sfops appropriations bill—the president's fy2020 request proposed creating a new international humanitarian assistance ( iha ) account . the proposed iha account would have consolidated four humanitarian assistance accounts—the ida , migration and refugee assistance , and emergency refugee and migration assistance accounts that are funded in sfops appropriations , along with ffp title ii within agriculture appropriations—into a single account within the sfops appropriations bill . the fy2020 budget request also repeated past proposals to eliminate food for progress and merge the da account with the economic support fund ( esf ) , democracy fund ( df ) , and assistance for europe , eurasia , and central asia ( aeeca ) accounts to create a new economic support and development fund ( esdf ) within sfops appropriations . congress did not adopt the administration's fy2020 proposals to eliminate ffp title ii , mcgovern - dole , or food for progress or create the new combined iha and esdf accounts . the following section summarizes the administration's fy2020 budget requests for u.s. international food assistance programs in the agriculture and sfops appropriations bills . the fy2020 agriculture appropriations act provided funding for u.s. international food assistance programs in the foreign assistance and related programs title ( title v ) . this included funding for ffp title ii and mcgovern - dole . the act also provided funding for administrative expenses to manage existing ffp title i loans that originated while the ffp title i program was active .