schedule a issuances . s. 386 contains a provision that would reserve up to 4,400 green cards for schedule a occupations ( professional nurses and physical therapists ) . under the most recent version of the bill , this set - aside would last for six years following enactment . the set - aside includes 4,400 principal immigrants , as well as their family members , effectively doubling the provision's impact . to estimate the number of family members , the analysis assumes that schedule a principal immigrants brought with them an average of 1.06 derivative immigrants . as such , the total set - aside under this provision is 4,400 principal immigrants plus 4,664 derivative immigrants , for a total set - aside of 9,064 immigrants . because of the hold harmless provisions , schedule a issuances are projected to start in year 2 of the analysis ( fy2022 ) . new petition approvals . transition year issuance s. s. 386 contains provisions that would allow a transition from the current 7% per - country ceiling to its elimination in the first three years following enactment . the transition would affect issuances in the first three years following enactment . because all of the issuance provisions described above overlap during the first few years , this analysis gives precedence to the hold harmless , overseas petition , and schedule a issuances over the transition year issuances . maintain c urrent l aw . supporters of the per - country ceiling cite the current law's original purpose of this provision: to prevent nationals from a few countries from monopolizing the limited number of employment - based green cards . this 7% threshold allows prospective immigrants from other countries to acquire lpr status in a relatively short time , diversifying the skilled pool of workers from which u.s. employers may draw . to the extent that prospective immigrants from high immigrant - sending countries such as india and china concentrate in particular industrial sectors , the per - country ceiling imposes constraints on some industries and allows others to access that worker pool . because indian nationals , in particular , have entered the employment - based backlog in relatively large numbers over the past two decades , they experience the most pronounced impact of the per - country ceiling . some indian nationals currently wait for decades to receive green cards—and in the case of new eb2 petition holders , centuries . some indian nationals consider this provision of the law discriminatory and unfair . remove a nnual p er - c ountry c eiling for e mployment - b ased i mmigrants . supporters of removing the per - country ceiling emphasize the inordinately long wait times which , as shown above , require indian nationals who enter the employment - based backlog to wait an estimated 8 , 195 , and 27 years , respectively , for green cards in the eb1 , eb2 , and eb3 categories . this analysis estimates that , holding current conditions constant , these wait times could increase to 18 , 436 , and 48 years , respectively , by fy2030 .