yes . section 8401 provides the secretary with the authority to waive various esea statutory and regulatory provisions . an sea or indian tribe that receives funds under any esea program may submit a request to the secretary to waive any statutory or regulatory requirement pertaining to the esea , unless the secretary is prohibited by law from waiving such provision . an lea that receive funds under any esea program may also request a waiver of esea statutory and regulatory provisions , but the lea must submit its request to its sea . the sea then has the option of submitting the lea's waiver request if the sea "determines the waiver appropriate. thus , an sea could request a waiver related to its accountability system . for example , an sea could request that only measures of student growth rather than student proficiency be used in the accountability system or that the sea be permitted to create a combined measure based on student proficiency and student growth . an lea could submit a waiver request to operate under a modified accountability system , such as an accountability system where the lea uses different indicators than those selected by the state . however , as the lea waiver request would have to be approved by the sea prior to being submitted to the secretary , it is possible that an sea would deny the request and require that all public schools be evaluated using the state established accountability system , as is currently required by statutory language . in identifying the lowest - performing 5% of title i - a schools for csi , statutory language requires each state to select these schools using a "state - determined methodology" that is based on the "system of meaningful differentiation. as there are no regulations clarifying the identification of schools for csi , based on ed's approval of state plans it appears that a state can decide whether to use all of the data included in the system of meaningful differentiation , including data for subgroups , or use only selected elements from the system of meaningful differentiation in its state - determined methodology for identifying csi schools . there are ed - approved state plans that include subgroup performance in the identification of the lowest performing 5% of schools for csi and also approved state plans that do not include it . for example , the district of columbia's state plan bases 25% of a school's overall accountability framework rating on student subgroup performance . based on this accountability framework , the lowest performing 5% of schools are identified for csi . on the other hand , north carolina's state plan only considers a school's total score on the state accountability model for the all students group when identifying the lowest performing 5% of schools . for all years following the first school year in which schools are identified for atsi , the methodology for identifying schools for tsi begins with an sea's identification of schools with at least one subgroup that is "consistently underperforming , as determined by the state. as such , an sea has the flexibility to define this group of schools as broadly or as narrowly as it chooses .