74-320 ) was enacted . the act provided 30% of customs receipts to usda to purchase surplus commodities from farmers impacted by the depression . these commodities were donated through various outlets for domestic consumption , including school lunch programs . with commodity aid came the first federal regulations for school lunch programs . selected initiatives and activities are discussed below . crs reports: crs in focus if10266 , an introduction to child nutrition reauthorization crs report r45486 , child nutrition programs: current issues crs report r42353 , domestic food assistance: summary of programs crs report r41354 , child nutrition and wic reauthorization: p.l . 111-296 ( summarizes the healthy , hunger - free kids act of 2010 ) crs report r44373 , tracking child nutrition reauthorization in the 114th congress: an overview crs report r45743 , usda domestic food assistance programs: fy2019 appropriations crs report rl34081 , farm and food support under usda's section 32 program crs report rl33299 , child nutrition and wic legislation in the 108th and 109th congresses ( summarizes the child nutrition and wic reauthorization act of 2004 ) other resources: usda fns website , https: / / www.fns.usda.gov / usda fns healthy , hunger - free kids act page , http: / / www.fns.usda.gov / school - meals / healthy - hunger - free - kids - act the fns page of the federal register , https: / / www.federalregister.gov / agencies / food - and - nutrition - service usda fns congressional budget justifications , https: / / www.obpa.usda.gov / explan_notes.htm . the emergence of school lunches and the national school lunch program when the first federal aid for school lunches was provided in the 1930s , local school lunch programs were already operational in many cities and localities across the u.s . many of these early lunch programs were started by charitable women's organizations at the turn of the century in an effort to feed hungry children . over time , they transitioned to school boards and school districts . these programs received a combination of private , local , and state funding . the federal government became involved in school lunch programs during the great depression both as a way to feed hungry children and support the farm economy . initially , federal aid was provided in the form of cafeteria equipment and labor . in 1932 , the reconstruction finance corporation began providing loans to states and school districts to cover the cost of cafeteria space and equipment for school lunch programs . in 1935 , the works progress administration , a new deal agency , began sponsoring women's employment in school lunchrooms . federal food support for school lunches began that same year , when section 32 of the act of august 24 , 1935 ( p.l . usda required recipient organizations , through their agreements with state agencies , to operate school lunch programs on a nonprofit basis , maintain any existing local funding for school lunches , keep records of foods received , serve meals free to poor children , and ensure that such children would not be identified to their peers , among other requirements . the availability of federal aid contributed to a rapid increase in the number of school lunch programs .