in the text of the report , appropriations are rounded to the nearest million . rather , the administration proposes a new $2.300 billion annual mandatory appropriation for crime victims programs . within this amount , $499 million would be for the ovw , $10 million would be for oversight of office for victims of crime ( ovc ) programs by the office of the inspector general , $12 million would be for developing innovative crime victims services initiatives , and a set - aside of up to $115 million would be for tribal victims assistance grants . from the remaining amount , ovc would provide formula and nonformula grants to the states to support crime victim compensation and victims services programs . under the administration's proposal , the amount of the mandatory appropriation would decrease if the balance on the cvf falls below $5.000 billion in future fiscal years . also , the administration's budget includes a proposal to transfer primary jurisdiction over federal tobacco and alcohol anti - smuggling laws from the atf to the department of the treasury's tax and trade bureau . the administration's budget request includes increased funding for nasa , but the administration does propose reduced funding for the science account ( - $832 million , - 11.7% ) and eliminating the office of stem engagement ( formerly the office of education ) . the administration also proposes renaming three of nasa's accounts: the space technology account would be changed to the exploration technology account , the exploration account would be changed to the deep space exploration systems account , and the space operations account would be changed to the low earth orbit and spaceflight operations account . like the administration's fy2020 budget , the fy2021 budget proposal does not appear to include a realignment of items that would be funded from these accounts , which is what the administration proposed in its fy2019 budget request . the fy2021 budget request includes reduced funding for nsf ( - $537 million , - 6.5% ) , which includes proposed reductions for the research and related activities ( - $524 million , - 7.8% ) , major research equipment and facilities construction ( - $13 million , - 5.5% ) , and education and human resources ( - $9 million , - 1.0% ) accounts . the proposed reductions are partially offset by proposed increases for the agency operations and award management ( +$9 million , +2.6% ) and office of the inspector general ( +$1 million , +8.2% ) accounts . the administration requests reduced funding for most of the related agencies , which includes a proposal to close the lsc , though it requests some funding to help provide for an orderly closeout of the lsc's operations . table 1 outlines the fy2020 funding and the administration's fy2021 request for the department of commerce , the department of justice , the science agencies , and the related agencies . figure 1 shows the total cjs funding for fy2010-fy2020 , in both nominal and inflation - adjusted dollars ( more - detailed historical appropriations data can be found in table 2 ) .