this report will be updated as necessary . the sergeant at arms enforces the rules and regulations governing the senate chamber . accordingly , the office of the sergeant at arms ( saa ) , including its doorkeepers , supervises and restricts staff access to the floor . the saa ensures that non - chamber staff members will not access the floor during a senate session unless they are on the journal clerk's pre - notification list or are allowed under the terms of a unanimous consent request . the saa also ensures that , barring a uc request , no more than two staff members from the same senator's office will be on the floor at the same time , as mandated in the recurring uc agreements agreed to at the start of each congress . as approved by the committee on rules and administration , the "regulations controlling the admission of employees and senate committees to the senate floor" are meant to "permit closer supervision over employees admitted to the senate floor" without depriving any employees the privilege of the floor if they are "entitled thereto under rule xxiii. in view of these regulations , the senate doorkeepers provide senate staff members with the following instructions regarding floor access . senate office managers and other staff are issued credentials that allow them to submit , using the saa transaact web portal , a list of staff members to be granted senate floor privileges . the submitted staff members should be eligible for floor access pursuant to clause 1 of rule xxiii . that is , they must be senate committee staff members or working in the office of a senator and on the payroll of the senate or joint committee staff members and on the payroll of the senate or the house of representatives . should the senate or joint committee office experience any personnel changes affecting its list of eligible individuals , the credentialed staff member should submit those changes to the saa via transaact . while senate offices may pre - submit the names of multiple staff members , the number of staff members from the same office allowed on the floor at one time is limited . the saa restricts access to those individuals who are in temporary possession of floor passes provided by the credentials desk . every committee of the senate , as well as joint committees , are allotted six cards ( floor passes ) to be used when the committee has jurisdiction over pending legislation . four cards may be used as needed without a time limit . two cards are given with a 15-minute time limit , allowing staff members to perform brief official duties , such as assisting with poster boards and other visual displays . each senator and the vice president is allotted two cards . the senate cards are issued to regular full - time senate staff members working in a senator's office . they are to be used while the staff member is performing official duties relating to a particular bill or matter under consideration . one card is not time limited , while the other card has a 15-minute limit .