successive u.s . administrations and many members of congress have actively supported the northern ireland peace process and encouraged the full implementation of the good friday agreement , as well as subsequent accords and initiatives to further the peace process and promote long - term reconciliation . some members have been particularly interested in police reforms and human rights in northern ireland . since 1986 , the united states has provided development aid through the international fund for ireland ( ifi ) as a means to encourage economic development and foster reconciliation . some members of congress also have demonstrated an interest in how brexit might affect northern ireland in the years ahead . many analysts view implementation of the most important aspects of the good friday agreement as complete . since 2013 , however , the northern ireland political parties and the uk and irish governments have made several attempts to reduce sectarian tensions and promote reconciliation . major endeavors include the following: the 2013 haass initiative . in 2013 , the northern ireland executive appointed former u.s. diplomat and special envoy for northern ireland richard haass as the independent chair of interparty talks aimed at tackling some of the most divisive issues in northern ireland society . in particular , haass was tasked with making recommendations on dealing with the past and the sectarian issues of parading , protests , and the use of flags and emblems . in december 2013 , haass released a draft proposal outlining the way forward in these areas , but he was unable to broker a final agreement among the northern ireland political parties . the 2014 stormont house agreement . in 2014 , financial pressures and budgetary disputes related to uk - wide welfare reforms and austerity measures tested northern ireland's devolved government . as noted previously , the devolved government led by the dup and sinn fein collapsed in january 2017 amid heightened tensions related to brexit and other issues . it took nearly three years following the march 2017 snap assembly elections to reestablish the devolved government . the search for peace and reconciliation remains challenging . difficult issues include bridging sectarian divisions and managing key sticking points ( especially parading , protests , and the use of flags and emblems ) ; dealing with the past ; addressing remaining paramilitary concerns and curbing dissident activity ; and furthering economic development . the 2013 haass initiative , the 2014 stormont house agreement , and the 2015 fresh start agreement attempted to tackle some aspects of these long - standing challenges . some measures agreed in these successive accords were delayed amid the absence of a devolved government between 2017 and 2020 . the uk exited the eu on january 31 , 2020 . in the uk's june 2016 public referendum on eu membership , voters in northern ireland favored remaining in the eu , 56% to 44% ( the uk overall voted in favor of leaving , 52% to 48% ) . brexit has added to divisions within northern ireland and poses considerable challenges , with potential implications for northern ireland's peace process , economy , and , in the longer term , constitutional status . successive u.s .