as a unit. thus , per the court , although "the focus of the foia is information , not documents" when the agency is deciding whether to exempt matter from a record , "outside of that context , foia calls for disclosure of a responsive record , not disclosure of responsive information within a record. an agency may be prohibited by another source of law from disclosing material that is exempt under foia . for example , under foia's exemption 3 , certain statutes that prohibit or place limits on agencies' disclosure of information may serve as bases under foia for withholding covered information . an agency's disclosure of information protected by an exemption 3 withholding statute , therefore , could , depending on the statute's terms , violate that particular statute . as another example , although foia's exemption 4 authorizes an agency to withhold certain confidential "commercial or financial information" and trade secrets , the trade secrets act ( tsa ) imposes criminal penalties for disclosing certain confidential materials if disclosure is not "authorized by law. thus , while exemption 4 grants agencies discretion to withhold information covered by both the exemption and the tsa , the tsa would prohibit the unauthorized disclosure of the information . ultimately , however , if records within foia's coverage are not exempt under foia or prohibited from being disclosed by another law , an agency must disclose such records upon request . under certain circumstances , an agency may be held to have waived its ability to apply an exemption to a requested record due to its prior disclosure of information . for example , the d.c . circuit has "held . that the government cannot rely on an otherwise valid exemption claim to justify withholding information that has been 'officially acknowledged' or is in the 'public domain.' courts often have held that an agency's prior disclosure of information to congress has not foreclosed application of an exemption in response to a subsequent foia request . however , whether an agency has waived an exemption is necessarily dependent on "the specific nature and circumstances of the prior disclosure. in addition to its nine exemptions , foia also contains three records exclusions . foia's exclusions allow an agency , in response to a request for certain law enforcement records , to "treat the records as not subject to the requirements of" foia . as the attorney general ' s memorandum on the 1 9 86 amendments to the freedom of information act explains , when an agency receives a request for records that fall within the coverage of an exclusion , the agency is authorized to withhold the records and "respond to the request as if the excluded records d[o] not exist. foia's exclusions , in other words , allow agencies to "withhold documents without comment. conversely , when an agency invokes a foia exemption in response to a request for records , it is required to "reveal the fact of and grounds for any withholdings" to the requester . foia's exclusions , therefore , are designed to allow agencies to better avoid disclosure of the narrow categories of records to which they apply . each of foia's three exclusions is codified at 5 u.s.c . â§ 552 ( c ) .