the provisions of h.r . 6139 were included as division c of h.r . 6201 , the families first coronavirus response act , as introduced in the house . the american hospital association ( aha ) issued an alert to its members expressing its opposition to the osha ets provisions in the bill . the provisions of division d of h.r . 6379 were also included in s. 3584 , the covid–19 workers first protection act of 2020 , as introduced in the senate . this legislation would specifically provide that the ets would remain in force until the permanent standard is promulgated and explicitly exempts the ets from the regulatory flexibility act , paperwork reduction act , and executive order 12866 . osha would be granted enforcement discretion in cases in which it is not feasible for an employer to fully comply with the ets ( such as a case in which ppe is unavailable ) if the employer is exercising due diligence to comply and implementing alternative means to protect employees . like the provisions in h.r . 6139 and the version of h.r . 6201 introduced in the house , this ets and permanent standard would be required to include an exposure control plan and provide no less protection than any state standard on novel pathogens , thus requiring osha to include the elements of the cal / osha atd standard in this ets and permanent standard . although the ets provisions in h.r . 6201 required that the ets be based on the 2007 cdc guidance , specific reference to the 2007 guidance is not included in this legislation . rather , the ets and permanent standard would have to incorporate , as appropriate , "guidelines issued by the centers for disease control and prevention , and the national institute for occupational safety and health , which are designed to prevent the transmission of infectious agents in healthcare settings" and scientific research on novel pathogens . states with occupational safety and health plans would be required to adopt the ets , or their own etss at least as effective as the ets , within 14 days of the legislation's enactment . 6559 , the covid - 19 every worker protection act of 2020 , was introduced in the house by representative scott on april 21 , 2020 . this legislation includes the ets and permanent standard provisions of division d of h.r . 6379 and s. 3584 and would require that these standards cover healthcare workers , emergency medical responders , and "other employees at occupational risk" of covid - 19 exposure . this legislation also adds two provisions that clarify the requirements for employers to record work - related covid - 19 infections and strengthen the protections against retaliation and discrimination offered to whistleblowers . sections 8 ( c ) and 24 ( a ) of the osh act require employers to maintain records of occupational injuries and illnesses in accordance with osha regulations . osha's reporting and recordkeeping regulations require that employers with 10 or more employees must keep records of work - related injuries and illnesses that result in lost work time for employees or that require medical care beyond first aid .