714 et seq .

 ) , as amended , to initiate two ad hoc trade assistance programs in 2018 and 2019 . referred to as "trade - aid packages," these two initiatives represented the administration's effort to provide short - term assistance to farmers in response to the foreign trade retaliation targeting u.s. agricultural products . the first trade - aid package was announced on july 24 , 2018 . it targeted production for nine agricultural commodities in 2018 and was valued at up to $12 billion . the second trade - aid package was announced on may 23 , 2019 . it targeted production for an expanded list of 41 commodities and was valued at up to an additional $16 billion . according to the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , the two trade - aid packages are structured in a similar manner and include three principal components ( table 8 ) : the market facilitation program ( mfp ) provides direct payments to producers of usda - specified "trade damaged" commodities . usda used different payment rate formulas to determine the mfp payment distribution for each of the 2018 and 2019 programs ( described below ) . mfp payments are administered by usda's farm service agency ( fsa ) . the food purchase and distribution program ( fpdp ) is for purchases of unexpected surpluses of affected commodities such as fruits , nuts , rice , legumes , beef , pork , milk , and other specified products for redistribution by usda's food and nutrition service through federal nutrition assistance programs including food banks , schools , and other outlets serving low - income individuals . it is administered by usda's agricultural marketing service . the agricultural trade promotion ( atp ) program provides cost - share assistance to eligible u.s. organizations for activities—such as consumer advertising , public relations , point - of - sale demonstrations , participation in trade fairs and exhibits , market research , and technical assistance—to boost exports for u.s. agriculture , including food , fish , and forestry products . it is administered by usda's foreign agriculture service in conjunction with the private sector . the two years of trade assistance , as announced by the secretary of agriculture , were valued at a potential combined $28 billion , the largest component being the mfp direct payments to producers valued at a combined $24.5 billion ( table 8 ) . the broad discretionary authority granted to the secretary under the ccc charter act to implement the trade - aid package also allowed the secretary to determine how the aid was calculated and distributed . some important differences between the 2018 and 2019 trade aid packages include the following: although the 2018 and 2019 mfp programs focused payments on the same three commodity groups—non - specialty crops ( grains and oilseeds ) , specialty crops ( nuts and fruit ) , and animal products ( hogs and dairy ) —the 2019 mfp included an expanded list of eligible commodities ( 41 eligible commodities in 2019 compared with nine in 2018 ) . the 2018 mfp payments for eligible specialty and non - specialty crops were based on physical production in 2018 , and calculated as per - unit payment rates .