dollar. ) several former central bank officials , including former president sirleaf's son , have been charged in the scandal . a usaid technical assistance program , to be implemented by kroll associates , aims to enhance the central bank's currency management processes . concerns also have centered on the weah administration's management of donor assistance , a key source of financing for development efforts . in mid - 2019 , the u.s. ambassador to liberia and several foreign counterparts sent a joint letter to the government signaling discontent with the weah administration's use of aid funds for unintended purposes . the weah administration publicly acknowledged that it had used aid funds to pay state salaries , but claimed that it had later restored donor accounts . separately , press reports emerged that the u.n. resident coordinator in liberia had sent a letter to the government over concerns about delayed and inaccurate financial reporting on u.n. - funded activities . in late 2019 , the world bank reportedly demanded that the government refund certain ineligible expenses identified during a project review . according to the state department's congressionally mandated fiscal transparency report , "foreign assistance receipts , largely project - based , were neither adequately captured in the budget nor subject to the same audit and domestic oversight as other budget items" in 2018 , the latest reporting year . in june 2019 , simmering discontent over alleged corruption and mismanagement by the weah administration gave way to large - scale anti - government protests in monrovia . headed by the council of patriots ( cop ) , a coalition of opposition politicians and activists , the demonstrators called for an audit of all state ministries and petitioned weah to publicly disclose his assets . the government drew criticism for its response to the protests , during which it blocked social media access . in january 2020 , thousands of protesters joined cop - led demonstrations in monrovia , which police dispersed with tear gas . the independent national commission on human rights , a state body , has called for an inquiry into allegations of excessive force by security forces . in a joint statement , the ambassadors of the united states , eu , and economic community of west african states ( ecowas ) lauded the security forces' management of the demonstrations but noted "with regret" the government's decision to disperse peaceful protesters without warning . efforts to address corruption and other governance demands are likely to encounter pushback from key segments of liberia's political landscape . corruption has been a longstanding concern in liberia and remains prevalent throughout the government , according to the state department , which has documented a "culture of impunity" in the civil service . any attempts to enact meaningful anti - corruption measures may thus founder on a lack of political will from legislators and other officials who profit from the current system . meanwhile , weah's stated commitment to address mounting calls from civil society and some legislators for postwar transitional justice measures has met with opposition from some legislators who are central to his political coalition . recent protests and instances of inflammatory rhetoric have raised concerns over political tensions in the country .