in terms of benchmark prices ( i.e. president nixon declined the shah's request and offer . as domestic u.s. oil production levels were not keeping pace with increasing u.s. oil demand , president nixon replaced moiq with an import licensing fee system in april 1973 . iran was not party to the october 1973 oil embargo—instituted by members of the organization of arab petroleum exporting countries ( oapec ) —an event that contributed to rapidly rising petroleum prices , perceived supply shortages , and the enactment of u.s. laws to ensure domestic availability of oil supply . the oil market situation in late 1973 created an opportunity for iran to increase oil revenue . u.s. crude oil imports from iran more than doubled from 1973 to 1978 , when imports reached approximately 550,000 bpd . however , u.s. - iran relations changed in 1979 when the iranian revolution culminated with the shah abdicating , iran becoming an islamic republic , and ayatollah khomeini rising to power as iran's supreme leader . oil production in iran started declining in late 1978 , due to a labor strike in opposition to the shah's policies , and the situation led to one of the largest ( 5.6 million bpd ) and longest ( nearly six months ) supply disruptions in history . this supply loss contributed to one of the highest inflation - adjusted annual oil price periods on record . russia is one of the largest oil producers and exporters in the world . in 2018 , crude oil and condensate production in russia was larger than in any other country , at approximately 11.2 million bpd . the united states ( 11 million bpd ) and saudi arabia ( 10.5 million bpd ) were ranked second and third respectively . as of the end of 2018 , russia held the sixth largest amount of proven oil reserves with approximately 106 billion barrels . commercial oil production in russia and the former soviet union dates back to the 1870s when the first wells were drilled in baku ( today the capital of azerbaijan ) . increasing oil production and exports—along with oil refining to make kerosene for artificial lighting—in the late 1800s resulted in the emergence of a major competitor to the global monopoly held by u.s. - based standard oil at that time . the oil industry continued to grow and expand in the russian empire and growth continued to develop in the soviet union after the 1917 bolshevik revolution . soviet oil policy decisions in the 1920s and 1950s resulted in depressed global oil prices that are credited with motivating two historical oil industry developments . the first was an export campaign in the 1920s that contributed to low prices and the signing of the historic achnacarry agreement in 1928 by multiple oil companies with the intent to restrict oil production in order to support oil prices . the second was an oil market - share campaign in the 1950s that led to lower prices and was one factor credited with motivating creation of opec in 1960 . by 1987 , the soviet union was the largest oil producer in the world at nearly 12.5 million bpd , more than twice the production of saudi arabia that year .