phase 2 . two years after certification , the program is to expand to cover veterans of all eras . expanding eligibility for the caregiver support program raises two potential issues: ( 1 ) delays in implementation of an it system to fully support the system and ( 2 ) increased costs associated with eligibility expansion under the act . as program eligibility expands , these issues may be of interest to policymakers . in addition to these two issues , the program may change in other significant ways when va modifies the regulations necessary to implement the eligibility expansion . va published a proposed rule to implement the changes required under the va mission act on march 6 , 2020 . the public comment period for the proposed rule ends on may 5 , 2020 . furthermore , rulemaking to add the expansion populations must be finalized , at the very least , prior to expansion becoming effective . the act required va to implement a new it system to fully support the family caregiver program by october 1 , 2018—nearly four months after the legislation was enacted . the it system must be able to ( 1 ) retrieve the data needed to assess and monitor program and workload trends , ( 2 ) manage data for program participation that exceeds va estimates , and ( 3 ) integrate the system with other vha it systems . the act required va to certify that the system had been implemented no later than october 1 , 2019 . the first phase of eligibility expansion is to become effective when the it system is certified . however , va has not yet certified an it system . prior to enactment of the va mission act , the it system used to support the family caregivers program , the caregiver application tracker ( cat ) , was deemed inadequate . specifically , limitations with cat did not grant the caregiver support program office ready access to the workload data needed to monitor the effects of the program on va medical center resources . va attempted to add functionality to cat in a project called cat rescue . however , cat rescue was terminated in april 2018 after va reported defects during system testing . when the va mission act was enacted , va was in the midst of replacing cat with a new it system , called the caregivers tool ( caret ) . this project began in september 2015 . however , va identified deficiencies in caret during acceptance testing and terminated the project in february 2019 . in march 2019 , va began a third effort to acquire a replacement system , which is based on an existing commercial product . the new system is referred to as the caregiver record management application ( carma ) . va is deploying carma in three phases . the first phase replaced cat with carma and was completed in october 2019 . the second phase automated stipend processing within carma and was completed in january 2020 . the third phase is expected to be completed in summer 2020 .