appropriation . legislation that provides budget authority to allow federal agencies to incur obligations and to make payments out of the treasury for specified purposes , usually during a specified period of time . discretionary appropriations measures are under the jurisdiction of the house and senate committees on appropriations . authorization . the process of both estimating the budgetary effects of pending legislation and comparing those effects to a baseline . the congressional budget office prepares estimates of the budgetary effects of legislation , including both spending and revenue effects . the budget committees in the house and senate act as official scorekeepers by providing the presiding officers in their respective chambers with the estimates needed to make decisions about points of order enforcing budgetary parameters . the budget committees also make periodic summary scorekeeping reports that are placed in the congressional record . sequestration . a procedure in which the president is required to issue an order canceling budgetary resources—that is , money available for obligation or spending—to enforce a statutory budget requirement . sequestered funds are no longer available for obligation or expenditure . the statutory paygo requirement and the statutory limits on discretionary spending are enforced by sequestration . in addition , the automatic spending reductions required by the budget control act of 2011 are partially achieved through sequestration . congress may rescind all , part , or none of an amount proposed by the president and may also initiate rescission of funds not requested in a presidential message . revenues . funds collected from the public primarily as a result of the federal government's exercise of its sovereign powers . they include individual and corporate income taxes , excise taxes , customs duties , estate and gift taxes , fees and fines , payroll taxes for social insurance programs , and miscellaneous receipts . scorekeeping . transfer . a budgetary enforcement mechanism originally set forth in the budget enforcement act of 1990 . it generally requires that any projected increase in the deficit due to changes in direct spending or revenues resulting from legislation must be offset by an equivalent amount of direct spending cuts or revenue increases to eliminate the net increase over either a six - year period covering the current fiscal year plus the ensuing five fiscal years or over an 11-year period covering the current fiscal year plus the ensuing 10 fiscal years . the statutory paygo mechanism currently in place was established under the statutory pay - as - you - go act of 2010 . in the event that the net impact of changes to direct spending and revenue laws over the course of a session of congress is projected to increase the deficit in either of these time periods , the president is required to issue a sequester order to eliminate it . in addition , there are currently paygo procedures in the house and senate enforced by points of order on the floor to prevent the consideration of legislation that does not meet the requirement . reconciliation . an expedited procedure , provided under section 310 of the congressional budget act , for changing existing revenue or direct spending laws to implement budgetary policies established in a budget resolution .