more than 1,800 ads were collected from all sources . duplicate ads resulting from posts to more than one source , and ads that appear to have been frequently reposted , were removed , as were ads for positions in congressional settings other than personal offices , yielding 880 ads for positions in member personal offices . substantially similar position titles ( eg , deputy scheduler and state deputy scheduler ) for which there were five or more ads were identified and grouped together , as were related job titles ( eg , positions designated as district , field , or regional representative that had essentially similar job duties and expectations ) for which there were five or more substantially similar ads , yielding a total of 704 ads . ads for the 33 identified position titles were further categorized if there were five or more ads that specified the advertised position as "not entry level" or other signifier of presumptive advanced status . the 704 ads were coded against a variety of variables within eight categories , including ad tracking information ; ad details ; position responsibilities and responsibility areas ; expected job skills , qualifications , and credentials ; application materials ; and office type . the distribution of ads by job title and level is provided in table 1 . solicitations of applicants for congressional staff appear to originate in a highly decentralized manner . means of identifying appropriate candidates might potentially include reassigning staff within offices , placing ads in services that make them available by subscription , word of mouth , and other nonpublic means of identifying potential applicants for congressional staff positions . consequently , it cannot be determined whether the dataset of ads analyzed in this report is representative of all congressional employment solicitations . in addition , the process by which candidates for some member office senior staff positions are identified may not be public - facing . the job announcements board hosted by representative steny hoyer during part of his tenure as house minority whip . data were collected from ads posted between approximately january 2016 and december 2017 . based on information specified within the ads , most position titles were identified by one of the following four primary responsibility areas ( some positions were identified by up to three responsibility areas ) : legislative , policy , and oversight , media , messaging , and speeches , constituent communications , outreach , and service , and office administration and support . for each position , at least one sample position description was created based on the coded data . information includes the most frequently occurring of the following: primary responsibility areas ; widely expected duties , typically up to six of the most frequently occurring duties specified in all ads for that position ; other potential duties , typically up to six other duties mentioned in more than one ad ; applicant information , including characteristics , skills , and knowledge and prior experience ; and other expectations . categorizing congressional staff positions by position title relies on an assumption that similarly titled positions in house and senate personal offices carry out the same tasks under essentially similar circumstances .