outweigh the anticompetitive effects. in evaluating this evidence , the fact finder cannot presume that entry would only have occurred after the expiration of the patent or statutory exclusivity . it also cannot presume that allowing entry into the market before the patent or statutory exclusivity period expires is necessarily procompetitive . if the ftc proves that parties to an agreement violated these provisions , paagba would provide for assessment of a civil monetary penalty against each violating party . the civil penalty must be "sufficient to deter violations," but no more than three times the value that the respective violating party gained from the agreement . if the brand did not gain demonstrable value from the agreement , the value the generic received would be used to calculate the penalty . in calculating the penalty for a particular party , an ftc alj would consider "the nature , circumstances , extent , and gravity of violation" ; the agreement's impact on commerce ; and the culpability , history of violations , ability to pay , ability to continue doing business , and profits or compensation gained by all parties . any penalties assessed would be in addition to , rather than in lieu of , any penalties imposed by other federal law . the ftc would also be able to seek injunctions and other equitable relief , including cease - and - desist orders . in addition , an anda filer that was party to such an agreement would forfeit its 180-day exclusivity awarded for challenging a patent using a paragraph ( iv ) certification . the first portion of the bill addresses product hopping . it would amend the ftc act to define when product hopping constitutes a violation of the federal antitrust laws . the bill would allow the ftc to prove a prima facie case of product hopping by showing that a manufacturer had engaged in either a "hard switch" or a "soft switch" during a certain period . specifically , the manufacturer would have to engage in a switch between when the manufacturer first received notice that an applicant submitted an anda or biosimilar license for a particular product and 180 days after the generic drug or biosimilar product is first marketed . some bills aim to curtail certain pharmaceutical patenting practices directly . one such proposal is the affordable prescriptions for patients act of 2019 ( appa ) , which would make product hopping an antitrust violation and would set a limit on the number of certain patents that could be asserted in biologics litigation . pharmaceutical patenting practices have attracted significant interest from both commentators and congress . this section of the report reviews several proposals , from both legislation and the academic literature , that seek to reduce or eliminate these patenting practices . this review is not intended to be comprehensive , nor does it evaluate the merits of these proposals . instead , the proposals are reviewed as representative examples of the various types of legal changes under consideration . as discussed above , patenting practices are only one factor that may contribute to consumer prices in the highly complex pharmaceutical market . thus , the discussed proposals relating to patenting practices are one potential method to reduce drug prices .