smugglers have found ways to defeat them . they have cut holes and driven vehicles through fencing and , in at least one instance , have bribed border officials to provide keys to the fencing and inside knowledge about unpatrolled roads and sensor locations . more recently , smugglers have reportedly sawed through steel and concrete bollards on the newly constructed border barrier ; "after cutting through the base of a single bollard , smugglers can push the steel out of the way , creating an adult - size gap" through which people and drugs can pass . some have noted that border barriers may deter some portion of illegal drug smuggling , while an unknown portion will be displaced to areas without fencing . specifically , along the southwest border , barriers may shift some portion of smuggling traffic to other areas of the land border between the united states and mexico as well as to the ocean . some of these alternate areas may have terrain that acts as some sort of a barrier , presenting different challenges than those from constructed border barriers . these challenges may , in turn , deter or alter drug smuggling . in addition , there have been reports that the newly constructed border barrier in the san diego border sector has coincided with an increase of maritime smuggling along that coast . smugglers use small open vessels ( "pangas" ) , which can travel at high speeds . they also use recreational boats and small commercial fishing vessels that can be outfitted with hidden compartments to "blend in with legitimate boaters. in addition to moving illicit drugs across water or open areas of the land border without manmade barriers , the addition or enhancement of border barriers could lead some smugglers to move their contraband through poes . the most recent data from cbp indicate that , in pounds , more illicit drugs—specifically marijuana , cocaine , methamphetamine , heroin , and fentanyl—are already being moved through poes than between them . policymakers may question whether any drug smuggling displaced to the poes as a result of additional or augmented border barriers is a substantive change . a question policymakers may ask is what effect , if any , increased miles or enhanced styles of border barriers may have on drug smuggling between the poes . specifically , they may question whether additional border barrier construction will substantially alter drug smugglers' routes , tactics , speed , or abilities to breach these barriers and bring contraband into the country . a comprehensive analysis of this issue is confounded by a number of factors , the most fundamental being that the exact quantity of illicit drugs flowing into the united states is unknown . without this baseline , analysts , enforcement officials , and policymakers rely on other data , albeit selected or incomplete , to help inform whether or how border barriers may affect illicit drug smuggling . border barriers are only one component of tactical infrastructure employed at the border . infrastructure , in turn , is only one element ( along with technology and personnel ) of border security .