take the subject of roads for example . the jurisdiction of a subcommittee is generally determined by the full committee that created it . in many cases , the full committee will establish the jurisdictions of its subcommittees in the rules that committees are required to adopt during the first few months of a new congress . if a subcommittee's jurisdiction is not defined by its parent committee , measures are generally referred to subcommittee or retained by the full committee at the discretion of its chair . some committees rely more heavily on their subcommittees to process legislation and make recommendations than do other committees . the house rulebook contains 35 different sets of statutory legislative procedures ( also called "expedited" or "fast - track" procedures ) that apply only to a narrow class of items described in the statute itself . in most cases , once the primary committee has reported to the house , the speaker will set a deadline for additional committees of referral to report or be automatically discharged from further consideration . although the speaker has the authority to do so , rarely are time limits established on deliberations of a primary committee , or extended beyond the deadline imposed by a sequential referral . due to their presumed expertise on matters within their jurisdiction , committees of primary or sole referral generally enjoy deference from the house on whether or not to report legislation to the full chamber . with house approval , the speaker may appoint members from relevant committees of jurisdiction to a special , select , or ad hoc committee in order to receive and review specific matters and report to the house its findings or recommendations . rule xii further indicates that the speaker "may make such other [referral] provision as may be considered appropriate. house rules vest these powers of referral in the speaker ; in practice , the house parliamentarian makes day - to - day referral decisions acting as the speaker's nonpartisan and disinterested agent . worth noting is that house rules and procedures for referring legislation have changed in recent decades . for instance , prior to january 3 , 1975 , house rules provided no formal mechanism for a measure to be referred to two or more committees with a jurisdictional claim to the measure's subject matter . the ability of the speaker to refer legislation to more than one committee was first established in house rules through the adoption of h.res . 988 ( 93 th congress ) , the committee reform amendments of 1974 , which became effective at the start of the 94 th congress ( 1975-1976 ) . furthermore , at the outset of the 98 th congress ( 1983-1984 ) , speaker o'neill announced a policy of identifying a "primary" committee of jurisdiction when legislation was multiply referred , and beginning in the 104 th congress ( 1995-1996 ) the designation of a primary committee of referral by the speaker has been a requirement of house rules . clause 1 of house rule x is the main determinant of house committee jurisdiction , but other factors may also influence how legislation is referred .