appendix a . restrictions on u.s. funding for voluntary fp / rh programs appendix b. usaid fp / rh priority countries: keyâ statistics , 201 . ensuring adequate supplies of contraceptives . providing non - coerced access to surgical sterilization and long - acting reversible contraceptives ( larcs ) , such as intrauterine devices and contraceptive implants . integrating fp / rh and hiv / aids programs to ensure that hiv - positive men and women have access to family planning information and services , for disease prevention and to prevent mother - to - child transmission of the virus . integrating fp / rh and maternal and child health ( mch ) programs , specifically during the postpartum period , when there is considerable demand from new mothers for contraception to ensure pregnancy spacing . in addition to these priorities , usaid fp / rh programs may also focus on related policy areas , such as efforts to end child marriage , female genital mutilation and cutting , and gender - based violence ; and related health goals , including the prevention of fistula . bilateral fp / rh assistance is funded through a variety of accounts in annual department of state , foreign operations , and related programs ( sfops ) appropriations measures . the global health programs ( ghp ) account is the funding channel for more than 90% of bilateral fp / rh aid while smaller amounts of bilateral fp / rh assistance are generally made available through other accounts . department of state economic support fund ( esf ) monies are provided to select countries considered by the state department to be politically and strategically important . in recent years , pakistan , afghanistan , and jordan have received esf funds for fp / rh activities . in fy2017 , for example , afghanistan , which is a usaid fp / rh priority country , received $20 million in bilateral family planning assistance , all of which was provided through the esf . over the past decade , enacted funding levels for bilateral international fp / rh aid have remained fairly consistent ( figure 2 ) . although congressionally enacted funding has been constant since 2011 , the absence of foreign assistance authorization legislation in recent decades has made annual consideration of foreign aid appropriations the primary venue for debating international family planning and reproductive health policy . controversies that are frequently debated as part of the appropriations process include codification of the mexico city policy / protecting life in global health assistance ( mcp / plglha ) , which is currently imposed through executive order ( see "selected issues for congress" ) ; the effect that withholding u.s. dollars as a result of such restrictions could have on access to voluntary family planning and other health services in developing countries ; and whether or not designating funding for contraceptive provision and family planning is the best approach to allocating global health funds . members of congress hold varied perspectives on these issues . some members have supported expanding access to fp / rh services , while others aim to increase restrictions on such services or reduce funding levels .