, funds that are available until expended ) . in addition , the prac is required to appoint an executive director selected in consultation with the majority and minority leadership of the house and the senate . the prac has the same authority to conduct audits and investigations as inspectors general under the inspector general act of 1978 . the prac is required to provide management alerts to the president and congress on "management , risk , and funding" issues that may require immediate attention . the prac is also required to report to the president and congress biannually with a summary of prac activity and , to the extent practicable , a quantification of the impact of tax expenditures in the cares act . finally the prac is required to provide other reports and periodic updates to congress as it considers appropriate . in addition , the prac is directed to establish and maintain a "user - friendly , public - facing website to foster greater accountability and transparency in the use of covered funds. the prac is required to post specified information , including agencies' use of funds provided in the act . the prac terminates on september 30 , 2025 . section 15003 appropriates $80 million in no - year funds to support the activities of the prac . the prac's organization and duties have similarities to those of the recovery accountability and transparency board that was established as part of the american recovery and reinvestment act to conduct oversight of the use of funds in that act . the cares act appropriates $148 million for established inspector general offices in addition to the $25 million for the sigpr and $80 million for the prac discussed above . in total , therefore , the cares act provides $253 million to the inspector general community to oversee the federal government's coronavirus response . title i of division b , under the heading "office of the inspector general," provides $750,000 to the department of agriculture oig . the appropriation expires september 30 , 2021 , and may be used only to oversee funds appropriated to the department under the cares act . title ii of division b , under the heading "department of commerce—economic development administration," provides that of the $1.5 billion appropriated to the department of commerce , $3 million is to be transferred to the department's oig to oversee the use of funds appropriated to the department under the cares act . the appropriation expires september 30 , 2022 . title iii of division b , under the heading "office of the inspector general," provides $20 million for the department of defense oig . this appropriation may be used only to oversee the use of funds appropriated to the department under the cares act . title vii of division b , under the heading "office of the inspector general," provides $7 million to department of education oig . these funds expire on september 30 , 2022 . this appropriation may be used only to respond to covid - 19 generally and to oversee the use of funds appropriated to the department under the cares act .