appendix a . databases and resources appendix b . china's fdi in the united state . global leadership directly . as a result , some members of congress and administration officials are focusing attention on the critical implications that china's increasing international economic engagements could have for u.s. economic and strategic interests . this could include: collecting , maintaining , and publicizing—to the extent that is possible—a more accurate calculus of actual chinese economic activities , particularly by tracking investment and assistance that is delivered , as opposed to that which is merely announced ( eg , either unilaterally or by encouraging or requiring greater disclosure through the international financial institutions and wto ) . directing agencies within the executive branch to develop a whole - of - government approach and guidance to better assess the global investment , construction , and lending activities of u.s. , chinese , and other major actors . as part of this effort , the u.s. government could harmonize u.s. programs for gathering information and streamline data centralization . in addition , it could study the adequacy of data and information recording , collection , disclosure , reporting , and analysis at the u.s. and international levels and recommend necessary improvements . establishing a u.s. statistical office or program tasked with collecting current information on international capital flows and other information related to international investment , public procurement , and export and investment promotion , financing , and insurance by u.s. , chinese , and other major economic actors . conducting oversight and examining more closely data collection and transparency commitments in various institutions , including the organization for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) , international monetary fund ( imf ) , the world bank , and united nations conference on trade and development ( unctad ) on investment , loans , and government procurement to determine if these mechanisms are sufficient and / or are being adhered to . determining whether the world trade organization ( wto ) should play a greater role to enhance transparency and set standards for dissemination of investment data through future reforms to key agreements or new agreements on investment . examining the activities of international and regional organizations to determine if they are sufficient to address emerging data requirements or whether a major u.s. and / or internationally - coordinated effort is required . supporting u.s. and international efforts to provide training courses , workshops , and technical assistance programs for countries to implement international statistical guidelines and improve comparable data compilation and dissemination practices . holding hearings on chinese overseas lending and investment practices . the united states could consider a combination of pressure and collaboration to strengthen its economic engagement efforts and encourage china to adopt international best practices . while the success of past efforts has arguably been limited , the united states could continue to: work with other countries and international economic institutions to improve the collection and accuracy of data , address data deficiencies , and harmonize data reporting requirements by china and other major economies .