if so , is cost sharing allowed ? to the extent that information is available , these issues are addressed with regard to private health insurance coverage of covid - 19 testing , treatment , and vaccination . table 1 summarizes key information . prior to the enactment of the ffcra ( p.l . 116-127 ) , there were no federal requirements specifically mandating private health insurance coverage of items or services related to covid - 19 testing . section 6001 of the ffcra requires most private health insurance plans to cover covid - 19 testing , administration of the test , and related items and services , as defined in the act . per ffcra , the coverage must be provided without consumer cost sharing , including deductibles , copayments , or coinsurance . what types of plans are subject to the coverage requirement ? for example , some insurers require that they ( the insurer ) provide prior authorization for routine hospital inpatient care , and / or require that primary care physicians provide approval or referrals for specialty care , as a condition for covering the care . does the coverage requirement depend on how or where the service or item is furnished ( eg , by an in - network versus out - of - network provider ) ? under private insurance , benefit coverage and consumer cost sharing is often contingent upon whether the service or item is furnished by a provider that the insurer has contracted with ( i.e. , whether that provider is in network for a given plan ) . in instances where a contract between an insurer and provider does not exist , the provider is considered out of network . when does the coverage requirement go into effect ? prior authorization or other medical management requirements are prohibited . the definition of testing that must be covered was expanded by section 3201 of the cares act ( p.l . in addition , the department of labor ( dol ) , department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and the treasury issued an faq document on april 11 , 2020 ( hereinafter , "tri - agency april 11 faq" ) , on the private health insurance coverage requirements in ffcra and the cares act . together , the acts and guidance require coverage of certain tests and services , as summarized below . specified covid - 19 diagnostic tests , including both molecular ( eg , polymerase chain reaction , or pcr , tests ) and serological tests ( i.e. , antibody tests ) , and the administration of such tests are covered . "items and services furnished to an individual during [visits , as specified below] that result in an order for or administration of [an applicable covid - 19 test] , but only to the extent such items and services relate to the furnishing or administration of such product or to the evaluation of such individual for purposes of determining the need of such individual for such product. this definition could encompass additional diagnostic testing associated with the visit . however , it would not encompass treatment for covid - 19-associated illnesses .