appendix a . jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act of 2003 fmap increase the jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act of 2003 ( jgtrra ; p.l . 108-27 ) included a provision that increased federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) rates for the 50 states , the district of columbia , and the territories during the last two quarters of fy2003 and the first three quarters of fy2004 . the fmap rates were held harmless and increased by an across - the - board 2.95 percentage points for each state ( i.e. , the 50 states , the district of columbia , and the territories ) . the jgtrra fmap increases were subject to certain requirements for states . for more detail about the jgtrra fmap increase , see " jgtrra fmap increase . table a - 1 shows states' regular fmap rates and jgtrra fmap rates for fy2003 and fy2004 . appendix b. american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 fmap increase the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l . 111-5 ) provided a temporary fmap rate increase to the 50 states and the district of columbia that was later extended by p.l . with the extension , the arra fmap increase lasted from the first quarter of fy2009 through the third quarter of fy2011 ( i.e. , october 2008 through june 2011 ) . arra held all states harmless from any decline in their regular fmap rates throughout the period . under the arra fmap increases , all states ( i.e. , the 50 states and the district of columbia ) received an across - the - board increase of 6.2 percentage points to their regular fmap through the first quarter of fy2011 , at which point the across - the - board percentage point increase phased down to 3.2 and then 1.2 percentage points for the second and third quarters of fy2011 , respectively . throughout the period , states with unemployment rates that had increased by certain amounts for a quarter received an additional unemployment - related increase . there were three tiers of the unemployment - related increase . see "arra unemployment - related increase" for details about the unemployment - related increase , including how it was calculated . the arra fmap increases were subject to certain requirements for states . for more information about the arra fmap increases and these requirements , see " arra fmap increase . medicaid is a countercyclical program . during recessions , growth in the unemployment rate results in an increase in the rate of growth for medicaid enrollment , which increases the rate of growth for medicaid expenditures at the same time that state revenues decline . reduced state revenues can make it difficult for states to continue financing their medicaid programs , especially with the recession - related growth in medicaid enrollment . the effect of recessions on medicaid enrollment , medicaid expenditures , and state tax revenues are generally not isolated to the recession period and can continue after the recession has officially ended . in the past , two laws have provided states with fiscal relief through temporary fmap rate increases due to recessions: the jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act of 2003 ( jgtrra ; p.l .