the hea generally authorizes several options for qualifying individuals . recent administrative and congressional action , including the enactment of the coronavirus aid , relief , and economic security ( cares ) act ( p.l . 116-136 ) , provide additional student loan relief measures . the higher education act of 1965 ( hea ; p.l . 89-329 , as amended ) authorizes the operation of three federal s tudent loan programs: the william d. ford federal direct loan ( direct loan ) program , the federal family education loan ( ffel ) program , and the federal perkins loan program . while new loans are authorized to be made only through the direct loan program , ffel and perkins loan program loans remain outstanding and borrowers of such loans remain responsible for repaying them . as of december 31 , 2019 , $1.5 trillion in these loans , borrowed by or on behalf of 42.8 million individuals , remained outstanding . direct loan program loans are owned by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) . as of december 31 , 2019 , approximately 35.3 million borrowers owed about $1.3 trillion in direct loan debt . ffel program loans may be held by private lenders , guaranty agencies , or ed . as of december 31 , 2019 , approximately 11.8 million borrowers owed about $257.2 billion in ffel program debt . of that , approximately $87.7 billion was held by ed , representing between 3.3 million and 6 million borrowers , and $169.3 billion was held by private lenders or guaranty agencies , representing debt for between 6.0 million and 7.2 million borrowers . perkins loan program loans may be held by institutions of higher education ( ihes ) that made the loans or by ed . as of december 31 , 2019 , about 1.9 million borrowers owed approximately $5.9 billion in perkins loans . in response to the current coronavirus disease 2019 ( covid - 19 ) pandemic , numerous questions have arisen regarding student loan repayment flexibilities and debt relief that may be available to individuals to alleviate potential financial effects related to covid - 19 . this report provides an overview of student loan repayment flexibilities and debt relief provisions that may be available to borrowers facing financial difficulties resulting from the pandemic . it first lists some pre - existing loan terms and conditions ( authorized through statute and regulations ) that may be available to individuals . it then discusses specific administrative and congressional actions taken to address student loan debt in the context of covid - 19 . the report concludes with a brief description of additional existing authorities that could be utilized to address other aspects of student loan relief . several loan terms and conditions that offer forms of repayment relief to borrowers were authorized in statute and regulations prior to the onset of the covid - 19 pandemic .