health . at $5.3 billion , health assistance comprised 75% of u.s. aid to africa in fy2019 . in recent years , the largest allocation of regional environmental assistance has been for the central africa regional program for the environment ( carpe ) . implemented by usaid and the u.s . fish and wildlife service , capre promotes conservation , sustainable resource use , and climate change mitigation in central africa's congo basin rainforest , with a present focus on landscapes in drc , the republic of congo , and the central african republic ( car ) . congress has shown enduring interest in international conservation initiatives and efforts to curb wildlife trafficking and other environmental crime , including in africa . while the state department and usaid administer the majority of u.s. foreign assistance to africa , other federal departments and agencies also manage or support aid programs in the region . for example , the departments of agriculture , energy , justice , commerce , homeland security , and the treasury conduct technical assistance programs and other activities in africa , and may help implement some state department - and usaid - administered programs on the continent . other u.s. federal entities involved in administering assistance to africa notably include: the department of defense ( dod ) . in addition to implementing some state department - administered security assistance programs , dod is authorized to engage in security cooperation with foreign partner militaries and internal security entities for a range of purposes . the majority of this assistance has been provided under dod's "global train and equip" authority , first established by congress in the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) of fy2006 ( p.l . in the fy2017 ndaa ( p.l . 114-328 ) , congress codified and expanded the "global train and equip" authority under 10 u.s.c . 333 ( "section 333" ) , consolidating various capacity - building authorities that it had granted dod on a temporary or otherwise limited basis . section 333 authorizes dod to provide training and equipment to foreign military and internal security forces to build their capacity to counter terrorism , weapons of mass destruction , drug trafficking , and transnational crime , and to bolster maritime and border security and military intelligence . comprehensive regional - or country - level funding data for dod security cooperation programs are not publicly available , complicating approximations of funding for african countries . a crs calculation based on available congressional notification data suggests that kenya , uganda , niger , chad , somalia , and cameroon have been the top african recipients of cumulative dod global train and equip assistance over the past decade . congress has authorized additional dod security cooperation programs in africa under global or africa - specific authorities ( eg , to help combat the lord's resistance army rebel group in central africa between fy2012 and fy2017 ) . millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) . authorized by congress in 2004 , the mcc supports five - year development "compacts" in developing countries that meet various governance and development benchmarks . mcc recipient governments lead the development and implementation of their programs , which are tailored to address key "constraints to growth" identified during the compact design phase .