the options include the following . the rates have not been increased since 1993 . in 2018 a gasoline tax of approximately 45 cents per gallon would have been needed to equal the purchasing power of the 18.3-cents - per - gallon gasoline tax in 1998 . in addition , sluggish growth in vehicle travel and improved vehicle efficiency have depressed the growth of gallons consumed , further constraining revenues . this requirement has not been a house rule since january 2019 . congress could reduce spending on the federal - aid highway program . to bring outlays into line with anticipated revenues , the needed reduction would be roughly 25% . when state officials determine that a bridge is unsafe , they are to close it to traffic immediately . the actual closing of a bridge is usually done by the state , but in some states closures are under the authority of county commissioners . the recent failure of local officials in mississippi to close unsafe bridges until the state was threatened with the withholding of federal funds suggests that unsafe bridge closures do not always happen immediately . congress may wish to consider the safety of bridges not directly under the control of the states in reauthorization . the fast act created two new programs to facilitate highway freight movement . the national highway freight program ( nhfp ) is a formula program that provided up to $1.5 billion annually to the states for highway components designated as being especially important to freight movement . having a separate freight formula program helps states concentrate funding for projects on freight routes . since 2008 , congress has transferred nearly $144 billion to the htf ( $114.7 billion to the highway account alone ) from the treasury general fund and other sources in order to fill the gap between the tax revenue flowing into the fund and the outlays congress has authorized . despite these transfers , without a reduction in the size of the surface transportation programs , an increase in revenues , or further general fund transfers , the highway account balance in the htf is projected to be close to zero in the first month of fy2022 . at that point , fhwa would likely have to delay payments to state departments of transportation for completed work . the closures and stay - at - home orders implemented in response to the covid - 19 pandemic may make the htf's funding shortfall more severe . as many employers closed or shifted to telework and fewer americans drove to work , gasoline tax revenues will likely fall below projections . if states continue road projects as planned , the highway account balance could approach zero sooner than previously expected unless congress provides additional funds . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projects that htf highway account outlays ( spending ) will continue to outpace revenues through f2026 ( figure 4 ) under current law . this projection , made prior to the covid - 19-related shutdowns , estimates that in funding a five five - year reauthorization beginning in fy2021 congress faces a projected highway account shortfall of $46.5 billion .