these have been waived . the specific hipaa privacy rule requirements for which penalties may be waived are as follows: ( 1 ) the requirement to distribute a notice of privacy practices ( 45 c.f.r . â§164.520 ) ; ( 2 ) the patient's right to request certain privacy restrictions ( 45 c.f.r . â§164.522 ( a ) ) ; ( 3 ) the patient's right to request confidential communications ( 45 c.f.r . â§164.522 ( b ) ) ; ( 4 ) the requirement to honor a request to opt out of a facility directory ( 45 c.f.r . â§164.510 ( a ) ) ; and ( 5 ) the requirement to obtain agreement to share information with family and friends involved in a patient's care ( 45 c.f.r . â§164.510 ( b ) ) . these waivers apply only ( 1 ) in the emergency area identified in the public health emergency declaration and for the duration of the emergency , ( 2 ) to those hospitals that have a disaster plan ; and ( 3 ) for the first 72 hours after the hospital's plan has been initiated . provision section 3224 requires the secretary , not later than 180 days after enactment , to issue guidance on the sharing of patients' phi ( as defined at 45 c.f.r . â§106.103 ) during emergency declarations and determinations , with respect to covid - 19 , pursuant to phsa section 319 , section 501 ( b ) of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( stafford act ) , and the national emergencies act . the section requires the guidance to address compliance with the hipaa privacy rule and applicable policies , including any policies that may come into effect during these emergencies . background the healthy start program ( healthy start ) , which is authorized in phsa section 330h and administered by hrsa , is a competitive grant program . the program enables eligible public or private entities , community - based organizations , faith - based organizations , and indian or tribal organizations to propose and administer innovative , community - based ways to decrease u.s. infant mortality rates ( imrs ) , improve perinatal and maternal health outcomes , and reduce ethnic and racial health disparities in perinatal health . ( i nfant mortality refers to the death of an infant before his or her first birthday . an infant mortality rate refers to the comparison of the number of infant deaths against 1,000 live births in a given year. ) healthy start participants consist of women , men , infants , children , and involved parties such as family members . the program requires participants to reside in communities with imrs that are at least 1.5 times greater than the u.s. imr and / or have high rates of adverse perinatal outcomes such as preterm births and maternal deaths . the program's authorization of appropriations , which expired in 2013 , was "the amount authorized for the preceding fiscal year increased by the percentage increase in the consumer price index ( cpi ) for all urban consumers for such year. provision purpose and considerations in making grants .