referred to the committee on finance . it is a serious problem . but , it is just one barrier to individuals and communities being able to fully participate in society today . the other common barriers , no matter where one lives , are the costs of internet service and devices , plus digital literacy skills . simplistically equating "the digital divide" with just one of these barriers increases the division in our country . broadband infrastructure initiatives funded under the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l . 111-5 ) have concluded , but the federal communications commission ( fcc ) and rural utilities service ( rus , within the u.s. department of agriculture ) continue to have active programs that provide federal funding for broadband . there are few current federal funding initiatives to address other aspects of the digital divide , however , such as digital literacy and digital inclusion and the homework gap . states are playing a crucial role in efforts to expand broadband access , encouraging broadband investment , and helping to bring more of their residents online . each state approaches broadband access and deployment differently , and state efforts may provide models for any future federal initiatives . this report analyzes selected state - level and local initiatives that have used different approaches . it does not attempt to include broadband initiatives from all 50 states . rather , it highlights selected examples to illustrate programs that could serve as templates for potential federal initiatives . the term broadband commonly refers to high - speed internet access that is faster than dial - up access and is immediately accessible . in 2015 , the fcc defined broadband as 25 / 3 megabits per second ( mbps ) , i.e. , 25 mbps ( download rate ) and 3 mbps ( upload rate ) . about 21.3 million americans currently lack access to broadband at those speeds . broadband includes several high - speed transmission technologies , such as: digital subscriber line ( dsl ) ; cable modem ; fiber ; wireless ; satellite ; and broadband over powerlines ( bpl ) . the term digital divide refers to a gap between those who use or have access to telecommunications and information technologies and those who do not . many areas of the united states—particularly rural areas—have either limited or no access to broadband infrastructure . several factors contribute to the digital divide , including terrain , population density , demography , and market factors . additionally , there are citizens in areas with high broadband penetration who are unable to access it due to socioeconomic factors . ensuring access to broadband is not the only barrier to closing the digital divide . other challenges include increasing the adoption of broadband ( where it is available ) and training for digital literacy . although strides have been made in the deployment of broadband , the digital divide persists—prompting a variety of federal broadband initiatives to address barriers and push communities across the digital divide . increasingly , state governments have taken action to ensure that all residents , regardless of where they live or socioeconomic factors that may inhibit adoption , have access to broadband .