before enactment of p.l . 116-136 , treasury had already made equity investments through the esf in fed emergency programs created in response to covid - 19 . because the cares act appropriated $500 billion to the esf , these fed programs are now , in effect , backed by cares act funding . the programs are the following: commercial paper funding facility ( cpff ) . the cpff purchases newly - issued commercial paper from all types of u.s. issuers who cannot find private sector buyers . commercial paper is short - term debt issued by financial firms ( including banks ) , nonfinancial firms , and "asset backed" pass - through entities that purchase loans . money market fund liquidity facility ( mmlf ) . the mmlf makes nonrecourse loans to financial institutions to purchase assets that money market funds are selling to meet redemptions . this reduces the probability of runs on money market funds caused by a fund's inability to liquidate assets . primary market corporate credit facility ( pmccf ) and secondary market corporate credit facility ( smccf ) . the fed created two new facilities to support corporate bond markets—the pmccf to purchase newly - issued corporate debt from issuers and the smccf to purchase existing corporate debt or corporate debt exchange - traded funds on secondary markets . the issuer must have material operations in the united states and cannot receive direct federal financial assistance related to covid - 19 . term asset - backed securities loan facility ( talf ) . the talf makes nonrecourse , three - year loans to private investors to purchase newly - issued , highly - rated asset - backed securities ( abs ) backed by various nonmortgage loans . eligible abs include those backed by certain auto loans , student loans , credit card receivables , equipment loans , floorplan loans , insurance premium finance loans , small business loans guaranteed by the small business administration ( sba ) , or servicing advance receivables . main street lending program ( mslp ) . the mslp buys loans from depository institutions that are four - year loans to businesses with up to 10,000 employees or up to $2.5 billion in revenues . the loans to businesses would defer principal and interest repayment for one year , and the businesses would have to make a "reasonable effort" to retain employees . this program may be particularly attractive to businesses too large to qualify for sba assistance . municipal liquidity facility ( mlf ) . the mlf purchases shorter - term state and municipal debt in response to higher yields and reduced liquidity in that market . the facility purchases only debt of states , larger counties ( with at least 500,000 residents ) , and larger cities ( with at least 250,000 residents ) . some programs were announced with an overall size limit ( see table 1 ) . during the 2008 financial crisis , however , actual activity typically did not match the announced size .