prefix ) . suspension is , however , the most common procedure used to consider minority - sponsored legislation in the house by a wide margin . in the 115 th congress , 77% of the minority - sponsored measures that were considered on the house floor were raised under the suspension procedure . members of the house or senate minority parties sponsored 27% of all suspension measures originating in either chamber , compared to 14% of legislation subject to different procedures , including privileged business ( 27 measures ) and unanimous consent ( 48 measures ) . minority - party house members sponsored 228 ( 27% ) of the 855 house measures considered under suspension . suspension motions are in order on designated days . rule xv states that "the speaker may not entertain a motion that the house suspend the rules except on mondays , tuesdays , and wednesdays and during the last six days of a session of congress. suspension measures , however , may be considered on other days by unanimous consent or under the terms of a special order of business ( special rule ) reported by the committee on rules and agreed to by the house . a motion to suspend the rules is a compound motion to suspend the house rules and pass a bill or agree to a resolution . when considering such a motion , the house is voting on the two questions simultaneously . once recognized , the member making the motion will say , "mr. [or madam] speaker , i move to suspend the rules and pass___. the house rules that are suspended under this procedure include those that "would impede an immediate vote on passage of a measure … such as ordering the previous question , third reading , recommittal , or division of the question. a measure considered under the suspension procedure is not subject to floor amendment . the motion to suspend and pass the measure , though , may provide for passage of the measure in an amended form . that is , the text to be approved may be presented in a form altered by committee amendments or by informal negotiations . sixty - four percent of all measures that received floor action were initially considered under suspension ( 952 out of the 1,498 ) , compared to those under the terms of a special rule ( 12% ) , unanimous consent ( 10% ) , or privileged business ( 15% ) . figure 2 displays the form of suspension measures . most of the measures considered under suspension during the 115 th congress ( 94% ) were bills . house bills made up 83% of the suspension total , senate bills 10% . the remaining measures were house resolutions , house concurrent resolutions , and house joint resolutions . there were no senate concurrent or joint resolutions considered under suspension of the rules in the 115 th congress . as represented in figure 3 , most suspension measures were sponsored by members of the majority party during the 115 th congress .