cbo did not provide an estimate of this provision . under chapter 55 of title 10 , u.s. code , the department of defense administers a statutory health entitlement to approximately 9.5 million beneficiaries ( i.e. federal medicaid funding to the states and the district of columbia is open - ended , but the medicaid programs in the territories are subject to annual federal capped funding . federal medicaid funding for the territories comes from different sources . the permanent source of federal medicaid funding for the territories is the annual capped funding . these data would then have been transmitted to the cdc . this section describes all of the provisions included in ffcra division f. some provisions described below have been amended by the cares act ; in such cases , foot n otes reference the relevant crs expert who can answer questions about the amendment s . in some cases , the amendments made by the cares act are substantial , in which case , the footnote may also provide a brief description of the amendment . private health insurance is the predominant source of health insurance coverage in the united states . in general , consumers may obtain individual health insurance coverage directly from an insurer , or they may enroll in a group health plan through their employer or another sponsor . group health plan sponsors may finance coverage themselves ( self - insure ) or purchase ( fully insured ) coverage from an insurer . covered benefits and consumer costs may vary by plan , subject to applicable federal and state requirements . the federal government may regulate all the coverage types noted above , and states may regulate all but self - insured group plans . federal and state requirements may vary by coverage type . some federal requirements apply to all coverage types noted above , while other federal requirements only apply to certain coverage types . prior to the enactment of ffcra , there were no federal requirements specifically mandating private health insurance coverage of items or services related to covid - 19 testing . in recent weeks , some states have announced relevant coverage requirements , and some insurers have clarified or expanded their policies to include relevant coverage . ffcra newly requires most private health insurance plans to cover covid - 19 testing , administration of the test , and related items and services ( see " definitions of covid - 19 testing and related services " ) . the coverage must be provided without consumer cost - sharing , including deductibles , copayments , or coinsurance . prior authorization or other utilization management requirements are prohibited . these requirements apply to individual health insurance coverage and to group plans , whether fully insured or self - insured . this includes plans sold on and off the individual and small group exchanges . per the definition of individual health insurance coverage cited in the act , the requirements do not apply to short - term , limited - duration plans .