the va has authority under 38 u.s.c . section 3680 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( a ) to pay gi bill and vr&e allowances for up to four weeks when an educational institution temporarily closes under an established policy based on an executive order of the president or due to an emergency situation . the provisions in this section exempt from the time limitation , the period during which an individual is prevented from pursuing a program of education because the educational institution closed ( temporarily or permanently ) under an established policy based on an executive order of the president or due to an emergency situation until the individual is able to resume pursuit . the provisions are applicable to the montgomery gi bill - active duty ( mgib - ad ) 10-year limitation , the post - 9 / 11 gi bill 15-year limitation and age limitation for children using transferred benefits , the vr&e 12-year limitation and the period of a veteran's vocational rehabilitation program , and the montgomery gi bill - selected reserve ( mgib - sr ) limitation . typically , programs under vr&e are limited to 48 months of entitlement and veterans pursuing an education program under vr&e must be enrolled to receive a subsistence allowance . with the exception of those participants covered under this p.l . 116-128 exemption , post - 9 / 11 gi bill participants enrolled exclusively in distance education are eligible for no more than one - half the national average of the housing allowance . in general , the gi bills provide eligible persons a 36-month entitlement to educational assistance . gi bill entitlement is restored in the following instances: for an incomplete course if an individual is unable to receive credit or lost training time as a result of an educational institution closing ; for an incomplete course if an individual is unable to receive credit or lost training time because the course or program is disapproved by a subsequently established or modified policy , regulation , or law ; and for the interim ( through the end of the academic term but no more than 120 days ) post - 9 / 11 gi bill housing allowance paid following either a closure or disapproval . the provisions in this section require that the va restore entitlement for an incomplete course if an individual is unable to receive credit or lost training time as a result of a temporary closure of an educational institution or the temporary termination of a course or program of education by reason of an emergency situation . those who are unsheltered lack access to sanitary facilities . for those sleeping in emergency shelters , conditions may be crowded , with short distances between beds , and there may be limited facilities for washing and keeping clean . the va administers programs to assist veterans experiencing homelessness and also manages several grant programs for nonprofit and public entities to provide housing and services to homeless veterans .