â§200.102 , "exceptions. the memoranda are downloadable from the omb website . the memorandum also provides answers to a set of frequently asked questions intended to assist the acquisition workforce as it addresses impacts due to covid - 19 . https: / / www.whitehouse.gov / wp - content / uploads / 2020 / 03 / m - 20-17.pdf m - 20-16 federal agency operational alignment to slow the spread of coronavirus covid - 19 ( march 17 , 2020 ) provided agencies with initial guidance , consistent with the president's coronavirus guidelines for america , directing agencies to take appropriate steps to prioritize all resources to slow the transmission of covid - 19 , while ensuring mission - critical activities continue . the memorandum further required all agencies , within 48 hours , to review , modify , and begin implementing risk - based policies and procedures based on cdc guidance and legal advice , as necessary to safeguard the health and safety of federal workplaces to restrict the transmission of covid - 19 . https: / / www.whitehouse.gov / wp - content / uploads / 2020 / 03 / m - 20-16.pdf m - 20-15 updated guidance for the national capital region on telework flexibilities in response to coronavirus ( march 15 , 2020 ) directs agencies to offer maximum telework flexibilities to all current telework - eligible employees , consistent with operational needs of the departments and agencies as determined by their heads , as well as to use all existing authorities to offer telework to additional employees , to the extent their work could be telework enabled . https: / / www.whitehouse.gov / wp - content / uploads / 2020 / 03 / m20-15-telework - guidance - omb.pdf m - 20-14 updated federal travel guidance in response to coronavirus ( march 14 , 2020 ) advises that "only mission - critical travel is recommended at this time. an optimist might hope for a silver lining . if the r&d community learns to overcome some of the challenges of remote working and travel restrictions , that might create future opportunities , after the covid - 19 pandemic is over , for increased workplace flexibilities and reduced travel expenses . the pandemic has also highlighted issues that congress may seek to address in the future , such as additional r&d on cybersecurity for virtual collaboration and rural access to broadband internet for off - site work during emergencies . office of management and budget memoranda omb has issued a number of memoranda related to the covid - 19 response . these memoranda are written broadly , not focused solely on federal r&d activities . nevertheless , elements included in these memoranda have relevant information regarding the operation of the federal r&d enterprise . as of the date of this report , covid - 19-related memoranda include m - 20-19 harnessing technology to support mission continuity ( march 22 , 2020 ) directs agencies to utilize technology to the greatest extent practicable to support mission continuity . the memorandum addresses a set of frequently asked questions to provide additional guidance and assist the it workforce as it addresses impacts of covid - 19 .