, property crimes ) . 104-155 ) removed that provision . to meet the requirements of the hcsa and subsequent amendments , doj collects and reports data on hate crimes that occur in the united states through two sources: the hate crime statistics program and the ncvs . a perennial issue that can cause confusion for those unfamiliar with the fbi's and bjs's data collection goals and methodologies is the difference between the number of hate crime incidents reported by the fbi and the number of hate crime victimizations reported by bjs . for example , for 2018 ( the most recent data available ) the fbi reported that there were approximately 7,100 hate crime incidents that involved approximately 8,800 victims . in comparison , bjs reported that there were an estimated 198,000 hate crime victimizations in 2017 . what might explain the difference in the two national measures of hate crimes ? the answer lies partially in the fact that the data reported by the fbi and bjs reflect different goals for collecting data on hate crimes . the fbi data only reflect hate crime incidents that are reported to law enforcement , and where law enforcement concludes that a hate crime has occurred and reports it to the fbi's hate crime statistics program . in contrast , the goal of the ncvs hate crime data collection effort is to estimate the total number of hate crime victimizations that occur each year , including victimizations that are not reported to law enforcement agencies ( i.e. , a portion of the dark figure of crime ) . the goals and methodologies described above help explain why the ncvs estimates of hate crime victimizations are higher than the number of hate crime incidents reported by the fbi . at the same time , the fbi's hate crime statistics program collects data on a larger number of victim types and crimes that may be motivated by the offender's bias than the ncvs . because the ncvs collects data on reported and unreported hate crime victimizations , its totals will always be larger than the fbi's hate crime data . another explanation for the difference between the two measures are the different standards needed to be met to be counted as a hate crime in the fbi's hate crime statistics program and the ncvs . for a hate crime to be counted by the fbi , law enforcement must have sufficient evidence that would lead a reasonable and prudent person to conclude that the offender's actions were motivated , in whole or in part , by his or her bias . in contrast , under the ncvs , an incident is counted as a hate crime if the victim believes that the offense was based on their race , ethnicity , religion , disability , sexual orientation , gender , or gender identity , and the offender used hate language , hate symbols , or a law enforcement investigation concluded that a hate crime had occurred . an independent investigation of the perceived bias is not necessary in every case for the ncvs interviewers to include the offense as a hate crime . for example , the fbi collects data on bias motivated homicides and vandalisms , which are not be captured by the ncvs .