in general , p.l . 116-93 supported the administration's proposals to strengthen defenses against ballistic missile attacks , whether by icbms aimed at u.s. territory , or missiles of shorter range aimed at u.s. forces stationed abroad , or at the territory of allied countries . ( see table 1 . ) the president's fy2020 budget request for dod reflects a shift in strategic emphasis based on the 2018 national defense strategy ( nds ) , which called for "increased and sustained investment" to counter evolving threats from china and russia . this marks a change from the focus of u.s. national security policy for nearly the past three decades and a renewed emphasis on competition between nuclear - armed powers , which had been the cornerstone of u.s. strategy for more than four decades after the end of world war ii . during the cold war , u.s. national security policy and the design of the u.s. military establishment were focused on the strategic competition with the union of soviet socialist republics and on containing the spread of communism globally . in the years following the collapse of the soviet union , u.s. policies were designed – and u.s. forces were trained and equipped – largely with an eye on dealing with potential regional aggressors such as iraq , iran , and north korea and recalibrating relations with china and russia . after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , u.s. national security policy and dod planning focused largely on countering terrorism and insurgencies in the middle east while containing , if not reversing , north korean and iranian nuclear weapons programs . however , as a legacy of the cold war , u.s. and allied military forces had overwhelming military superiority over these adversaries and , accordingly , counter - terrorism and counterinsurgency operations were conducted in relatively permissive environments . the 2014 russian invasion of the crimean peninsula and subsequent proxy war in eastern ukraine fostered a renewed concern in the united states and in europe about an aggressive and revanchist regime in moscow . meanwhile , china began building and militarizing islands in the south china sea in order to lay claim to key shipping lanes and to reinforce its claims to sovereignty over the south china sea , itself . together , these events highlighted anew the salience in the u.s. national security agenda of competing with other great powers , that is , states able and willing to use military force unilaterally to accomplish their objectives . at the same time , the challenges that had surfaced at the end of the cold war ( eg , fragile states , genocide , terrorism , and nuclear proliferation ) remained serious threats to u.s. interests . in some cases , adversaries appear to be collaborating to achieve shared or compatible objectives and to take advantage of social and economic tools to advance their agendas . some states are also collaborating with non - state proxies ( including , but not limited to , militias , criminal networks , corporations , and hackers ) and deliberately blurring the lines between conventional and irregular conflict and between civilian and military activities .