each appropriation in p.l . division a of p.l . table 1 details the supplemental appropriations included in division b , as well as subdivision and transfers of those appropriations outlined in p.l . title i provides $100 billion in emergency supplemental appropriations to the hhs public health and social services emergency fund ( phssef ) , an account used in appropriations acts to provide the hhs secretary with one - time or emergency funding , as well as annual funding for the office of the hhs assistance secretary for preparedness and response ( aspr ) . of the $100 billion , $75 billion is additional funding for the hhs "provider relief fund," established with an initial appropriation of $100 billion in the cares act . 116-139 increases the ppp authorization limit from $349 billion to $659 billion , and increases the direct appropriation in the cares act for the program from $349 billion to more than $670 billion to support that authorization amount . division a of the act also: requires that no less than $30 billion of the additional ppp authorization amount be set aside for loans issued by insured depository institutions and credit unions with consolidated assets of $10 billion to $50 billion ; requires that no less than $30 billion of the additional ppp authorization amount be set aside for loans issued by community financial institutions ( including community development financial institutions ( cdfis ) , minority depository institutions , community development corporations , and sba microloan intermediaries ) , and insured depository institutions and credit unions with consolidated assets less than $10 billion ; and makes agricultural enterprises with not more than 500 employees eligible for eidl and emergency eidl grants during the covered period ( january 31 , 2020 , through december 31 , 2020 ) . division b of p.l . 116-139 is a supplemental appropriations measure providing $100 billion for the department of health and human services ( hhs ) through the public health and social services emergency fund ( phssef ) and $62 billion for the small business administration ( $50 billion for eidl , $10 billion for emergency eidl grants , and $2.1 billion for sba salaries and expenses ) . all of the supplemental appropriations are designated as being emergency requirements under the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act of 1985 ( p.l . 99-177 , as amended ) , and thus do not count against the statutory limits on discretionary spending for fy2020 . 116-139 , division b , explicitly provides its resources "to prevent , prepare for , and respond to coronavirus , domestically or internationally. these funds remain available until expended , and are to be used "to prevent , prepare for , and respond to coronavirus , domestically or internationally , for necessary expenses to reimburse , through grants or other mechanisms , eligible health care providers for health care related expenses or lost revenues that are attributable to coronavirus…. 116-139 and the cares act define eligible providers broadly as any that provide "diagnoses , testing , or care for individuals with possible or actual cases of covid - 19…. hhs has made initial distributions from the provider relief fund .