appendix a . summary of financial regulator mandates banking regulators banks and credit unions serve a vital role in the economy . thus , they are subject to a strong regulatory framework that requires institutions operate in a safe and sound manner . depository institutions are routinely examined to ensure their business lines are healthy and to make sure they comply with various laws . these regulators also write and provide guidance on rules for depository institutions to implement their legal authorities over certain business practices . although the mandates and authorities for each agency are a bit different , the agencies all serve as primary federal regulators for some kind of depository institution . the type of depository institution depends on whether a bank is chartered at the federal or state level and whether it is a member of the federal reserve system . ( see table a - 1 . ) federal reserve system the federal reserve act of 1913 ( p.l . 63-43 ) established the federal reserve as the central bank of the united states , comprising the board of governors and 12 federal reserve banks . the board generally sets policy , which is carried out by the reserve banks . in addition to its responsibility as the central bank to set monetary policy , the federal reserve is also responsible for supervising and regulating state banks that are members of the system and all bank - holding companies . the federal reserve also has an important role in operating the payments and settlement system . table b - 2 summarizes the federal reserve's notable recent activities in the payments system . office of the comptroller of the currency the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) was established in 1863 as a bureau of the u.s. department of the treasury . the occ is the primary federal regulator for nearly 1,200 national banks , federal savings associations , and federal branches and agencies of foreign banks operating in the united states . the occ grants national bank charters , which allow the charter holder to legally operate as a bank . federal deposit insurance corporation the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) , established by the banking act of 1933 ( p.l . 73-66 ) and largely shaped into its modern form by the federal deposit insurance act of 1950 ( p.l . 81-797 ) , insures the deposits of banks and serves as the primary federal regulator for state - chartered banks and thrifts that are not members of the federal reserve . the fdic manages the deposit insurance fund , which provides the funds necessary to insure deposits and to resolve failed banks . the fdic provides deposit insurance for deposits at all u.s. banks , both national and state , but most of the banks the fdic supervises are smaller institutions , known as community banks . national credit union administration in 1970 , congress amended the federal credit union act to establish the national credit union administration ( ncua ) as the regulator for the federal credit union system ( p.l . the ncua supervises and insures deposit shares at federal credit unions and is responsible for resolving failing institutions .