however , the program is administered by hrsa . provider relief fund: the third and fourth supplemental measures each provided funding for a "provider relief fund" to assist health care providers and facilities affected by the covid - 19 pandemic . these funds are intended to reimburse eligible health care providers for health care - related expenses or lost revenues that are attributable to covid - 19 . these funds may also be used to support child care facilities that are open and operating , including those providing care for the children of essential workers . several other acf programs received funding , including the community services block grant ( $1 billion ) , head start ( $750 million ) , and the low income home energy assistance program ( $225 million ) . almost all of the $30.925 billion in supplemental ed appropriations provided in the third measure are for the education stabilization fund ( esf ) . the esf is composed of three emergency relief funds: ( 1 ) a governor's emergency education relief ( geer ) fund ( â§18002 ) , ( 2 ) an elementary and secondary school emergency relief fund ( esserf ; â§18003 ) , and ( 3 ) a higher education emergency relief ( heer ) fund ( â§18004 ) . the third measure provided a total of $30.750 billion for the esf and specified that these funds are to remain available through september 30 , 2021 . the geer fund may be used to provide emergency support through grants to local educational agencies ( leas ) that the state educational agency ( sea ) or governor determines to have been the most significantly impacted by covid - 19 . emergency support may also be provided through grants to institutions of higher education ( ihes ) serving students within the state that the governor determines to have been the most significantly impacted by covid - 19 . a governor may also choose to provide emergency support to any other ihe , lea , or education - related entity within the state that he or she deems "essential for carrying out emergency educational services" to students for a broad array of purposes ranging from any activity authorized under various federal education laws to the provision of child care and early childhood education , social and emotional support , and the protection of education - related jobs . funds from the esserf are to be awarded to states based on their relative shares of grants awarded under title i - a of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , as amended . seas are required to provide at least 90% of the funds to leas to be used for myriad purposes such as any activity authorized under various federal education laws ( eg , esea ) , coordination of preparedness and response to the covid - 19 pandemic , technology acquisition , mental health , and activities related to summer learning . funds retained by the sea must be used for emergency needs , as determined by the sea , to address issues in response to the covid - 19 pandemic and for administration .