however , 42 u.s.c . in 2014 , doe initiated a test sale to determine if recent infrastructure changes could impact the spr's drawdown capabilities and to exercise sales procedures . the test ran successfully with some lessons learned , including some pipeline and storage capacity limitations . a number of other sales reached around 88 million barrels through 2019 were authorized for various reasons ( eg , to generate revenue to reduce the budget deficit as well as to modernize the spr ) . congress originally created the spr to provide security against severe petroleum supply interruptions and to adhere to iep obligations . trade policy with respect to oil has undergone significant changes in recent years to accommodate technological and market developments . as the u.s. oil market moved toward higher production levels , some policies have come into question . consequently , in december 2015 , congress passed the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l . 114-113 ) which repealed section 103 of epca ( p.l . 94-163 ) , removing any restrictions to crude oil exports . net - exporters of oil do not have a stockholding obligation under the iep . some have noted that with the reduction of net imports , the size of the spr could be reconsidered . for similar reasons to lifting restriction on crude oil exports , and with the relatively recent increases in domestic crude oil production , some stakeholders see less need for an oil stockpile . they contend the change in oil markets warrants a reduction in the size of that stockpile . u.s. crude oil and petroleum product imports have been in decline . the eia reports that in september 2019 , the united states exported 89,000 million barrels per day more crude oil and petroleum products than it imported . the eia further projected that , in most forecasts , the united states will be a net petroleum exporter on an annual basis around 2020 . however , even if the united states reaches net export status , eia and iea projections indicate that the united states may return to a net importer between 2040 and 2050 . some contend maintaining the stockpile has value , regardless of net export status . for instance , keisuke sadamori , iea's director for energy markets and security , testified during a senate hearing in 2019 , oil security is not only an issue for net - importers , and security concerns such as regional extreme weather events and terrorist attacks can affect all countries . in a global market , even in net exporting countries , oil consumers will be economically harmed by spiking oil prices , and if a disruption tips the world economy into recession , the pain will be felt by exporting and importing countries alike . finally , the united states is not guaranteed to remain a net exporter indefinitely . in may 2018 , the government accountability office ( gao ) released a report on the future of the spr analyzing doe's planning approach .