appendix a . an historical overview of the definition of technology assessment the definition of the term technology assessment has a long history of discussion and debate . much of this discussion occurred in the late 1960s and early 1970s during the efforts that ultimately led to the establishment of the office of technology assessment in 1972 . how does assessment differ from other methods of analysis ? answers to these questions will more concisely define technology assessment and more closely show its relationship to the policymaking process . technology assessment for the congress will deal for the most part with applications in the united states . it is worth noting though , that the entire world , and even outer space , is the system with which we are concerned… . the international aspects of technology assessment will become more important as the power and ubiquity of man - made forces continue to increase… . to assess technology one has to establish cause and effect relationships from the action or project source to the locale of consequences . a direct or immediate effect is easy to spot and assess . the direct effects , in turn , will cause other consequences—indirect or derivative effects . as the scope of assessment moves outward in time the derivative effects become the result of many causes and not of one specific technological change… . the function of technology assessment is to identify all of these [impacts and trends]—both short - term and long range . the emphasis though will be on the short - term impacts that can be measured by natural science parameters . that is , the focus of technology assessment will be on those consequences that can be predicted with a useful degree of probability . possible changes in values , attitudes , or motivations are important but not easily predicted . these changes are usually long term and fall beyond the primary focus of technology assessment . therefore , because of their slow evolution , present human values and political motivations will serve as the frame of reference for purposes of measurement and appraisal . assessment is a form of policy research and is not technological forecasting or program planning . it is a balanced analysis of how a technological program could proceed with the benefits and risks of each policy alternative carefully described . it incorporates prediction and planning , but only to expose the potential consequences of the program . assessment is an aid to , and not a substitute for , judgment . technology assessment provides the decision maker with a list of future courses of action backed up by systematic analysis of the consequences . in this sense it is an analytical study that could be prepared by anyone . its utility would be enhanced if it was undertaken for a particular policymaking group that could sketch in the nature of the problem for the study team beforehand . in a broader sense , assessment is part of the legislative process . our subcommittee will gather and assess information before we can make any judgments .