, past due support ) . employment programs may also provide work supports including transportation assistance , small incentives to promote program engagement , and specialized services for those with criminal records such as records expungement or voluntary drug testing . this report first reviews how cse - led employment programs may be designed with regard to ncp eligibility and recruitment , as well as services provided . this is followed by an explanation of the current federal funding options for these programs . the next section reviews the available evidence on the effectiveness of employment programs that have been led by or conducted in cooperation with cse . the report concludes by highlighting recent proposals to dedicate federal funding for cse employment programs . cse employment programs must establish criteria to determine eligibility for services . unemployed , or underemployed , low - income ncps who are struggling to meet their obligations are the population that most frequently qualifies for services . programs may also serve additional types of ncps , like those who are in the process of paternity or order establishment , to facilitate recruitment or expand their reach . alternatively , cse employment programs may narrowly target services to conserve resources and prioritize certain cases ( eg , those owing current support versus those owing arrears only ) . eligibility criteria can also help limit duplication with other public programs or risks of supplanting their funding . another important decision cse employment programs make is whether to rely on mandatory or voluntary recruitment policies , or both . courts can issue mandatory orders for ncps to participate in a work program . when ncps fail to pay child support , states may issue contempt citations or file criminal nonsupport charges that bring parents before a court . ( the required administrative and court processes can be expensive for the cse program and state. ) at this point , the court may give ncps the choice to seek work as an alternative to incarceration , or order them to do so . depending on the jurisdiction and court , ncps may be left to their own discretion for how to secure employment , or they may be firmly connected to or ordered into an employment program that can provide relevant services and assistance . as a result , among the population presented with the choice of participating in a mandatory work program versus incarceration , enrollment and engagement rates are usually fairly high . alternatively , or additionally , cse employment programs can focus on voluntary recruitment . this approach allows programs to serve more ncps than just those who have been brought into court . program referrals can be made by staff from cse agencies , courts , community organizations , and probation or parole offices . even when programs are voluntary , court referrals and the consequences of nonpayment ( eg , license suspensions , interest charged on debt , the risk of eventually being incarcerated ) give ncps strong incentives to participate . still , several voluntary programs report that recruitment and retention is challenging in that many ncps referred to or made aware of the programs decline to participate voluntarily or stay engaged .