appendix b . additional funding categories and amounts since the 112 th congress , congress has provided additional funding for specific categories of work within some usace budget accounts ( eg , investigations , construction , o&m , mississippi river and tributaries ) . table b - 1 shows the additional funding congress provided in fy2018 to fy2020 for 26 categories of usace activities across four budget accounts . congress directed usace to produce a work plan no later than 60 days after enactment of the appropriations bill , allocating these additional funds to projects meeting the criteria of the categories and any other direction provided in the explanatory statement or conference report . some states received funding for larger projects , whereas others received funding for less extensive work . for example , under the construction account , the work plan allocated $100 million or more per state in additional funding to 10 states―alabama , california , florida , illinois , louisiana , north dakota , new jersey , pennsylvania , tennessee , and texas―in at least one of fy2018 , fy2019 , or fy2020 ; the work plans over that same period included between $1 million and $7 million annually per state for other states ( eg , minnesota , montana , new mexico , nevada , and utah ) . how might congress address differences between its priorities and the administration's priorities for usace in future fiscal years' appropriations ? construction backlog according to usace , in early fy2020 , there was a construction backlog of $96 billion , including projects with signed chief's reports ( i.e. , reports recommending new projects for congressional construction authorization ) , dam modifications , and deferred maintenance . in addition , as previously noted , the fcce account typically receives annual appropriations around $35 million , and its flood response and repair activities are primarily funded through supplemental appropriations . potential policy questions related to funding flood risk reduction actives include the following: will congress or the administration address the balance between inland and coastal projects referenced in the explanatory statement accompanying usace's fy2020 appropriations in p.l . the o&m account increased from 37% of usace annual appropriations in fy2006 and fy2007 to a high of 53% in fy2018 and fy2019 . the following is a potential policy question related to the shift toward more annual appropriations being used to for o&m: how might congress address the funding of aging usace infrastructure , while also meeting the other demands for agency projects and funds ? annual funding for the environment was less from fy2014 to fy2019 ( ranging from $470 million to $591 million ) compared with funding in the earlier fy2006 to fy2012 period , which ranged from $609 million to $680 million annually . postponed investments in aquatic ecosystem restoration may result in missed opportunities to attenuate wetlands loss and realize related ecosystem benefits . potential policy questions related to the funding of usace environmental actives include the following: what are the consequences of the current level and distribution of usace restoration funding ?