this assumption is reflected in the figures below. ) these totals are inclusive of both mandatory and discretionary funding . the amounts in this table are shown in terms of budget authority ( ba ) and outlays . ba is the authority provided by federal law to enter into contracts or other financial obligations that will result in immediate or future expenditures involving federal government funds . outlays occur when funds are actually expended from the treasury ; they could be the result of either new budget authority enacted in the current fiscal year or unexpended budget authority that was enacted in previous fiscal years . as a consequence , the ba and outlays in this table represent two different ways of accounting for the funding that is provided to each hhs agency through the federal budget process . for example , table 4 shows $0 in fy2021 ba for ahrq because the president's budget proposes to eliminate this agency ; however , the table shows an estimated $299 million in fy2021 ahrq outlays , reflecting the expected expenditure of funds previously provided to the agency . this appendix provides for each operating division a brief summary of its mission , the applicable appropriations bill , the fy2021 budget request level , and links to additional resources related to that request . food and drug administration ( fda ) the fda mission is focused on regulating the safety , efficacy , and security of human foods , dietary supplements , cosmetics , and animal foods ; and the safety and effectiveness of human drugs , biological products ( eg , vaccines ) , medical devices , radiation - emitting products , and animal drugs . it also regulates the manufacture , marketing , and sale of tobacco products . relevant appropriations bill: agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies ( ag ) fy2021 request: ba: $3.293 billion outlays: $3.552 billion additional resources related to the fy202 1 request: congressional justification ( all - purpose table on p. 19 ) , https: / / www.fda.gov / media / 135078 / download bib chapter ( p. 20 ) , https: / / www.hhs.gov / sites / default / files / fy - 2021-budget - in - brief.pdf#page=24 health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) the hrsa mission is focused on "improving health care to people who are geographically isolated , economically or medically vulnerable. among its many programs and activities , hrsa supports health care workforce training ; the national health service corps ; and the federal health centers program , which provides grants to nonprofit entities that provide primary care services to people who experience financial , geographic , cultural , or other barriers to health care .