the act authorized the sba . the small business act specifies that it is congress's declared policy to promote the interests of small businesses to "preserve free competitive enterprise. congress indicated that one of the ways to preserve free competitive enterprise was to increase market competition by insuring that small businesses received a "fair proportion" of federal contracts and subcontracts . since 1953 , congress has used its broad authority to impose requirements on the federal procurement process to help small businesses receive a fair proportion of federal contracts and subcontracts , primarily through the establishment of federal procurement goals and various contracting preferences—including restricted competitions ( set - asides ) , sole source awards , and price evaluation adjustment / preference in unrestricted competitions—for small businesses . congress has also authorized the following: government - wide and agency - specific goals for the percentage of federal contract and subcontract dollars awarded to small businesses generally and to specific types of small businesses , including at least 5% to wosbs ; an annual small business goaling report to measure progress in meeting these goals ; a general requirement for federal agencies to reserve ( set aside ) contracts that have an anticipated value greater than the micro - purchase threshold ( currently $10,000 ) but not greater than the simplified acquisition threshold ( currently $250,000 ) ; and , under specified conditions , contracts that have an anticipated value greater than the simplified acquisition threshold exclusively for small businesses . for example , two third - party certifiers identified the need for additional training and guidance for federal contracting officers , and staff from two federal contracting offices said that the last time that they had received training on the wosb program was in 2011 , when the program was first implemented . in a related development , the house passed legislation ( h.r . 190 , the expanding contracting opportunities for small businesses act of 2019 ) which would , among other provisions , eliminate the inclusion of option periods in the award price for sole source contracts awarded to qualified hubzone small businesses , sdbs , sdvosbs , and wosbs ( including edwosbs ) . this provision would increase the number of contracts available for sole source awards to these recipients because the option years would not count toward the statutory caps on sole source awards ( the wosb caps are currently $6.5 million for manufacturing contracts and $4 million for other contracts ) . the bill would also increase the wosb sole source cap to $7 million for manufacturing contracts to align them with the $7 million cap for the hubzone and 8 ( a ) program small businesses . also , some wosb advocates have suggested that the wosb program should be amended to ( 1 ) eliminate the distinction and disparate treatment of wosbs and edwosbs when awarding contracts , and / or ( 2 ) allow set - asides and sole source awards to wosbs ( including edwosbs ) in all naics industry codes regardless of wosb representation , as is the case for other small business preference programs . both legislative options could lead to an increase in the amount of contracts awarded to wosbs .