more than half of the dot spending authorized in arra was for highways . the recession was relatively deep and the recovery relatively slow . the unemployment rate , for example , rose from 4.4% in may 2007 to 10% in october 2009 , and did not fall below 6% again until september 2014 . arra was the largest fiscal stimulus measure passed by congress in reaction to the great recession . when enacted , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated the law would cost the federal government $787 billion from fy2009 through fy2019 . of this amount , infrastructure accounted for approximately $100 billion to $150 billion ( 13% to 19% ) , depending on how the term is defined ( see text box , 'what is infrastructure ? ' of the original $787 billion cost estimate , programs administered by the u.s. department of transportation ( dot ) received a total of $48.1 billion , about 6% of the total . other public works infrastructure funding in arra included $4.6 billion for army corps of engineers projects , some of which were related to waterborne transportation ; $4 billion for state clean water revolving funds ; $2 billion for state drinking water revolving funds ; and $2.5 billion for four major federal land management agencies . authority for state and local governments to issue tax credit bonds for capital spending represented an additional federal subsidy of about $36 billion . these figures do not include arra funding for federal government buildings and facilities , communications technologies , and energy systems . as is the case with most federal infrastructure investment , the infrastructure support authorized in arra was provided in four different ways: direct spending on infrastructure the federal government owns and operates , including roads and bridges on federal lands and the air traffic control system ; grants to nonfederal entities , especially state and local agencies such as state departments of transportation and local public transportation authorities ; tax preferences to provide incentives for nonfederal investment in infrastructure , such as the authority granted state and local governments to issue bonds to finance capital spending on infrastructure ; and credit assistance to nonfederal entities , such as loans and loan guarantees to public and private project sponsors . arra funding represented a 72% supplement to dot's regular fy2009 funding of $67.2 billion . the highway funding was predominantly distributed by formula , and , like most of the other funding , had to be obligated by the end of fy2010—19 months after the date of enactment—and expended by the end of fy2015 . most of the funding for public transportation was also distributed by formula ; the major exception was $750 million for the federal transit administration's existing capital investment grant program . the $8 billion for high - speed and intercity rail projects was an entirely new discretionary program . arra also created an entirely new discretionary program whose explicit purpose was economic stimulus , transportation investment generating economic recovery ( tiger ) grants , which could be used for a wide range of transportation projects ( table 1 ) . for most of these programs , the arra grants did not require any local match .