appendix a . common foreign assistance acronyms and abbreviation . no funds for the palestinians . for the first time in over a decade , an administration has not requested any u.s. bilateral economic or security assistance aid for the palestinians ( see "potential foreign aid issues for congress" section below ) . the trump administration , having clashed repeatedly with palestinian authority president mahmoud abbas , has significantly reduced bilateral funding to the west bank and gaza , and has discontinued contributions to u.n . relief and works agency for palestine refugees in the near east ( unrwa ) for palestinian refugees . moreover , as a result of provisions in the anti - terrorism clarification act of 2018 ( atca , p.l . 115-253 ) , no bilateral assistance has been delivered to the palestinians since january 2019 . the administration did suggest that funds from its re - proposed "diplomatic progress fund" ( $225 million ) could be used to "resume security assistance in the west bank" or support critical diplomatic efforts , such as "a plan for middle east peace. in fy2020 , the administration requested $175 million in esdf for the diplomatic progress fund , though congress did not fund it in the fy2020 further consolidated appropriations act , p.l . 116-94 ( referred to herein as p.l . in addition to assistance provided directly to certain countries , the united states provides aid to middle eastern countries through regional programs , including the following . middle east regional partnership initiative ( mepi ) . mepi is an office within the bureau for near eastern affairs at the state department that specifically supports political reform , women's and youth empowerment , quality education , and promoting economic opportunity in the arab world . since mepi's inception in 2002 , congress has allocated it an estimated $1.1 billion in esf . one of mepi's contributions to u.s. democracy promotion in the arab world has been to directly fund indigenous nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) . mepi's local grants program awards grants to ngos throughout the middle east in order to build capacity for small organizations . however , in countries with legal restrictions prohibiting foreign funding of local ngos , u.s. officials and grant recipients may weigh the potential risks of cooperation . between 2011 and 2013 , egypt arrested and convicted local and foreign ngo specialists on election monitoring , political party training , and government transparency in egypt . middle east regional ( mer ) . a usaid - managed program funded by esf , mer supports programs that work in multiple countries on issues such as women's rights , public health , water scarcity , and education . reducing mena aid . for fy2021 , the administration proposes to spend an estimated $6.6 billion on bilateral assistance to the mena region , a figure that would be nearly equal to the 2020 request but 12% less than what congress appropriated for 2019 ( see figure 3 ) . in order to achieve this 12% proposed reduction , the administration's fy2021 request would reduce total military and economic assistance to iraq , lebanon , and tunisia by a combined $544 million .