these include the following . do the ifis have sufficient resources to respond to the covid - 19 pandemic ? does the united states support mobilization of additional resources , and if so , through what mechanisms ? developing countries face a variety of financing needs , including funding the immediate public health response , broad budgetary support , and liquidity support . how should the ifis prioritize their financial assistance ? how should ifi assistance be allocated across countries ? how might coordination and coherence of covid - 19 responses among ifis and donor governments be handled ? many ifis are focused on the rapid disbursement of financial assistance . what is the trade - off between streamlining approval processes and maintaining due diligence to protect ifi resources ? is there oversight of how the resources from debt relief are used ? do the ifis have sufficient staffing to process high volumes of financial assistance ? china has emerged as a major creditor in recent years , but the terms of its lending are opaque . do the ifis have sufficient access to the information needed to assess the financing needs of developing countries and emerging markets ? would any ifi assistance be used to pay off china debt in certain countries ? while the current focus is on getting resources quickly to the poor and least developed countries , the imf is drawing attention to large project increases in debt / gdp ratios for many countries . what is the administration's position on a new round of multilateral debt forgiveness ? how is the administration engaging on developing - country debt with official institutions and the private sector ? what is the administration's plan for debt relief negotiations with creditor governments outside of the paris club group of creditors ? what is the appropriate balance between ifi financing and debt relief in the covid - 19 response ? in what context is one policy more useful ? how might the disbursement of ifi financial assistance be impacted by an inability to reach multilateral agreement on debt relief ? developing and emerging economies are facing immediate financing needs to grapple with the spread of covid - 19 , and economic recovery from the pandemic may take years . how should the ifis assess the capacity of countries to repay ifi loans given the short - , medium - , and long - term impacts of the covid - 19 pandemic ? further congressional action would be required to implement some of the proposals under consideration . the imf and the world bank have called for a debt standstill for low - income countries , during which those countries could suspend debt service payments and instead devote their funds to the exigencies of the pandemic . on april 15 , 2020 , the g - 20 donor countries in conjunction with the private sector agreed to a debt standstill through the end of 2020 . some policy experts and policymakers in developing countries are calling for additional debt relief given the severity of the crisis for low - income countries .