each category is discussed in additional detail below . although statutory reporting requirements vary widely in the scope and nature of the information they are designed to elicit , most requirements carry several common provisions . when designing these requirements , congress faces a number of choices that may affect the content , frequency , and other features of the information ultimately received . to better understand various options and legislative considerations for creating reporting requirements , this report analyzes requirements enacted during the 115 th congress that could be identified using a keyword search . reporting requirements can serve as a critical component of legislative oversight . they may be designed to accomplish a variety of purposes , including monitoring executive activity , obtaining information on complex or emerging issues , and generating ideas and recommendations for legislative action . however , legislators , agencies , and outside observers have periodically voiced concerns regarding the volume and cost of reporting requirements , whether certain requirements are duplicative and ineffective , and the difficulty in monitoring agency compliance with such requirements . each concern noted above is complicated by the lack of a comprehensive inventory of existing report requirements and report submissions . legislators have periodically introduced legislation to create a centralized repository of congressionally mandated reports . for example , the access to congressionally mandated reports act ( h.r . 736 , 116 th congress ) would , among other things , require the government publishing office ( gpo ) to create a publicly available online portal of "all congressionally mandated reports," subject to certain exceptions . the bill was passed by the house on july 7 , 2019 . establishing a centralized , public repository for congressionally mandated reports may address a number of concerns related to the reporting process . for instance , a comprehensive database of submitted reports may allow congress to more easily monitor whether an expected report has been submitted , and whether it was submitted in a timely fashion . additionally , it may facilitate greater accessibility to and awareness of reports submitted to congress . greater awareness of reports that have already been submitted may in turn help congress make better use of information provided by agencies , and also help determine whether contemplated requirements for new reports may be duplicative of existing reports . lastly , a centralized database of submitted reports may help congress better assess the reporting burden placed on federal agencies . on the other hand , creating a database of all submitted reports would not necessarily provide congress with a complete picture of reporting requirements . reports that are required , but are not submitted , would not appear in a repository of submitted reports , potentially limiting its use as a tool for monitoring agency compliance . for reasons already discussed , obtaining a complete inventory of existing requirements would be a complicated and potentially resource - intensive task . additionally , the establishment of any centralized repository would require ongoing maintenance and other resources as new requirements are established and new reports are submitted .