appendix a . temporary visitors to the united states for business or pleasure from selected aspiring vwp countries appendix b . selected immigration inspections databases and system . this report offers an overview of the vwp . it discusses the potential effects on national security and considers the likely economic effects on the u.s. travel and tourism industries if more countries were to be added to the program . there was a gap until 2008 , when another eight countries were admitted . in the past 10 years , chile , greece , taiwan , and , most recently , poland have been added . adding countries to the vwp is done through bilateral negotiations , and membership is often perceived as evidence of close ties with the unitedâ states . argentina and uruguay are the only two countries that have been removed from the program , in 2002 and 2003 , respectively . national security is a key goal of the vwp . over the years , congress has continued to add security criteria for vwp participation . one of the vwp's most significant security additions was esta , which was put in place in 2009 and is administered by dhs . in addition , several laws require vwp partner countries to share information with the united states and to set standards for travel documentation . nevertheless , debate remains as to whether the vwp sufficiently vets individual travelers prior to arrival at a u.s. port of entry . a principal objective of the vwp is to boost the u.s. travel and tourism sectors by encouraging travel from high - volume and low - risk countries to the united states . the number of international visitors arriving in the united states totaled 79.3 million in 2019 , down slightly from a record high of 79.7 million in 2018 . because of the sharp decline in international travel in the wake of the covid - 19 pandemic , many international flights have been cancelled and visitor volume is likely to fall sharply in 2020 . in 2018 , the travel and tourism sectors accounted for 2.9% of u.s. gross domestic product , a larger share than many other industries , including agriculture , mining , or utilities , and they directly and indirectly employed 9.2 million workers . every dollar international visitors spend in the united states counts as an export . collectively , foreign visitors spent about $256 billion in 2018 on domestic passenger fares aboard u.s. airlines and on travel - related goods and services , which makes tourism the united states' single - largest services sector export . every year since 1989 , the u.s. travel and tourism industries have posted a trade surplus , which in 2018 was $69.6 billion . travel - and tourism - related exports accounted for 31% of all u.s. services exports and 10% of total exports in 2018 .