â§â§1801 et seq. ) limited funding also would have been provided for administrative costs of the grant program and for the development and implementation of investment plans . under these versions of the fisheries investment and regulatory relief act , the secretary of commerce also would have established a regional fisheries grant program to provide funds to advance the regional priorities identified in the regional fishery investment plans . the secretary would have awarded grants only to projects that would implement regional fishery investment plans and to projects recommended by respective regional fishery investment committees and approved by each regional fishery management council . the secretary would have been required to allocate 70% of funds from the p&d account to the eight council regions . half of this funding would have been allocated equally among the councils , and half would have been distributed according to the combined economic impact of recreational and commercial fisheries in each region . the secretary also would have been required to allocate 20% of funds for a national fisheries investment program that would support rebuilding and maintaining fish populations and promote sustainable fisheries . the committee would be composed of representatives from six geographic regions of the united states . the secretary of commerce would appoint three members from each region , including ( 1 ) an individual with experience as a seafood harvester or processor , ( 2 ) an individual with experience in recreational or commercial fishing or growing seafood , and ( 3 ) an individual who represents the fisheries science community or the relevant regional fishery management council . the secretary also would appoint four at - large members , including ( 1 ) an individual who has experience in food distribution , marketing , retail , or service ; ( 2 ) an individual with experience in the recreational fishing industry supply chain ; ( 3 ) an individual with experience in the commercial fishing industry supply chain ; and ( 4 ) an individual who is an employee of nmfs with expertise in fisheries research . the committee members would meet twice annually , and meetings would rotate among the six regions . the secretary of commerce would identify three or more experts to undertake technical review of grant applications , which would occur prior to committee review . the secretary also would be required to develop guidance related to technical review , including criteria for elimination of applications that fail to meet a minimum level of technical merit . a grant would not be approved unless the secretary was satisfied with the applicant's technical and financial capability . based on the committee's recommendations , the secretary would evaluate the proposed project according to listed criteria and other criteria the secretary may require . if the secretary fails to provide funds to a grant selected by the committee , the secretary would be required to send a written document to the committee justifying the decision . figure 1 summarizes the flow of funding from the p&d account into noaa and the s - k program . some fishing industry representatives have questioned whether the u.s. commercial fishing industry and fishing communities could benefit from greater direct support from s - k funding .