a dditional it y . additionality is the extent the activity and associated carbon benefit would not have happened anyway . for example , preserving an area to avoid deforestation is not additional if the forestland was not under threat of deforestation . finally , all of these considerations are in the context of the uncertainty related to the future effects of changing climatic conditions on forests broadly . the general scientific consensus is that , under most climate change scenarios , u.s. forests overall would likely continue to serve as a net carbon sink . however , the strength of that sink would diminish over time and , under some scenarios , could reverse . regionally , some forests could be net sources of carbon at various times . part of the uncertainty related to how forests may adapt to climate change is because many of the potential effects are interrelated ( particularly in terms of ecological disturbances ) and because , in some scenarios , the various effects could amplify or counteract each other . for example , more co 2 in the atmosphere could increase forest growth but also could result in drought conditions , which would inhibit forest growth . another source of uncertainty is the maximum extent of u.s. forests . after expanding steadily for several decades , the extent of u.s. forest area may have begun to plateau . if forest area begins to decrease , then a net amount of carbon could be lost and u.s. forests would be expected to sequester less carbon annually . if forest area expands further , however , then u.s. forests might be able to sequester more carbon moving forward . finally , the carbon flux associated with u.s. forests is small relative to the amount of carbon stored in those forests , though u.s. forests offset 12% of ghg emissions in 2018 . if u.s. forests sequester less carbon annually in the future , as predicted by some models , then u.s. forests would offset less ghg emissions and could potentially become a source of ghg emissions . under such a scenario , even if ghg emissions were to remain constant at today's levels , the amount of atmospheric carbon would still increase . thus , even minor shifts in carbon flux have the potential to significantly affect the nation's carbon balance and the overall global carbon cycle . below is a glossary of selected terms used throughout this report . most of the definitions are derived from several , interrelated sources , as listed below . some terms may have a broad definition established through various international standards , which allow for the definition to be narrowed to fit national specifications . in some cases , the definition has been edited for clarity . food and agriculture organization of the united nations , global forest resources assessment 2020: terms and definitions , working paper 188 , 2018. international panel on climate change ( ipcc , which is the united nations body for assessing the science related to climate change ) , ipcc guidelines for national greenhouse gas inventories , 2006 .