, the end of fy2021 ) . ccdbg funds are generally allocated according to a formula set in statute . under the ccdbg act formula , hhs is to reserve up to 0.5% for territories and not less than 2% for tribes and tribal organizations . the formula also includes set - asides for technical assistance ( up to 0.5% ) ; research , demonstrations , and evaluation ( 0.5% ) ; and a national toll - free hotline and website ( up to $1.5 million ) . after all reservations have been made , the remaining funds go to states . funds are allocated to states according to a formula based on their share of children under age five , their share of children receiving free - or reduced - price lunches , and state per capita income . table 1 presents fy2020 ccdbg allocations released by hhs . the table includes allocations from fy2020 annual appropriations ( p.l . 116-94 ) , as well as the cares act ( p.l . this report provides an overview of the ccdbg provisions in the cares act . is the main federal law supporting child care programs for low - income working families . the funds are to be used to "prevent , prepare for , and respond to coronavirus. the cares act funds are provided in addition to fy2020 annual appropriations of $5.8 billion ( see p.l . the additional $3.5 billion represents a 60% increase in total appropriations to the ccdbg in fy2020 . the ccdbg is administered by the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) . hhs allocates ccdbg funds to states , territories , and tribes according to a statutory formula . in addition , certain funds may be reserved for other activities , such as technical assistance and research . state , territory , and tribal lead agencies submit ccdbg plans to hhs every three years describing how their child care programs will operate . ccdbg funds are used to subsidize the cost of child care for eligible children of low - income working parents . funds are also used to support activities to improve the quality of child care and for certain other costs . the cares act appropriates $3.5 billion in fy2020 emergency supplemental funds to the ccdbg . the additional funds are to remain available for obligation by hhs through september 30 , 2021 ( i.e. the cares act includes a number of provisions that clarify allowable uses and , in some cases , waive certain underlying requirements of the ccdbg act . below is a brief discussion of key provisions . the ccdbg act ( 42 u.s.c . â§â§9858 et seq. ) among other things , these provisions address allowable uses and flexibilities of the supplemental funds . the report also includes allocations for the additional $3.5 billion in ccdbg appropriations . the cares act includes $3.5 billion in supplemental appropriations for the child care and development block grant ( ccdbg ) . on march 27 , 2020 , the coronavirus aid , relief , and economic security ( cares ) act was signed into law ( p.l .