84-99 program . table 2 provides information on how usace shares the costs for the program . 84-99 program , the costs for all lerrds are 100% nonfederal . most repairs would require few or no new lerrds . nonstructural alternatives may require significant new lerrd acquisition by the nonfederal sponsor . also , if a nonstructural alternative is pursued , usace will provide no further flood - related assistance anywhere within the formerly protected area , except for rescue operations , with some exceptions . for repairs under the p.l . 84-99 program , usace primarily follows engineer regulation ( er ) 500-1-1 from 2001 , and updated agency policies for how to return coastal storm damage reduction projects to design levels of protection ( eg , how to reconstruct and renourish with sand and engineered dune and beach to the design level of protection ) . er 500-1-1 includes nonstructural alternatives to repair , pursuant to the 1996 amendment to the repair authority , but , in practice , the p.l . 84-99 program appears to remain a "repair - in - place" program or for minor adjustments in levee alignments to avoid repeated erosive damage to a levee segment often referred to as scour . repair - in - place planning often is more expeditious for usace than the planning required for a nonstructural alternative . usace does not appear to track the use of the nonstructural alternative authority within the p.l . 84-99 program . selected uses of the nonstructural alternative authority include examples following the 1997 floods in california and the 2008 floods in the upper portion of the mississippi river . 84-99 program , usace may setback a damaged levee segment ; usace considers the setback a structural realignment of the levee to restore the damaged levee system . usace does not consider levee setbacks as nonstructural alternatives . because levee setbacks are considered as structural realignments for the repair of the damaged levee , the levee setbacks as part of the p.l . 84-99 program are designed for purposes of the levee's functioning and integrity ( eg , to decrease scour ) rather than to enhance floodplain capacity or reduce peak flows . if a nonfederal entity pursues a nonstructural alternative , such as the acquisition of floodplain lands , the nonfederal sponsor also may choose to setback the levee . it appears that usace would consider the setback of the levee not as part of the nonstructural alternative but as a complementary investment by the nonfederal entity . usace and other federal agencies also may own and operate levees and other flood control projects . usace is responsible for rebuilding flood - damaged levees that it operates . usace has no authority to evaluate and implement nonstructural alternatives ( or nnbfs ) for congressionally authorized usace - operated infrastructure . some contend that traditional structural measures are institutionally easier for usace to implement , which disadvantages use of nnbfs , especially in situations and contexts that favor expediency or are time - constrained . although usace has decades of experience planning and constructing structural levees and dams , and the authorities and policies to guide those measures , the agency's guidance and experience with nnbfs are less well - developed .