we have to be very careful. the president announces the formation of the president's coronavirus task force , headed by hhs secretary azar , with coordination provided by the national security council . what is the severity ? what is the incubation period and can there be asymptomatic transmission ? a 69-year - old patient undergoes neurosurgery at wuhan union hospital . four days later , he will develop symptoms that will later be identified as those of the novel coronavirus . following his admission , he will infect 14 medical workers , making him the virus' first identified "super - spreader. chinese authorities will not disclose infections among medical personnel until january 20 . china's leader , xi jinping , convenes an all - day meeting of the country's seven - man politburo standing committee , the country's highest decisionmaking body . media reports of the meeting at the time do not mention the epidemic . in a february 3 speech made public on february 15 , however , xi states that at the january 7 meeting , he "raised a demand for prevention and control of the novel coronavirus pneumonia. 9 p . cst : a china cdc team reportedly sequences the genome of the novel coronavirus . chinese state media will announce this on january 9 . the team led by prof. yong - zhen zhang of fudan university in shanghai submits an article to the peer - reviewed journal nature detailing the team's sequencing of the novel coronavirus . in an article with a hong kong byline , "new virus discovered by chinese scientists investigating pneumonia outbreak," the wall street journal is the first major publication to report that chinese scientists have genetically sequenced a novel coronavirus . the wall street journal says "chinese scientists" sequenced the virus , but it does not identify them or their institutions . u.s. and chinese cdc directors speak by phone about "technological exchanges and cooperation," according to china's official timeline . 9:45 a.m. cst : the xinhua news agency publishes an interview in which a prominent medical expert states that the pneumonia cases in wuhan appear to be caused by a novel coronavirus . 10:32 a.m. cst: cctv reports that on january 7 , china cdc successfully sequenced the genome of the novel coronavirus responsible for the wuhan outbreak . who issues a statement about the preliminary determination of a novel coronavirus , observing , "preliminary identification of a novel virus in a short period of time is a notable achievement. it adds , "who does not recommend any specific measures for travelers . who advises against the application of any travel or trade restrictions on china based on the information currently available. the annual full session of the wuhan municipal people's congress concludes after five days , during which the wuhan municipal health commission issued no updates on the epidemic . the wuhan institute of virology is among the institutions that have now developed testing kits . all suspected novel coronavirus patients in wuhan are tested . chinese national health commission party secretary and director ma xiaowei and china cdc director - general gao fu speak separately by telephone with who director general tedros about the epidemic .