four of these vetoes were overridden . six vetoed bills were forewarned with a written veto threat . ( four received a presidential threat , and two received senior advisors threats. ) congress attempted to override six of them and succeeded once . presidents have also attempted to influence the shape of legislation through the use of veto threats . three additional bills received statements noting the administration's opposition to the bill but did not include a veto threat . none of the bills that congress later overrode were preceded by a presidential veto threat . three - quarters of president bush's vetoes ( 9 of 12 ) were preceded by a written statement of opposition to the bill . president bush also issued multiple written veto threats on four bills that would later receive a veto: three bills received two threats each , and one bill received two statements of opposition . president obama vetoed 12 bills , and congress overrode his veto once . as was true for president bush , six of president obama's vetoes were preceded by a written veto threat ( four presidential and two senior advisors threats ) . unlike the patterns observed for the bush presidency , however , all of president obama's veto threats were whole bill veto threats . whereas president bush also communicated in saps his opposition to three bills short of threatening a veto , president obama either did not issue a sap at all or issued one that contained a veto threat . one of president obama's vetoed bills received two veto threats . president obama's approach of issuing either no statement at all on a bill or a statement containing a veto threat marks a different approach from the one used by president bush . since the 1980s , formal , written statements of administration policy ( saps , pronounced "saps" ) have frequently been used to express the president's support for or opposition to particular pieces of legislation . saps sometimes threaten to use the veto power if the legislation reviewed reaches the president's desk in its current form . among the george w. bush administration ( 2001-2009 ) and the obama administration ( 2009-2017 ) saps examined later in this report , for example , 24% and 48% , respectively , contained a veto threat . this report begins with a brief discussion of the veto power and congress's role in the veto process . it then examines the ways presidents communicate their intention to veto , oppose , or support a bill . the report then provides and discusses summary data on veto threats and vetoes during the bush and obama administrations . as specified by the u.s. constitution ( article i , section 7 ) , the president has 10 days , sundays excepted , to act once he has been presented with legislation that has passed both houses of congress and either reject or accept the bill into law . within those 10 days , administration officials consider various points of view from affected agencies ( as is the case throughout the legislative process ) and recommend a course of action to the president regarding whether or not to veto the presented bill .