in the 116 th congress , h.r . some of the issues and legislation in this debate are discussed below . one overarching question for reclamation is how ( or if ) the bureau should support the construction of new water supply infrastructure , in particular new surface water storage infrastructure . the last major reclamation water storage project constructed was the animas la plata project on the colorado / new mexico border ; it was originally authorized under the colorado river basin project act of 1968 ( p.l . 84-485 ) and constructed from 2002 to 2009 . outside of indian water rights settlements and rural water projects , congress generally has not authorized reclamation to construct major new water storage projects in the last 30-40 years . the status of the section 4007 water storage authorities enacted in the wiin act could be important in determining the bureau's future direction . when enacted , section 4007 was the first new major water storage project construction authority in years . it was notable for its deference to nonfederal project sponsors to lead or contribute to activities traditionally led by the federal government . the process set up under section 4007 was also notable for its departure from the traditional congressional approval process for reclamation projects , in which congress enacts project - specific authorizations . although the financing structure for wiin act projects requires less of an overall federal investment than was necessary for many past reclamation projects , the lower relative up - front federal subsidy also appears likely to shrink the pool of projects using these authorities compared with those that benefited from traditional reclamation projects . six of the nine water storage projects that were funded through early 2020 were located in california ; two were located in washington , and one was located in idaho . that is , 3 of the 17 reclamation states appear likely to benefit from section 4007 funding in the near term . some members of congress have proposed extending and / or amending the section 4007 authority in the 116 th congress . for instance , s. 1932 would extend that part of the wiin act for five years ( through fy2025 ) and authorize $670 million for new ground and surface water storage projects under this section . separately , a draft bill introduced by representative huffman would set up a new annual reporting process to inform congressional authorization deliberations for "major" federal projects , as well as nonfederal water storage projects . under this legislation , certain nonfederal water storage projects ( specifically , nonfederally sponsored projects costing less than $250 million ) would not be subject to this reporting process and would not require explicit authorization by congress . the legislation would increase the authorization of appropriations for section 4007 storage projects to $750 million and extend this authority through fy2025 . supporters have advocated for continuing section 4007 authority for several reasons . they argue that new construction will increase water availability in the west and help to address the water resource effects of climate change , and thus it warrants federal prioritization . they also note that significantly more funding is required to complete the projects that have initially received wiin act funds .