( possibly , quite literally . generally , such programs use at least one of a variety of approaches . one such approach involves fostering communication between fintech firms and regulators . communication can help these firms better understand how regulators view a developing technology and potential regulatory concerns . communication also helps make regulators aware of new fintech innovations when developing new or interpreting existing regulations . as discussed below , certain regulators have established offices within their organizations to conduct outreach to fintechs—including maintaining outreach websites , participating in fintech conferences , and organizing office hours with fintech firms . in another approach , some regulators have announced research collaborations with fintech firms to improve their understanding of new products and technologies . such initiatives could include jointly designing a research trial or fintech firms sharing data about their product performance with regulators . another potential approach policymakers may use if they determine that particular regulations are unnecessarily burdensome or otherwise ill - suited to a particular technology is to exempt companies or products that meet certain criteria from such regulations . similarly , a regulator could issue a no - a ction letter —an official communication stating a regulator does not expect to take enforcement actions in certain situations . regulators will often only provide such special regulatory treatment to companies that first demonstrate that consumers will not be exposed to undue harm or meet other conditions , like agreeing to share data with regulators for research purposes . regulatory uncertainty can be resolved if regulators offer or require certain fintech firms to enter a regulatory regime with well - defined permissions , restrictions , and responsibilities . for example , a regulator could offer or require a specific charter or license for certain firms . financial regulators have begun to implement some of these approaches through a number of rulemakings and by establishing programs and offices and taskforces within agencies . for a detailed examination of these initiatives , see crs report r46333 , fintech: overview of financial regulators and recent policy approaches , by andrew p. scott . the regulatory approaches described above could be supported or opposed by various stakeholders depending on how they are designed and implemented and which firms or products are affected . for example , while fintech firms may want to reduce regulatory uncertainty and operate under one set of rules nationally ( rather than different rules in each state ) , they may also oppose new or additional data - reporting requirements . incumbent financial institutions may argue that regulatory tailoring and exemptions for fintech firms would put incumbents at a competitive disadvantage . state regulators and consumer advocates may oppose any federal charter that would preempt state consumer - protection laws . congress or financial regulators may consider various regulatory approaches . policymakers choosing to tailor regulation for fintechs could apply a different regulatory treatment either to companies or to products . if the goal is to provide new , inexperienced firms an opportunity to learn how they and their products would be regulated , institution - based regulation for firms meeting criteria associated with start - up companies may be the better option .