appendix b . example of emergency declarations for the same incident stafford act emergencies have been declared for different states , territories , and tribes for the same incident . for example , the states of florida , georgia , south carolina , and north carolina , the u.s. virgin islands , and the florida seminole tribe of florida all received emergency declarations for hurricane dorian in 2019 . the incident period and declaration date for the emergency declarations varied by state , territory , and tribe . this information is captured in table b - 1 . this report does not address these other forms of assistance . the stafford act authorizes the president to issue two types of declarations that could provide federal assistance to states and localities in response to a public health incident , such as an infectious disease outbreak: ( 1 ) an "emergency declaration" ( authorized under stafford act section 501 ) , or ( 2 ) a "major disaster declaration" ( authorized under stafford act section 401 ) . the following questions relate to the stafford act declarations for covid - 19 . different types of federal assistance are available pursuant to each type of declaration , with emergency declarations providing more limited forms of assistance than major disaster declarations . federal assistance made available pursuant to stafford act declarations is intended to supplement local efforts to respond to and recover from emergencies and major disasters . federal assistance may support state , territorial , tribal , and local governments , certain nonprofit organizations , and individuals and households . table 1 lists the forms of assistance available pursuant to each type of declaration . the following questions relate to the federal response efforts for covid - 19 , including assistance available to state , territorial , tribal , and local governments , private nonprofit organizations , private entities , and individuals and households . the following questions relate to the funding sources for the federal assistance under the stafford act that may supplement state , tribal , and local response efforts for covid - 19 . additional sources of assistance may be available to support the nation's response to and recovery from the covid - 19 pandemic . crs has developed products on various topics related to the covid - 19 pandemic , including global issues , public health , economic impacts on individuals , impacts on business and the u.s. economy , executive branch response , congressional response and legislation , and legal analysis . the crs covid - 19 resources are available at https: / / www.crs.gov / resources / coronavirus - disease - 2019 . some select products crs has developed related to the covid - 19 pandemic and stafford act assistance programs are included below .