additionally , h.r . the five proposed commissions are found in h.r . 6429 ( the national commission on covid - 19 act , sponsored by representative stephanie murphy ) , h.r . for instance , if the scheme provides only for the appointment of members of congress to the commission , it arguably might not have the technical expertise or diversity of knowledge to complete its duties within the time given by statute . similarly , if the appointment scheme includes qualifying provisos so specific that only a small set of private citizens could serve on the panel , the commission's final work product may arguably only represent a narrow range of viewpoints . none of the proposed covid - 19 commissions specify whether members of congress may serve on the commission . while most statutes that authorize congressional advisory commissions do not provide detailed procedures for how the commission should conduct its business , the statutory language may provide a general structure , including a mechanism for selecting a chair and procedures for creating rules . none of the five covid - 19 commission proposals contain language that directs the process for potentially adopting rules of procedure . for a comparison of each proposed commission's specified rules of procedures and operations , see table 1 . most congressional commissions are generally considered policy commissions—temporary bodies that study particular policy problems and report their findings to congress or review a specific event . each of the five proposals would provide the proposed commission with certain powers to carry out its mission ( see table 1 for specifics ) . one general issue for commissions is who is authorized to execute such powers . in some cases , the commission itself executes its powers , with the commission deciding whether to devise rules and procedures for the general use of such power . 6455 does not provide any executive branch appointments . attention to the proper balance between the number of members appointed by congressional leaders and by other individuals ( such as the president ) , or to the number of members of congress required to be among the appointees , or to the qualifications of appointees , can be significant factors in enabling a commission to fulfill its congressional mandate . in general , a commission's appointment scheme can impact both the commission's ability to fulfill its statutory duties and its final work product . in other cases , the legislation specifically authorizes the commission to give discretionary power to subcommittees or individual commission members . finally , the legislation itself might grant certain powers to individual members of the commission , such as the chair . the proposed covid - 19 commissions contain staffing provisions commonly found in congressional advisory commission legislation . most congressional commissions are also authorized to hire consultants , procure intermittent services , and request that federal agencies detail personnel to aid the work of the commission . commissions generally require funding to help meet their statutory goals . when designing a commission , therefore , policymakers may consider both how the commission will be funded , and how much funding the commission will be authorized to receive . four of the five proposals specify a funding mechanism for the commission .