these prudential issues are discussed in this section . credit union industry advocates argue that lifting lending restrictions to make the system more comparable with the banking system would increase borrowers' available pools of credit . community banks , which often compete with credit unions , argue that policies such as raising the business lending cap , for example , would allow credit unions to expand beyond their congressionally mandated mission and could pose a threat to financial stability . by amending the fcu act several times to expand permissible lending activities , congress arguably had recognized that the credit union system has evolved into a more sophisticated financial intermediation system . this discussion will use the balance sheet terminology defined in the box below . congress has passed legislation , and the ncua has implemented and proposed rules , supporting the expansion of lending activities that would increase financial transactions volumes ( economies of scale ) . the expansion of lending activities , as discussed in this section , is likely to generate greater cash flows and revenues for the credit union system . congress created the ncusif in 1970 to be the insurance fund for all federally regulated credit unions . the ncua manages the ncusif , which is completely funded by insured credit unions . the ncusif's primary income source is the premiums collected from credit unions , which pay the fund's operating expenses , cover losses , and build reserves . premiums were originally set at one - twelfth of 1% of the total amount of member share accounts , but p.l . 98-369 required each federally insured credit union to maintain a fund deposit equal to 1% of its insured share accounts . examination fees and any penalties ncua collects from insured institutions are also deposited into the ncusif . fund portions not applied to current operations can be invested in government securities , and the earnings also generate fund income . the ncusif's reserves consist of the 1% deposit , plus the fund's accumulated insurance premiums , fees , and interest earnings . prudential safety and soundness regulation , which includes holding sufficient capital reserves , may reduce the financial institutions' insolvency ( failure ) risk and promote public confidence in the financial system . although higher capital requirements may not prevent adverse financial risk events from occurring , more capital enhances the financial firms' ability to absorb greater losses associated with potential loan defaults . the enhanced absorption capacity may strengthen public confidence in the soundness of these financial institutions and increase their ability to function during periods of financial stress . for this reason , the ncua has proposed enhanced net worth ( capitalization ) requirements for credit unions , which is intended to increase the credit union system's resilience to insolvency risk and to minimize possible losses to the ncusif and ultimately to taxpayers . congress has also emphasized prudential safety and soundness concerns . following the 2008 financial crisis , the federal bank prudential regulators implemented prudential requirements to enhance the u.s. banking system's resiliency to systemic risk events .