both the telecommunications industry and the fcc are taking steps to counter illegal robocalls . the fcc has also expanded the scope of some existing rules and continues to target and fine illegal robocallers . the telephone consumer protection act of 1991 ( tcpa ) regulates robocalls . legal robocalls are used by legitimate call originators for political , public service , and emergency messages , which are legal . other fcc actions to fight illegal robocallers include ongoing enforcement actions , an extension of a robocall ban to international callers , and the establishment of a hospital robocall protection group . the fcc has taken wide - ranging steps to stop illegal robocalls , including imposing fines on law breakers ; mandating the implementation of call authentication technologies by the telecommunications industry ; creating databases of numbers that should not be called ; and providing regulatory permission to implement call blocking . historically , decreases in the number of robocalls are sometimes followed shortly thereafter by spikes in those numbers , illustrating how robocallers continue to overcome measures to stop them ( eg , by changing their originating numbers ) . although these steps appear to be having some impact , scammers remain determined to continue their attempts to defraud consumers using robocalls . most of the tools being used against robocalls have been developed recently , while some are still under development . therefore , it may take telecommunications providers some time to fully implement them , and it may be some time before a long - term and ongoing decrease in robocall numbers will be realized . this report addresses robocalls that are both illegal under the tcpa as well as intended to defraud , not robocalls that are defined only as illegal . the number of robocalls continues to grow in the united states , and the figures tend to fluctuate based on the introduction of new government and industry attempts to stop them and robocallers' changing tactics to thwart those attempts ( see figure 1 ) . in 2019 , u.s. consumers received 58.5 billion robocalls , an increase of 22% from the 47.8 billion received in 2018 , according to the youmail robocall index . in 2016 , the full first year the robocall index was tabulated , that figure was 29.1 billion calls—half the number of calls in 2019 . further , the fcc states that robocalls make up its biggest consumer complaint category , with over 200,000 complaints each year—around 60% of all the complaints it receives . over the past three years , the fcc has pursued a multi - part strategy for combatting spoofed robocalls . the agency has issued hundreds of millions of dollars in fines for violations of its truth in caller id rules ; expanded its rules to reach foreign calls and text messages ; enabled voice service providers to block certain clearly unlawful calls before they reach consumers' phones ; clarified that voice service providers may offer call - blocking services by default ; and called on the industry to "trace back" illegal spoofed calls and text messages to their original sources . the fcc estimates that eliminating illegal scam robocalls would provide a public benefit of $3 billion annually .