tanf is administered hhs . under federal budget rules , tanf is a mandatory spending program . tanf is not a dedicated education and / or training program , but a broad - purpose block grant that gives states permission to spend funds on a wide range of benefits , services , and activities . vet tec is not a gi bill . the gi bills and vet tec provide financial assistance to students whose eligibility is based on a qualifying individual's service in the uniformed services while such students are enrolled in approved programs of education , which include training programs . the gi bills and vet tec are administered primarily by the department of veterans affairs . the gi bills are appropriated entitlements funded with mandatory spending . appropriated entitlement spending is funded , but not controlled , in annual appropriations acts . vet tec is funded by a limited allocation from gi bill appropriations . the remainder of this section describes the post - 9 / 11 gi bill and vet tec . the post - 9 / 11 gi bill has represented approximately 80% or more of total gi bill participation and spending in each year since fy2013 . while the majority of post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits are used to support education through degree pursuit , they are also used to support students pursuing training and education through approved work - based learning and non - degree instructional programs at a variety of training establishments and educational institutions . non - degree programs include credit and noncredit instructional programs , courses that prepare individuals for assessments to further their education or career ( eg , advanced placement [ap] exams or real estate licensing exams ) , ojt , apprenticeships , and courses that lead to a predetermined educational , vocational , or professional objective ( table 6 ) . the variety of eligible programs was intended to provide eligible individuals with the maximum choice in training and education options . vet tec benefits are only available for the pursuit of non - degree high - technology programs of education at contracted training providers that enter into a program participation agreement ( ppa ) with the va. a high - technology program of education provides instruction in computer programming , computer software , media application , data processing , or information science . the training providers must meet several criteria including , but not limited to , not offering degrees and not charging tuition and fees that exceed annual va caps . post - 9 / 11 gi bill benefits are available to eligible servicemembers and veterans and their family members . the program is not open to the general public and is not based on family income levels . a servicemember or veteran must meet qualifying active duty service requirements in the uniformed services and either continue on active duty or meet specified discharge / release requirements . an eligible servicemember may transfer benefits to family members . the spouse and children of a servicemember who dies in the line of duty while serving on active duty as a member of the armed forces are also eligible .