these plans do not forgive unpaid loan payments . loan forbearance plans between consumers and financial institutions usually include a repayment plan , which is an agreement allowing a defaulted borrower to repay the amount in arrears and become current on the loan according to an agreed upon schedule . interest or fees may or may not accrue during the loan forbearance period . as loan forbearance and repayment plans are generally offered to consumers experiencing a temporary hardship , they have become a common form of consumer relief during the covid - 19 pandemic . during this pandemic , many businesses might be closed either by mandate ( eg , restaurants , concerts , or sporting event venues ) or facing significant revenue declines due to social distancing efforts ( eg , more space between people at open stores or restaurants ) or changes in consumer behavior ( eg , airlines , hotels , and the travel industry ) . many of these disruptions may be temporary , lasting only for the duration of the pandemic . many financial institutions offer loan forbearance plans as an option for consumers who have experienced job loss or temporary income loss but may be able to continue to repay their credit obligations after the disruption ends . in addition , financial institutions may see loan forbearance plans as a good option for consumers at this time because these plans often do not involve renegotiating contracts . loan forbearance may be a less viable option to deal with the financial ramifications of the pandemic if it causes prolonged disruptions , such as persistent elevated levels of unemployment or permanent business closures . other relief options available to consumers loss mitigation ( or workout options ) refers to a menu of possible options financial institutions may offer to help a distressed borrower become and stay current with loan payments and avoid default . loan forbearance is one type of loss mitigation . loan modifications are another type of loss mitigation that renegotiates the contract with concessions to the borrower . these concessions can take the form of principal balance reductions , interest rate reductions , term to maturity extensions , or some combination of such options . financial institutions or loan servicers generally weigh the costs and benefits of the various loss mitigation options and offer borrowers the least costly option from a business perspective . loan forbearance can be the least costly option when the duration of consumer hardship is temporary and short , and the lender can be paid back quickly . loan modifications may also be beneficial to the lender under circumstances when the costs to modify and retain the loan are lower than the costs of default . if a borrower's circumstances , such as becoming disabled or long - term unemployed , make it difficult for servicers to offer a workout option , the lender may find options such as debt collection , auto repossession , foreclosure , or wage garnishment a less costly way to resolve the default . finally , various contractual arrangements that loan servicers are obligated to follow may dictate servicer actions from the time the loan became distressed until resolution . these arrangements may limit servicers' authorities and options .