the court , however , did not issue a holding on this issue . the first area of case law involves the regulation of corporations . in first national bank v. bellotti , the court held that corporate speech in the form of expenditures , in a state referendum , could not be suppressed under the first amendment . in two other corporate speech cases , the court generally upheld a requirement that corporate political expenditures be made from a special segregated fund or political action committee ( pac ) , but subjected this requirement to an exception for "purely" political organizations: federal election commission ( fec ) v. massachusetts citizens for life ( mcfl ) and austin v. michigan chamber of commerce . the second area of case law involves the regulation of labor unions . in fec v. national right to work committee the court upheld a regulation restricting from whom labor unions can solicit funds for their separate segregated funds or pacs . the third area of case law addresses the regulation of political party expenditures . in colorado republican federal campaign committee v. fec , the court upheld a political party's purchase and broadcasting of radio "attack ads," finding it was an "uncoordinated independent expenditure. moreover , in brown v. socialist workers ' 74 campaign committee , the court struck down a state disclosure requirement as applied to a minority party that had historically been the object of harassment and discrimination in the public and private sectors . in the second regulatory context , the court in federal election commission v. akins was presented with the question of whether certain "political committees," without the primary purpose of electing candidates , must nonetheless disclose under feca . in the landmark 1976 decision , buckley v. valeo , the supreme court established the constitutional framework for campaign finance regulation and in numerous subsequent decisions , extended its holding . the fourth area of case law examines the regulation of pacs . in fec v. national conservative political action committee ( ncpac ) , the court struck down a prohibition on independent expenditures above $1,000 in support of a "publicly funded" candidate . finally , the issue of a state statute limiting state office candidate expenditures is examined . in randall v. sorrell , the court struck down a vermont statute imposing expenditure limits finding that the state's primary justification for the limits was not significantly different from congress' rationale for the expenditure limits that the court struck down in buckley . this section analyzes supreme court opinions decided subsequent to buckley in which the court evaluated the constitutionality of disclosure requirements . the first line of cases clarifies the scope of buckley 's general rule , upholding liberal disclosure requirements . case law subsequent to buckley further illustrates that neither the freedom of speech and association nor the government's regulatory powers are absolute . accordingly , supreme court campaign finance holdings embody the doctrinal tension between striking a reasonable balance between protecting the liberty interests in free speech and association , on the one hand , and upholding campaign finance regulation enacted with the intent to encourage political debate while protecting the election process from corruption , on the other .