the court in u.s . terms limits , inc. noted that the states do retain significant sovereign authority in many areas , but that the states transferred and delegated certain powers and authority to the national government within the instrument creating that entity , the constitution . with respect to powers in relation to the federal , national government , and any powers deriving exclusively from and because of the existence of that national government , the states must look to the united states constitution for grants or delegation of authority to them . even the dissenting opinion in the u.s. te rm l imits case , which would have found a "reserved" power of the individual states with respect to term limits and additional "qualifications" of members of congress , distinguished such arguable authority regarding the "selection of members" from any authority of a state to affect the term of a member of congress once a member is sworn and seated in the united states congress . as explained in justice thomas' dissent , an individual state does not possess the authority to effectuate a recall to cut short the term of a sitting member of the united states congress , and such member is beyond the reach of the people of the state "until the next election": in keeping with the complexity of our federal system , once the representatives chosen by the people of each state assemble in congress , they form a national body and are beyond the control of the individual states until the next election . the dissent in the term limits case thus conceded that , regardless of their view of the authority of each state in setting qualifications or conditions on the "selection of members of congress" under the tenth amendment , once a member of congress is seated , such a member is not subject to recall , and the only way to remove that member prior to the expiration of his term is expressly delegated to that member's house of congress in the expulsion clause of article i , section 5 . as again explained by justice thomas , even if a state wishes to "punish one of its senators ... for his vote on some bill .. . the senator would still be able to serve out his term ; the constitution provides for senators to be chosen for 6-year terms ... and a person who has been seated in congress can be removed only if two - thirds of the members of his house vote to expel him , ยง5 , cl . the dissent explained that an individual state could not "slash" or threaten to slash the salary of a member of congress if the state disagreed with the action of the member since "such a power would approximate a power of recall , which the framers denied to the states when they specified the terms of members of congress . the framers may well have thought that state power over salary , like state power to recall , would be inconsistent with the notion that congress was a national legislature once it assembled.