house . cannon ' s procedure in the house of representatives . 103 rd congress , 1 st session . washington: gpo , 1993 . publications of committees and offices of the house floor procedure in the u.s. house of representatives was issued in january 1999 by the house rules committee and published by the congressional institute . an earlier version entitled floor operations manual: u.s. house of representatives was issued in april 1997 . a version under the title house republican floor manual was issued by the office of the house majority leader in january 1997 . how our laws are made ( 23 rd edition ) , prepared by the office of the house parliamentarian , 108 th congress , 1 st session . washington: gpo , 2003 . crs products most titles , including multimedia and the general distribution memorandum , are available from the crs home page at http: / / www.crs.gov . crs report 98-995 , the amending process in the house of representatives , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl30244 , the committee markup process in the house of representatives , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs20147 , committee of the whole: an introduction , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report 95-187 , committee system: rules changes in the house , 104 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) . each of these principles is discussed below . as already discussed , selected precedents of the house are summarized in the parliamentarian's annotations in the house manual . moreover , procedural floor exchanges that establish house precedents are recorded in the congressional record on the dates when they occurred . in addition , however , house precedents in general are compiled , digested , described , or referenced in five official publications of the house: house practice ; deschler ' s precedents ; hinds ' and cannon ' s precedents ; procedure in the u.s. house of representatives and its supplement ; and cannon ' s procedure . house practice presents comprehensive , consolidated information about contemporary procedure in the house , including reference to the precedents and other parliamentary authorities on which it is grounded . the three collections of precedents listed compile precedents of the house , setting forth both the principles they illustrate and the proceedings that established or exemplify them . deschler ' s precedents compiles precedents established from 1936 through the date of publication , hinds ' precedents those established up to 1906 , and cannon ' s precedents those established between 1906 and 1936 . the other two documents listed are no longer current , but can be viewed as predecessor documents of house practice . although the format of each document is different , each presents a digest of the then current practice of the house with citations of precedential and other authorities in which it is grounded . when examining published precedents for their application to a particular parliamentary situation , the reader might bear in mind the principles of house procedure discussed earlier in this report . members needing to find precedents to support or rebut a parliamentary argument might wish to seek the official advice of office of the house parliamentarian ( 5-7373 ) .