are encouraged but not mandated . as mentioned above , the security community , the obama administration , industry , and congress have debated the need to regulate more comprehensively the cybersecurity of critical infrastructure assets . however , it has proven difficult to pass additional regulations . some in the security community suggest that strategic national needs are market externalities that require regulation to encourage more owner / operators ( in particular , those who may not be at the forefront in cybersecurity capabilities or practices ) to take the type of action that the security community considers necessary . industry groups are concerned about the costs and benefits and the potential for duplicative reporting requirements associated with additional regulations . federal funding for critical infrastructure protection it is difficult to determine how much funding the federal government devotes to the protection of critical infrastructure . the homeland security act requires the president's budget to include a budget analysis of homeland security activities across the federal government . this analysis appears in chapter 3 of the analytical perspectives volume of the president's budget . however , beginning with the fy2010 budget request , the administration changed the way homeland security activities are accounted for , making the estimate of how much is spent on critical infrastructure less clear . during the bush administration , omb defined six categories of homeland security activities that paralleled the mission areas defined in the national strategy for homeland security . these were: intelligence and warning ; border and transportation security ; domestic counter - terrorism ; critical infrastructure and key asset protection ; defending against catastrophic events ; and emergency preparedness and response . the "critical infrastructure and key resources protection" category included funding spent by agencies to protect their own critical infrastructure . it also included funds that agencies may have spent working with states , local governments , and private owners / operators to reduce their respective vulnerabilities . dhs activities included both of these , as well as activities associated with coordinating the national effort . other mission areas included activities that could also be considered part of the effort to protect critical infrastructure . for instance , the intelligence and warning mission area includes threat analysis , risk analysis , and the sharing of that information with other stakeholders , including states , localities , and the private sector , each of which factor into critical infrastructure protection . border and transportation security includes activities associated with protecting airports , sea ports , and other transportation modes . therefore , previous estimates for "critical infrastructure and key resources protection" probably represented a minimum estimate of the total amount of federal funding spent on critical infrastructure protection . for fy2010 , omb reformulated the categories for tracking homeland security activity , rearranging them into three new categories: prevent and disrupt terrorist attacks ; protect the american people , our critical infrastructure , and key resources ; and respond to and recover from incidents . as a result , it is not possible to compare the fy2010 figures with those from prior budgets .