it is not a burden . since future generations would inherit both the bonds and the tax liabilities needed to service the bonds , no burden would be shifted to the future . in a more complex case in which the bond owners and taxpayers were not the same people , the existence of a national debt would imply some income redistribution from the latter to the former . who bears this burden ? questions such as these have perplexed economists at least since the days of adam smith . bdk define burden in terms of the lifetime consumption of a generation ( as opposed to the resources that must be given up now to , let us say , fight a war ) . thus , the burden of the national debt is not shifted to them as the convention view argues . the attack on barro's view has been both theoretical and empirical . great britain in his day had accumulated a large national debt fighting the seven years war ( the french and indian war ) and was about to add a further considerable sum suppressing the rebellion in its american colonies . interestingly , mainstream macroeconomics views the burden of a national debt , not in terms of the debt per se , but in terms of government budget deficits that are the cause of the debt and its growth . thus , the burden that a national debt imposes on a country is due to the government's budget deficits . to see clearly the nature of this burden and who bears it , assume that the country's resources are fully employed and that capital ( or saving ) cannot flow internationally between countries . also assume that this country now engages in a war with a neighbor and that the increased expenditures associated with the war lead to a budget deficit that is financed by issuing bonds . the increase in government expenditures increases aggregate demand . in a fully employed economy , in addition to raising prices , the increase in demand will lead to a rise in interest rates . the increase in interest rates is the means by which the government obtains the additional resources to fight the war for the increase will discourage interest - sensitive spending by the private sector . this is primarily business spending for capital goods such as plant , equipment , and structures and spending by households for homes , automobiles , appliances and the like . thus , the budget deficit "crowds out" private capital and the burden of the growing national debt represented by the bonds issued to finance the war , is the decrease in the private capital stock of the country . the level of output is determined by the capital stock , labor force , and productivity levels . since the private capital stock inherited by future generations will be smaller , it implies that the level of output enjoyed by them will be lower . the lower level of output is thus the ultimate burden of the debt and it is a burden that is largely shifted forwarded to future generations .