the basis for this assessment is presented below . mark twain reportedly once said of wagner's music that "it is not as bad as it sounds. what can be done to improve dispute resolution efforts ? are the disputes undermining business confidence or efforts at economic policy coordination ? are the disputes weakening the credibility of the wto dispute settlement system ? do the political disputes reflect differences between the two partners in terms of basic values and orientations ? if so , could the disputes force a fundamental re - evaluation of the importance of the bilateral relationship ? in short , what is the significance of trade conflict to the bilateral relationship ? this report considers these overriding questions in three parts . the first part categorizes and evaluates the trade conflicts according to their underlying causes and characteristics . in light of the causes and dimensions of the disputes , the second section examines the potential for conflict management . a final section assesses the role that trade disputes may be playing in the u.s. - eu economic relationship . changes in government regulations , laws , or practices that protect or promote domestic commercial interests at the expense of foreign interests are at the heart of most trade conflicts . while governments are the sole providers or suppliers of trade protection , there are a range of parties or interest groups that demand or request measures that result in protection for domestic parties . these include producers and workers , as well as consumer and environmental interest groups . governments may also be the primary demanders or initiators of actions that have trade protectionist effects . why are many disputes so difficult to resolve ? u.s. - eu trade conflicts vary according to the nature of the demand for protection . many of the major u.s. - eu trade conflicts are classified and discussed below according to the nature of the demand for protective action . while many of the conflicts are spurred by multiple demanders and causes , an attempt is made to classify disputes according to categories that seemingly account for the overriding cause or demand for government action . as most trade conflicts embody a mixture of economic , political , and social dimensions , there is ample room for disagreement over the dominant cause of any particular dispute . by and large , this report classifies most of the conflicts according to american perspectives . whether the conflict is propelled by protectionist or other domestic aims remains a key question in some disputes as well . the three categories of trade conflicts — traditional , foreign policy , and regulatory — appear to offer different possibilities for conflict management . this is due not only to the fact that the causes and dimensions of these categories of conflicts differ , but also because the institutional relationships and forces that affect the supply of and demand for protection are operative in varying degrees from category to category .