the major titles of the act are discussed individually below . the truth - in - lending act ( tila ) was enacted in 1969 as title i of the consumer credit protection act . the purpose of the tila is "to assure a meaningful disclosure of credit terms so that the consumer will be able to compare more readily the various credit terms available to him and avoid the uninformed use of credit. the tila requires creditors to disclose certain basic information about the transaction so that the consumer will be given the information needed "to compare the cost of credit and make the best informed decision on the use of credit. the tila does not apply to the following: credit transactions involving extensions of credit for primarily business , commercial or agricultural purposes ; transactions in securities or commodities accounts by a broker - dealer registered with the securities and exchange commission ; credit transactions , other than those in which a security interest is or will be acquired in real property or in personal property used as the principal dwelling and other than private education loans , in which the total amount financed exceeds $25,000 ; public utility services regulated by a state ; or loans made , insured , or guaranteed pursuant to title iv of the higher education act . the fair credit billing act ( fcba ) was enacted on october 28 , 1974 , as an amendment to the consumer credit protection act . the purpose of the fcba is "to protect the consumer against inaccurate and unfair credit billing and credit card practices. the law defines and establishes a procedure for resolving billing errors in consumer credit transactions . the consumer leasing act ( cla ) was enacted in 1976 to "assure a meaningful disclosure of the terms of leases of personal property for personal , family , or household purposes so as to enable the lessee to compare more readily the various lease terms available to him , limit balloon payments in consumer leasing , enable comparison of lease terms with credit terms where appropriate , and to assure meaningful and accurate disclosures of lease terms in advertisements. the cla applies to leases exceeding four months , and not exceeding a total contractual obligation of more than $25,000 , primarily for personal , family , or household purposes . the cla does not apply to leases for agricultural , business , or commercial purposes , or to a government or governmental agency or instrumentality , or to an organization . the fair credit reporting act ( fcra ) was enacted on october 26 , 1970 . the purpose of the fcra is "to require that consumer reporting agencies adopt reasonable procedures for meeting the needs of commerce for consumer credit , personnel , insurance , and other information in a manner which is fair and equitable to the consumer , with regard to the confidentiality , accuracy , relevancy , and proper utilization of such information. the fcra applies to the files maintained by "consumer reporting agencies," a term broadly defined to include anyone in the business of furnishing reports on the credit worthiness of consumers to third parties .