appendix a . 2016 irs form 1040 2016 irs schedule a ( form 1040 ) appendix b . 2016 marginal tax rate schedul . these amounts are adjusted annually for inflation . only individuals with deductions that can be itemized in excess of the standard deduction find it worthwhile to itemize . this amount then becomes the amt tax base . next , a basic exemption is allowed and subtracted from the amt tax base . a two - tiered tax rate structure of 26% and 28% is then assessed against the remaining amt tax base to determine the amt liability . if the amt liability exceeds a taxpayer's regular income liability a taxpayer must add the difference between the two to his or her regular income tax liability to arrive at gross tax liability . congress , in 1969 , enacted the predecessor to the current individual amt to make sure that everyone paid at least a minimum of taxes and still preserve the economic and social incentives in the tax code . a taxpayer's regular income tax liability is listed on line 44 of the form 1040 . the amt liability is listed on line 45 of the form 1040 , and the gross tax liability is listed on line 47 of the form 1040 . nonrefundable tax credits are subtracted from gross tax liability to arrive at a taxpayer's final tax liability . thus , nonrefundable tax credits generally reduce an individual's tax liability directly , on a dollar - for - dollar basis , and are available to all qualified taxpayers . these increases apply per classification . thus , a 70-year - old blind and single taxpayer would be eligible for a $3,100 increase in his or her standard deduction . these tend to be taxpayers in the middle to high income ranges . for the 2014 tax year ( the most recent data ) , approximately 30% of taxpayers itemized their deductions . whichever deduction the taxpayer claims — itemized or standard — the deduction amount is subtracted from agi . deductions function like adjustments and exclusions in their effect on tax liability . deductions reduce a taxpayer's tax liability , but only by a percentage of the amount deducted . an individual in the 35% tax bracket would receive a reduction in taxes of $35 for each $100 deduction while an individual in the 25% tax bracket would receive a reduction in taxes of $25 for each $100 deduction . hence , the same deduction can be worth different amounts to different taxpayers depending on their marginal tax bracket . more simply stated , the tax savings from deductions are generally equal to the taxpayer's tax rate times the amount of the deduction . so higher - income taxpayers typically benefit more than lower - income taxpayers from deductions . a taxpayer's standard or total itemized deductions are listed on line 40 of the form 1040 . the individual components of the itemized deduction are listed on lines 1 to 28 on schedule a to form 1040 in appendix a . before calculating total income , personal exemptions are allowed for the taxpayer , his or her spouse ( if married and filing a joint return ) , and each dependent .