a fuel cell can be likened to a "chemical battery. unlike a battery , however , a fuel cell can run continuously , as long as the fuel supply is not exhausted . in a fuel cell , hydrogen reacts with oxygen to generate an electric current . hydrogen is supplied to the fuel cell as either pure hydrogen or a through hydrogen - rich fuel ( such as methanol , natural gas , or gasoline ) that is processed ( reformed ) on - board the vehicle . there is a physical limit to the voltage that one fuel cell can provide , so fuel cells are arranged in "stacks" to generate a high voltage that is used to power an electric motor . this chemical process eliminates the need for charging a battery , which is necessary with electric vehicles , while producing much lower emissions than combustion vehicles . in fact , if pure hydrogen fuel is used , the only product from the reaction will be water . with hydrogen fuel , an fcv would qualify as a zero emission vehicle . using other fuels , while the vehicle is no longer a zev , emissions would still be drastically cut as compared to conventional vehicles . furthermore , because potential fuel supplies for fcvs include natural gas , methanol , or pure hydrogen — the latter two produced from natural gas — another potential benefit from fuel cells will be their ability to reduce the transportation demand for foreign petroleum . only when traveling long distances might the combustion engine be necessary . potential advantages include the ability to use electric power , which tends to be less expensive per mile than gasoline . thus , some of the increased purchase cost of a phev over a conventional vehicle could be made up in future fuel savings . in addition , phevs could provide some of the environmental benefits of pure electric vehicles , including lower fuel - cycle pollutant and greenhouse gas emissions , without some of the performance drawbacks . an advanced vehicle further from commercialization is a fuel cell vehicle ( fcv ) . while currently available only to a few consumers ( on a demonstration basis ) , fuel cells have been touted as likely to be one of the most important technologies in the history of the automobile . they are currently very expensive , and thus there has been a great deal of interest in research and development to improve their marketability . because of their potential to revolutionize the automotive industry , all major manufacturers are working to develop fuel cell vehicles , and some manufacturers have introduced a limited number of vehicles for lease ; others intend to introduce vehicles for limited leases in the near future . demonstration projects are ongoing with fuel cell passenger cars , sport utility vehicles , and transit buses . many of these demonstrations are in conjunction with the california fuel cell partnership , a consortium of auto manufacturers , fuel providers , fuel cell developers , and state and federal agencies . another way to improve the fuel economy and emissions characteristics of vehicles is to use advanced components that reduce friction , decrease vehicle weight , or improve system efficiency .