implementation . successful implementation of the kpcs , which officially began january 1 , 2003 , will require that individual signatory nationsenforce existing or prospective regulatory processes and legislation that comply with the scheme,and that private actors involved in the trade comply with the scheme and national regulatoryframeworks . at the world diamond congress in october 2002 , the international diamondmanufacturers association ( idma ) and the world federation of diamond bourses ( wfdb ) adopteda resolution that described an "industry system of self regulation," that would comply withrequirements of the kimberley process . the first post - implementation plenary session of the kimberley process is scheduled to convene in johannesburg , south africa , from april 28 to 30 , 2003 . key issues likely to be the subject offurther negotiation or debate include: whether , and in what manner , if at all , the kimberley process would need to establish an independent monitoring system to ensure that participating states are living up to theircommitments and whether the whole process is transparent and effective . whether there could , or should , be a system or basis for deciding on whether countries wishing to join the kimberley process actually qualify to do so . one idea is to establisha "credentialing committee" within the process , even though it is presently open to all states thatmeet certain minimal qualifications . some observers fear that certain applicant states might onlyimplement in a nominal fashion the basic requirements required of participants . ( 67 ) in addition to addressing human rights and conflict - related concerns , conflict diamond hearings n the 106th and 107th congresses highlighted congressional interest in ensuring thatproposals toregulate international trade in diamonds and any u.s. legislation to implement such proposals beconsistent with relevant world trade organization trade rules . hearing witnesses called forlegislative solutions that would not penalize legitimate producers of diamonds , such as botswanaand south africa . some witnesses expressed concern that a failure to enact legislation to curtail theconflict diamond trade and to introduce methods of separating legitimate diamonds from illicitdiamonds might lead to a consumer - driven decrease in market demand for all diamonds , thusdamaging the revenue base of legitimate diamond producing nations . in the october 2001 hearingbefore the subcommittee on trade of the house committee on ways and means , industry and non - governmentalrepresentatives described growing consensus between their respective interest groupson the need to finalize the kimberley process . legislation: 107th congress . as in the 106thcongress , several conflict diamond - related bills were introduced in the 107th congress . theseincluded h.r . 918 ( hall ) ; h.r . 2500 ( wolf ) ; h.r . 2722 ( houghton ) ; h.r . 5410 ( kolbe ) ; h.con.res . 410 ( hall ) ; s. 787 ( gregg ) ; s. 1084 ( durbin ) ; s. 1215 ( hollings ) ; and s. 2027 ( durbin ) . among these bills , h.r . 2506 ( kolbe ) [ p.l .