total program outlays in fy1999 were $180.9 billion . there are no limits on amount , durationor scope of services and there are no cost - sharing requirements for pace enrollees . on november 29 of thatyear , the president signed the consolidated appropriations act for fy2000 ( p.l . includedin that bill by reference was the medicare , medicaid , and schip balanced budget refinement actof 1999 ( bbra 99 ) , a bill largely comprised of medicare provisions , but which also included anumber of changes to medicaid and the state children's health insurance program ( schip ; described below ) . in addition to technical amendments to bba 97 , bbra 99 included provisions allowing forincreased medicaid disproportionate share payments to hospitals for certain states and the districtof columbia , and for extended access to a special $500 million fund to pay for medicaid eligibilitydeterminations resulting from welfare reform for a longer period of time than allowed under previouslaw . ciss grants seek to reduceinfant mortality and improve the health of mothers and children through development and expansionof integrated services at the community level . the block grant requires that states match $3 in fundsor resources for every $4 in federal funds received , and that a minimum of 30% of block grant fundsbe used to support programs for children with special health care needs . for fy1994 forward , titlev authorizes to be appropriated $705 million annually . bba 97 created two diabetes grant programs under the public health service act . one grantprogram supports research into the prevention and cure of type i diabetes , or insulin - dependentdiabetes . the second grant program supports prevention and treatment of diabetes in indians . forfy1998 through fy2002 , each program receives $30 million annually through funds transferredfrom the schip appropriation . bba 97 also required evaluations of these grant programs with aninterim and final report due to congress on january 1 , 2000 and january 1 , 2002 , respectively . the ricky ray hemophilia relief fund act of 1998 ( p.l . bbra 99 also modified the schedule for phasing out cost - based reimbursement for fqhcsand rhcs that had been included in the bba 97 . schip , enacted in bba 97 , is targeted at uninsured children who live in families withincome below twice the federal poverty level and who would not otherwise be eligible for medicaid . the program began in october 1997 with total federal funding of nearly $40 billion for the periodfy1998 through fy2007 . states may use schip funds to provide coverage through healthinsurance that meets specific standards for benefits and cost - sharing ( known as separate stateprograms ) , or through expansions of eligibility under medicaid , or through a combination of bothoptions . schip entitles states with approved schip plans to pre - determined , annual federalallotments based on a distribution formula set in law . each state has flexibility to define the groupof targeted , low - income children who are eligible for its schip . eligibility criteria may include , forexample , geography , age , income and resources , residency , disability status , access to other healthinsurance , and duration of eligibility for schip .