, saving ) . table 1 . energy market failures and energy tax policy remedies source: adaptation based on fisher , anthony and michael h. rothkopf . market failure and energy policy: the rationale for selective conservation . energy policy , v.17 , august , 1989 . according to economists , energy is a commodity that is produced to provideutility to consumers or end users , and , in general , is no different than any othereconomic good . three features of energy as an economic good , however , differentiateit from other commodities . first , most energy is derived from depletable mineralresources: petroleum products are derived from crude oil , natural gas resides indepletable reservoirs or deposits ( such as coal mines ) , and electricity is ( currently ) mostly derived from coal . while this does not necessarily impede the smoothfunctioning of the competitive market system , it does mean that production decisionshave to be made functioning of the competitive market system , it does mean thatproduction decisions have to be made in an inter - temporal framework . that raises theimportant inter - generational question: do markets optimally deplete resources overtime , or do they exploit them for short run gain at the expense of the long - termbenefits of the future generation of consumers ? the second distinguishing feature of energy is that the activities required toproduce it generate adverse environmental effects , and the process of transformingit to do work involves combustion , which also generates pollution from emissions . in the presence of such pollution - - or externalities as discussed below - - marketsgenerally fail to produce and use the optimal quantities of energy - - they produce anduse too much energy , i.e. , more than the optimal amounts that maximize socialwell - being . finally , energy is different from other commodities ( say , eg , food , clothingor housing ) in that both at the micro and macroeconomic level it enters theproduction process of many firms and industries in an important extent - - it is a majorfactor of production , just as are labor , capital , and managerial ability . this hasimportant implications for the macro - economy: it means that changes in energyprices , particularly crude oil prices which are benchmarks for all energy prices , havethe potential to move the markets , and the macro - economy , in a major way . fluctuations in energy prices could have major effects on the business cycle,affecting aggregate output ( gdp ) , employment , interest rates , and prices ( i.e.,inflation ) . two examples of this are the recession of 1974-75 , which was caused bythe 1973 oil embargo , and the stagflation of the late 1970s , which was caused by thesharp run - up of crude oil prices of the 1970s . under generally accepted economic and accounting principles , producers ofdepletable resources ( such as oil , gas , or coal ) , who attempt to maximize profits overa finite stock of a resource , should be taxed in the same manner as non - energyproducers not subject to the finite resource constraint .