6 standing alone . this result is a natural outcome of the ratereduction and flattening in the president'sproposal , and explains why marriage penalty relief in the form of a second earner deduction was eliminated whenrate were flattened in 1986 . 6 , the congressional marriage penalty proposal , would , however , increase existing marriage bonuses , while the administration proposal wouldreduce them . rather than "what would the tax be if thecouple divorced ? these issues become much more important for certain types of married couples . most coupleswould not have had children without marriage,and having children can dramatically reduce tax liability . in divorce , who gets custody of children can alter taxliability . never marrying would probably alsohave altered career paths ( and thus the amount of earned income of each partner ) , savings behavior ( and thus theamount of unearned income ) , the allocation ofsavings and consumption into different types ( including tax exempt forms such as owner occupied housing that alsotend to affect the choices of itemizingdeductions ) . getting divorced would probably also alter these effects , unless the divorce were solely for purposesof tax minimization . the decision about how to measure the marriage penalty does not alter the effects of the two proposals ( which are still determined with reference to the marriedcouple's joint circumstances ) , but rather the original magnitude and remaining magnitude . in the next section we calculate the marriage penalty in general for couples without considering the effects of children , where there is much less uncertainty abouthow to measure the penalty . the following section discusses the issues surrounding marriage penalties for couples . despite all of the attention focused on marriage penalties , it may be surprising to know that for the middle class,marriage penalties are small or nonexistent,particularly in cases where the penalty is well - defined . according to data from the internal revenue servicestatistics of income , about 60% of joint returns thathave tax liability before credits paid taxes at the 15% rate in 1997 ; for these taxpayers , the marriage penalty can beno larger than $225 ( measured at 2001 incomelevels ) . for taxpayers who itemize and whose itemized deductions are at least as large as the combined standarddeduction for two singles , no penalty exists at all . as noted in the previous section , couples with children present serious problems in modeling marriage penaltiesand bonuses . the presence of children in ahousehold can dramatically alter tax liabilities . children justify a head of household rate schedule which has widerbrackets than the single return , implying alarger penalty and smaller bonus as compared to joint return than would be the case in comparing single and jointreturns . children increase personal exemptionsand , if under 17 , make the taxpayer eligible for a child credit . earned income credits , which reach much further upthe income brackets and are much larger,accrue with children . thus , how children are divided between the spouses can have profound consequences for taxliability .