table 4 . comparative chart of plan colombia legislation ( the administration request ; the housefy2000 supplemental appropriations bill ( h.r . 3908 ) ; the senate foreign operations appropriations ( s.2522 ) and senate appropriationscommittee fy2001 military construction appropriations ( s. 2521 ) bills ; and the enacting legislation , themilitary construction appropriations actfor fy2001 , p.l . * subtotals and totals may not add due to rounding . for a further breakdown of all categories of plan colombia assistance , see: http: / / www.ciponline.org / colombia / aidcompare.htm . table 5 . comparison of salient legislative provisions regarding colombia table 6 . u.s. aid to colombia fy1989-fy1998 ( obligations and authorizations , $ millions ) source note: data is drawn from a number of sources , not all of which are consistent , includingvarious editions of the u.s. overseas loans and grants andassistance from international organizations "green book" , prepared by the aid budget office , the foreign militarysales , foreign military construction sales,and military assistance facts book , prepared by the department of defense security cooperation agency , withdata as of september 30 , 1998 , informationprovided directly by the departments of state and defense that are not recorded in these publications , and by thegeneral accounting office ( gao ) for1996-1998 . note: this chart includes direct u.s. foreign assistance ( i.e. , the categories usually counted as u.s. foreign aid , which are in italics ) , as well as the costs of goodsand services provided to colombia from other u.s. government programs supporting counternarcotics efforts incolombia . the united states also provides asmall amount of dod excess defense articles ( eda ) to colombia . other funds are spent in colombia oncounternarcotics and other activities that areconsidered part of u.s. programs: for instance , the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) spends its own fundson joint operations in colombia . dod section124 detection and monitoring funds cover u.s. operated radar systems in colombia and elsewhere , and other costsof u.s. detection and monitoring of drugflights . a in these years , there was assistance in this category of less than $50,000 . house appropriations committee . subcommittee on foreign operations , export financing and related programs . hearing on colombia counternarcoticsfunding . february 29 , 2000 . house appropriations committee . subcommittee on foreign operations , export financing and related programs . hearing on emergency supplementalappropriations request for plan colombia . march 2 , 2000 . house armed services committee . hearing on southcom / u.s . policy towards colombia . march 23 , 2000 . house government reform committee . subcommittee on criminal justice , drug policy and human resources . hearing on department of defense's druginterdiction program , january 27 , 2000 . house government reform committee . subcommittee on criminal justice , drug policy and human resources . hearing on narcotics crisis in colombia . february 15 , 2000 . house government reform committee . subcommittee on criminal justice , drug policy and human resources . hearing on getting u.s. aid to colombia.october 12 , 2000 . house international relations committee . subcommittee on western hemisphere affairs . hearing on plan colombia . september 21 , 2000 . senate appropriations committee . subcommittees on defense and on military construction .