table 4 . total federal government spending on hiv / aids , by function ( $ in millions ) source: table prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on analysis from hhs budget office , march 20 , 2008 . notes: hhs : department of health and human services ; cms : centers for medicare and medicaid services ; di : disability insurance ; hud :department of housing and urban development ; ssi : supplemental security income ; opm - fehb : office of personnel management - federal employeeshealth benefits . figure 5 . hhs hiv / aids spending , by program / function , as apercentage of total source: hhs budget office , march 20 , 2008 . note: fy2009 is based on the administration's budget request . table 6 . federal government spending on international hiv / aids programs , by function ( $ in millions ) source: table prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on analysis from hhs budget office , march 20 , 2008 . notes: may not add due to rounding . hhs: department of health and human services . table 1 . hiv / aids minority initiative ( $ in millions ) source: table prepared by the congressional research ( crs ) based on analysis from the hhsbudget office , february 15 , 2008 . notes: totals may not add due to rounding . fy2009 is based on the administration's budgetrequest . in january 2003 , president bush announced in the state of the union speech a five - year $15 billionprogram , the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) . ( 13 ) the five - year programtargets countries with a very high prevalence of hiv infection ; its goals are to prevent 7 million newinfections , provide treatment to 2 million hiv - infected people , and provide care for 10 millionhiv - infected individuals and aids orphans . figure 1 . estimated total federal spending on hiv / aids,by function , fy2008 source: hhs budget office , march 20 , 2008 . federal government aids spending is estimated at $23.3 billion in fy2008 ( see table 5 ) . the bush administration request for fy2009 is $24.1 billion . of the total amount spent by thefederal government on hiv / aids in fy2008 , the majority ( 63% ) of funding is for treatmentprograms ; funding for research receives 13% of the total ( see figure 1 and table 4 ) . the remainingamounts are for prevention programs ( 14% ) and income support for persons with aids ( 10% ) . aids programs within hhs ( health and human services ) account for 66% of the totalamount spent on aids by the federal government ( see figure 2 ) . hhs entitlement funding supportsthe treatment of hiv / aids patients through medicaid and medicare , which are administered by thecenters for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) . hhs discretionary funding supports aidsresearch and prevention programs , as well as treatment programs . table 2 provides a history ofhhs discretionary funding for hiv / aids from the beginning of the epidemic in fy1981 to thepresent .