territories . this report focuses on municipal and industrial ( m&i ) water and wastewater activities . this report does not address projects and programs that involve irrigation , flood control , power supply , and recreation . however , in some cases ( noted below ) , a federal program ( eg , reclamation ) may primarily support one or more of these other objectives while providing some support for m&i activities , even if only incidentally . other federal authorities of usda's rural utilities service , reclamation , and usace may be available to assist with the provision of emergency water and wastewater needs , such as improving access to water supplies during a drought . these authorities are not discussed in this report . table 1 summarizes financial and other key elements of the projects and program activities discussed in this report . as indicated in the table , federal funding for the programs and projects discussed in this report varies greatly . collectively , congressional funding for these programs in recent years has been somewhat eroded by overall competition among the many programs that are supported by discretionary spending , despite the continuing pressure from stakeholders and others for increased funding . while federal support for some traditional financing tools — project grants , formula grants , capitalization grants , direct and guaranteed loans — has declined , policymakers have begun to consider alternative financing approaches , such as trust funds , new types of federal loans , and options to encourage private sector investments in water infrastructure through public - private partnerships . supporters of some of these newer ideas ( eg , the " water infrastructure finance and innovation act program " ) see them as options to supplement or complement , but not replace , traditional financing tools . state and local contributions are the most significant source of total funds available to communities for drinking water and wastewater treatment improvements . according to the congressional budget office , spending by state and local governments on drinking water and wastewater has increased much faster than spending by the federal government , especially since the mid - 1970s . in 2017 , the state and local share of such projects ( both capital and operation and maintenance spending ) was 96% , while the federal share was 4% . the department of commerce's economic development administration ( eda ) is authorized to provide development assistance to areas experiencing substantial economic distress . eda grants for community water and sewer projects are available through its public works and economic development facilities program ( pwed ) . such assistance is also available under the agency's economic adjustment assistance program . under the pwed program public works grants are awarded competitively to eligible applicants to revitalize , expand , and upgrade their physical infrastructure . these investments in public works improvements must be linked to projects intended to enable communities to attract new industry , encourage business expansion and retention , diversify local economies , and generate or retain private sector jobs in eda - designated distressed regions . grants may be used for a wide range of purposes but frequently have a sewer or water supply element .