this practice may be exploited in a fraudulent manner . for example , in february 2005 , choicepoint , the largest information broker in the country , "unwittingly sold personal information on at least 145,000 americans to a criminal ring engaged in identity theft. increasingly , states have passed laws that require state agencies and private entities to notify residents when a security breach results in the release of personal information , including ssns . california was the first jurisdiction to pass such a law in 2002 . as of october 2010 , at least 46 states , the district of columbia , puerto rico , and the virgin islands have enacted laws with similar requirements . the chronology that follows details various federal developments relating to use of the ssn . private sector entities routinely obtain and use ssns for a wide variety of purposes . as early as the 1970s , concerns regarding increased uses of the ssn by both government and private entities prompted studies and subsequent congressional action limiting government uses of the ssn . the social security administration created a task force in 1970 to investigate "non - program" uses of the ssn , and the task force's report the following year stated , any examination of ssn policy must begin with the recognition that the number has ceased to be merely a "social security number. the social security number ( ssn ) was first introduced as a device for keeping account of contributions to the social security program . a number of states have enacted statutes that restrict the use or display of ssns in various contexts , including restricting companies and individuals from posting or publicly displaying ssns , printing them on cards , transmitting them over the internet , or mailing them without safety measures . california was the first state to pass such a law that bars certain businesses , such as insurance companies , from publicly displaying ssns . the california law also prohibits printing an ssn on identification cards ; printing ssns on documents mailed to customers , except under certain circumstances ; and requiring persons to use an ssn to log onto a website without a password . other states , including arizona , arkansas , connecticut , illinois , maryland , michigan , minnesota , missouri , oklahoma , texas , utah and virginia , have passed laws similar to california's law . some states have gone further in protecting ssns , including restricting the solicitation of ssns by private companies , prohibiting disclosure of ssns or any number derived therefrom , or subjecting a truncated ssn to the same restrictions on display and transfer as the full ssn . concerns have been expressed regarding the effect of technological advances on the availability and use of the ssn in private sector databases: organizations that sell personal information , including ssns , have benefited greatly from continuing advances in computer technology and the availability of computerized databases . through the years , however , the use of this identifying number has been expanded by government entities and the private sector to keep track of many other government and private sector records .