kumgang . additionally , south korea proposed periodical orregularletter exchanges and an increased number of families for such exchanges . 1 / 30 / 01 - hyundai asan sends half of its $12 million january 2001 payment to the dprk , a violation of contract . thecompany blames snowballing losses from the mt . kumgang venture , estimated to reach 488 billion won ( $391million ) . 1 / 31 / 01 - at a 4th round of working level military talks ( panmunjon ) on reconnecting the seoul - shinuiju railroad in thedmz , the two sides near agreement on joint safety regulations aimed to help avert possible accidental clashes withinthedemilitarized zone ( dmz ) . landmine clearance work within the dmz is likely to begin in march . what are north korea's intentions ? with the apparent - and perhapstemporary - collapse of kim dae jung's sunshine policy , south korea's ability to take the initiative on peninsularmattersis limited . thus , the future course of inter - korean relations revolves to an even greater degree around north korea'sintentions , which remain opaque . in the aftermath of the june 2000 summit , many wondered whether pyongyang'sdiplomatic opening was a sign that kim jong - il had changed his stripes , deciding to adopt a more cooperativeposture andpossibly reform the faltering north korean economy . others warned that the north's actions were merely tacticsto obtaineconomic concessions from south korea and its allies , thereby propping up north korea's economy , rearming itsdeteriorating conventional military , and preserving the power of its communist elite . another possibility is that thenorthkorean ruling elite is divided , with some reformers favoring a greater openness , and other interests - such as thekoreanpeople's army - opposing it . in any event , thus far , north korea has largely succeeded in steering the north - southdialogue toward discussions over economic assistance and away from discussions over military confidence - buildingmeasures and internal economic reforms . 3 / 9 / 00 - kim dae jung's "berlin declaration. in a speech in berlin , rok president kim signaled seoul's interest inextending economic assistance to north korea , in exchange for reopening an official north - south dialogue . 4 / 8 / 00 - the rok and dprk announce they will hold the first - ever inter - korean summit in june . 5 / 29-31 / 00 - dprk leader kim jong - il makes a secret visit to beijing , meeting with top chinese leaders . 6 / 13-15 / 00 - the north - south summit , pyongyang , between rok president kim dae jung ( shown at left in photo ) anddprk leader kim jong - il . the two leaders sign a vaguely worded joint declaration , which indicates their agreementtowork toward unification , exchange visits by members of divided families around august 15 , 2000 , repatriate dprkprisoners in the rok who have completed their jail terms , work for "a balanced development" of both countries'economies , hold a dialogue between the two governments at an early date , and increase social and culturalexchanges . thedeclaration also mentions that kim jong - il accepted kim dae jung's invitation to visit seoul "at an appropriatetime.