u.s. const . article i , §4 , cl . day of chusing presidential electors clause the congress may determine the time of chusing the [presidential] electors , and the day on which they shall give their votes ; which day shall be the same throughout the united states . u.s. const . article ii , §1 , cl . fourteenth amendment equal protection clause no state shall make or enforce any law which shall ... deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws . the congress shall have power to enforce , by appropriate legislation , the provisions of this article . u.s. const . xiv , §§1 & 5 . fifteenth amendment the right of citizens of the united states to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the united states or by any state on account of race , color , or previous condition of servitude . the congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation . u.s. const . xv , §§1 & 2 . although the constitution is silent on various aspects of the voting process , the constitution seems to anticipate that states would be primarily responsible for establishing procedures for elections . federal authority to direct how states administer these regulations , however , is also provided for in the constitution . congress's power is at its most broad in the case of house elections , which have historically always been decided by a system of popular voting . its power may be more limited in elections for senators or president , and is at its narrowest as regards state elections . congress does not have general legislative authority to regulate the manner and procedures used for elections at the state and local level . nor , as noted above , does it appear to have complete authority to regulate presidential elections . congress does , however , have extensive authority to prevent voter disenfranchisement by a state or locality . for instance , the civil war amendments , the nineteenth amendment , the twenty - fourth amendment , and the twenty - sixth amendment all seek to prevent discrimination in access to voting , and authorize congress to exercise power over federal , state , and local elections to implement these protections . the most significant of these provisions is congress's enforcement authority under the fourteenth amendment to provide for equal protection and under the fifteenth amendment to prevent disenfranchisement based on race . as noted , modern election law is mostly regulated at the state level , but there are a variety of federal laws that direct how states will implement certain aspects of elections . while concurrent jurisdiction between the states and federal government over a particular issue area is relatively common , it is less common for the federal government to direct how the states will exercise its authority in such area . in other contexts , the directing or "commandeering" of states to implement federal programs can raise tenth amendment concerns . this , however , does not appear to be the case with election laws .