specifically , p.l . 105 - 89 requires states to initiate tpr proceedings in any case where the court has found that a parent has lost parental rights to that child's sibling ; killed another of his or her children or committed felony assault against the child or a sibling , or subjected the child to aggravated circumstances ( known as the fast track provision ) ; or for infants determined under state law to be abandoned . the law required hhs to prepare a report on the relationship between substance abuse and child welfare , based on information from the substance abuse and mental health services administration within hhs , as well as the administration for children and families ; the report was submitted to congress in april 1999 . unless specified otherwise , the law took effect upon enactment ( november 1997 ) , except that , where enactment of new state laws was required , states had until three months after their first legislative session to comply . also in each year's appropriations law , congress has limited the availability of these funds to certain years , even though the authorizing law provides that appropriated amounts shall remain available for allocation to the states until expended . a gao ( 2002 ) report and a cornerstone consulting group study indicate that states most commonly use their incentive awards to fund the recruitment of adoptive families and provide post - adoptive services . some states reported using their incentive funds for one - time expenses , such as studies , training , events , and the purchase of legal services , due to the uncertainty of receiving future adoption incentive awards . additionally , states reported that , because the awards were relatively small compared to their overall child welfare budgets , they were able to use their funds in innovative and flexible manners . no state reported that the adoption incentive bonus was the primary motivator for improving its adoption system . the primary concerns of states regarding the incentives were that they may give the impression that adoption is the best plan in all cases , that states with increased adoptions before asfa may have trouble exceeding their baselines ( this concern was expressed before the 2003 reauthorization updated the baselines ) , and that the law did not make further changes in the structure of federal funding for child welfare . additional provisions in p.l . 105 - 89 : gave child welfare agencies access to the federal parent locator service ; clarified eligibility for the independent living program ; established a sense of congress in favor of standby guardianship laws ; and made a statement of intent about "reasonable" parenting . though numerous changes to state and federal laws and programs have been amended and developed as a result of the adoption and safe families act , researchers have had difficulty judging asfa's effects on the child welfare system . many states had already begun to make adjustments to their systems before 1997 and some had previously enacted laws similar to asfa . this has made it difficult to determine how much of the shift in child welfare outcomes and data was due to asfa or other state and federal laws and programs .