one is from the state department itself . in the department's country reports , 2005 , the section on north korea discusses the japanese kidnapping issue and then states that there is "credible reports that other nationals were abducted from locations abroad. the state department does not appear to have provided clarification or details regarding these "credible reports. this assertion in country reports , 2005 could be seen as contradicting the assertion that north korea has not sponsored any terrorist acts since 1987 . the second type of reports , coming from several diverse sources , asserts that north korea has provided arms and possibly training to hezbollah in lebanon and the tamil tigers in sri lanka and that it maintains an intimate relationship with the iranian revolutionary guard . hezbollah and the tamil tigers are two of the most active terrorist groups on the u.s. list of international terrorist groups . the iranian revolutionary guard has been designated by the state department as a supporter of terrorism . a third , related body of more direct evidence appeared in the form of several intercepted shipments of north korean arms bound for iran in 2009 . [emphasis added. the country reports , 2006 , reflected the new rice - hill strategy of linking removal of north korea to fulfillment of the february 2007 nuclear agreement . while it mentions the japanese kidnapping issue , there is less discussion of it than in prior reports . moreover , it did not describe progress or a settlement of the kidnapping issue as a condition for north korea's removal . the state department's long - standing claim that north korea "was not known to have sponsored any terrorist acts since 1987" was particularly important in 2007 in view of the clear goal of the rice - hill strategy to remove north korea from the list of state sponsors of terrorism . however , questions about the accuracy of the claim are relevant in view of three types of reported information . three vessels were intercepted , which contained north korean weapons that western intelligence and israeli intelligence officials and non - government experts believe were bound for hezbollah and hamas , terrorist groups on the official u.s. list of international terrorist organizations . the largest of these shipments was aboard a ship that was searched in dubai before departing for iran in july 2009 . all three ships contained north korean components for 122 mm grad rockets and rocket launchers . the shipment intercepted in dubai contained 2,030 detonators for the grad rockets and related electric circuits and solid fuel propellant for rockets . the 122 mm rockets have a range of about 25 miles . iran , particularly the iranian revolutionary guards , is known to have supplied significant quantities of these rockets and rocket launchers to hezbollah and hamas , which have frequently fired them into israel . in december 2009 , a shipment of 35 tons of north korean weapons was intercepted aboard an ilyushin - t76 transport aircraft . the ilyushin had flown from pyongyang to bangkok , thailand , where the arms were seized . the flight plan of the aircraft reportedly showed that its ultimate destination was iran .