global influence . north koreasupported the 1979 islamic revolution in iran , which overthrew a key u.s. ally , the shah , and it provided missiletechnology to iran to help it in its 1980-88war with iraq . the united states backed iraq in that war . in their statements and cooperation , iran and north koreaappear to try to reinforce each other'scriticism of the united states as a global hegemon bent on dominating developing nations . iran uses that argumentto criticize the u.s. military presence inthe persian gulf monarchy states , and north korea likewise derides the u.s. military presence in south korea . north korea also has sought to earn hardcurrency from sales of arms and technology to middle eastern countries . over the past decade , north korea and iran have been further drawn together by u.s. references to both of them as "rogue states" and as targets of u.s.economic sanctions . as noted above , both of them , along with iraq , were designated by president bush as part of"an axis of evil" in his january 29 , 2002state of the union message . at the same time , north korea has deflected some scrutiny by emphasizing that it isnot a muslim nation and asserting that ithas no connections to islamic terrorist groups such as al qaeda or those backed by iran . iran , by contrast , has beenidentified by the united states for over adecade as the most active state sponsor of terrorism because of its backing for islamic terrorist organizations suchas lebanese hizballah and hamas , apalestinian organization . even though president bush described north korea as part of an axis of evil in early 2002 , later in the year the administration appeared to move moretoward the engagement policy with north korea that was followed during by the clinton administration . thatpolicy is discussed in greater detail below , inthe context of the clinton administration's efforts to broaden its october 1994 framework agreement on nuclearissues to halting north korea's missiletesting and missile exports ( to iran and other countries ) as well . at the end of 2002 , however , a sense of crisisdeveloped as north korea admitted toworking on a uranium enrichment route to a nuclear weapon , and later unfroze its plutonium program that had beensuspended under the october 1994framework agreement . north korea expelled iaea inspectors monitoring that agreement in december 2002 . the sense of crisis developed at the same time as there were revelations of two previously unknown nuclear sites in iran , as note above . although theseparate iran and north korea revelations coincided in time , there was nothing to indicate that iran and north koreaare working together on nuclearweapons technology . information on iranian efforts to acquire weapons and technology from other suppliers appears sketchy , andsuggests that iran is willing to deal with anumber of suppliers and middlemen to acquire needed technology . most suppliers to iran possess former sovietbloc equipment and technology that canreplace , complement , or supplement the technology iran is acquiring from russia .