if a quasi governmental entity is not an agency of government , what is it ? hybrid organizations attract both support and criticism . there are today , associated with the federal government alone , hundreds of hybrid entities that have collectively been called the "quasi government. the relationship of this burgeoning quasi government to elected and appointed officials is a subject of growing concern , as it touches the very heart of democratic governance: to whom are these hybrids accountable , and how is the public interest being protected over and against the interest of private parties ? the scope and consequences of these hybrid organizations have not been extensively studied . basic definitional issues resist resolution . even the language to be used in discussing the quasi government is in dispute . should government management be discussed in the language of law , economic theory , or the business school ? the traditional tools for holding executive agencies accountable , such as the budget and general management laws , are inapplicable in most instances , often leaving these hybrids with the freedom to pursue their own institutional interests , which may or may not conform to the public interest as defined by the nation's elected leadership . the current popularity of the quasi government option can be traced to at least five major factors at work in the political realm: ( 1 ) the desire to avoid creating another federal "bureaucracy" ; ( 2 ) the current controls on the federal budget process that encourage agencies to develop new sources of revenues ; ( 3 ) the desire by advocates of agencies and programs to be exempt from central management laws , especially statutory ceilings on personnel and compensation ; ( 4 ) the contemporary appeal of generic , economic - focused values as the basis for a "new public management" ; and ( 5 ) the belief that management flexibility requires entity - specific laws and regulations , even at the cost of less accountability to representative institutions . this report introduces the reader to the quasi government , suggests categories of entities within this sector , and examines their legal characteristics , behavior , and possible policy consequences . the report will be revised and updated as new information and analyses become available . the quasi government , virtually by its name alone and the intentional blurring of the governmental and private sectors , is not easily defined . while different categories of quasi governmental organizations can be described and found useful as an analytic tool , such categories are artificial , with porous lines of distinction and differentiation , and tend to be imposed upon the disparate entities after the fact . two rough models suggest themselves as ways of looking at these entities . first , there is the linear spectrum model where the existence of a quasi government between the governmental and private sectors is designated and categories of organizations ( eg , government - sponsored enterprises ) and their relationship to the executive branch ( and congress ) are described on a descending scale from closest to the most distant .