each of these contexts is discussed separately below . the michigan cases resolved an issue that had vexed the lower federal courts for a quarter - century . historically , judicial insistence on strict scrutiny has largely condemned governmental distinctions based on race , except in the most narrowly circumscribed circumstances . to the short list of governmental interests sufficiently compelling to warrant race - based decisionmaking , a majority of the court added the pursuit of diversity in higher education . but this expansion has been curtailed somewhat by the court's more recent pronouncement involving elementary and secondary school plans to promote racial diversity , its less deferential approach in fisher , and its subsequent decision to reconsider ut's admissions plan during the upcoming term . although the court's decision to strike down the seattle and louisville school assignment and transfer plans likely had a profound impact on similar plans at many of the nation's elementary and secondary schools , the parents involved in community schools case did not completely foreclose the possibility that school districts may constitutionally pursue certain measures to avoid racial isolation , prevent resegregation , and promote racial diversity in their schools . however , it is not entirely clear what these measures might entail . while the facially race - neutral methods identified in justice kennedy's concurring opinion — such as engaging in strategic site selection of new schools , altering attendance zones , providing resources for special programs , and recruiting students and faculty — seem more likely to survive judicial scrutiny , the fate of other kinds of race - conscious school plans may become apparent only as a result of legal developments that emerge over time . indeed , there is evidence that some school districts are abandoning race - based school assignment plans in favor of plans based on socioeconomic status , which is a non - suspect classification for purposes of constitutional review . likewise , some colleges and universities have taken similar steps in anticipation of judicial rulings limiting the use of race in higher education . meanwhile , the seeds of future controversy may lie in questions arguably raised but not fully addressed by the latest rulings . for example , the court's latest rulings left unanswered the constitutional status of racially exclusive diversity policies not directly involving admissions , such as the legality of race - based scholarship and financial aid , recruitment and outreach , or college preparation courses that exclusively target minority populations . in addition , the question of whether schools or universities may completely avoid constitutional shoals by adopting race - neutral plans to increase racial diversity may not be fully answered by the court's latest rulings . such race - neutral alternatives include percentage plans like those approved in texas , florida , and california that guarantee college admission to top graduates from every state high school , regardless of race . in addition to percentage plans , educational authorities have experimented with other forms of alternative action , or policies designed to promote racial diversity without relying on racial preferences . class - based affirmative action , for example , takes socioeconomic status or the family educational background of students into account .