databases . a central issue relating to the kinds of crimes for which dna is collected from convicted persons for inclusion in a profile database orindex . states vary in the crimes for which they collect dna samples . qualifying offenses include,at a minimum , felony sex crimes , but several others are included by different states: offenses againstchildren ( 40 states ) , murder ( 36 ) , assault and battery ( 27 ) , kidnapping ( 22 ) , robbery ( 19 ) , burglary ( 14 ) , and all felonies ( 6 ) . a concern of child advocates is the potentially negative impacts on children if suchchallenges are allowed . states have varied in their treatment of this issue . current research on improving dna identification is performed or supported mainly by nist , nij , the fbi laboratory , afdil , and private industry . such research has several broad goals . improvements in sensitivity of analyses would make useful typing possible from even smaller ormore highly degraded samples than at present . that could permit more powerful identification ( orexclusion ) from dna in trace evidence from , for example , saliva , tears , and skin cells . coupledwith further improvements in specificity , such as via use of a larger set of markers , it would alsoincrease the ability of dna evidence to make positive or unique identifications . even identicaltwins possess minor genetic differences that could eventually be detected . a central question is whether the men in such cases , who may claim not to be responsible for childsupport since they are not the child's biological father , should nevertheless continue to be heldresponsible . reducing the timerequired to complete typing could lead to more timely following of leads as well as more quicklyremoving from further consideration those persons excluded by the evidence . as the costs ofperforming dna analysis has come down , its use has increased . further reducing cost would makeuse of dna identification more widely available . research on automation and miniaturization ofthe typing process may lead to cost reductions and further improvements in quality control . conceivably , an automated , portable dna - typing system could eventually be developed that wouldpermit on - site analysis and identification through comparison against a database via wirelesscommunication . such major improvements in the technology will take several years at least to perfect . it is generally believed that str markers will remain the standard for dna identification over the nextdecade , with mtdna increasingly used to analyze highly degraded samples . research to developways to amplify longer sequences may , however , lead to more use of vntr or other more variablesystems in the near future . also , the human genome project and related efforts are increasinglyidentifying very small genetic differences , even at the level of a single base ( single nucleotidepolymorphisms , or snps ) . such research may lead to eventual development of better markersystems . in some cases , relevant physical characteristics , such as for eye color , might even bededucible from genetic sequences and could help , for example , in identifying suspects . ( 59 ) there are several challenges raised by the likely future improvements in dna typing .