the wto upheld theirclaim . with the united states in mind , the european union and japan are advocating a review ofthe antidumping practices of wto members as part of the agenda for a new round of wtonegotiations . some trade specialists have suggested , forexample , that the federally funded trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) programs could be reformedand made more effective . taa programs are available for workers ( through the department oflabor ) and for firms ( through the department of commerce ) . they provide funds for training andother adjustment measures to those who can demonstrate an adverse impact from imports . manyeconomists prefer this option over trade restrictive remedies because its directs assistance to thosemost affected and does so without distorting prices . but taa programs as currently designed andadministered have been criticized by labor advocacy groups as ineffective in responding to workers'needs in a globalizing economy . the congress might also require the president to halt or quantitatively restrict imports . sucha measure would resolve the immediate problem of adverse effects on the import - sensitive workersand firms and have been proposed and in some cases enacted in the past . but they would very likelybe challenged by other wto members as violating wto rules . they would also reducecompetitive pressures on a u.s. industry ( ies ) which might encourage inefficiency , higher costs anda decline in the general economic welfare . the united states opposes this position . the panel furthermore recommended that the law be repealed . the wto appellate bodyreaffirmed the decision in a january 16 , 2003 decision . however , the law has proved very popularin the congress . trade remedy legislation generally ignites a debate overthe direction of u.s. trade policy . trade remedy legislation is largely supported by those industries,such as steel , that are most sensitive to foreign competition . the legislation is often opposed by thoseindustries and groups that are users of imports as inputs or consumers of final products . increasedtrade relief would likely result in higher prices to these groups . changes in trade remedy laws could have an impact on u.s. relations with its major tradepartners , who might challenge the legality of some changes in u.s. trade remedy laws under thewto . along with their challenge of the "byrd amendment," the european union and japan arechallenging other u.s. antidumping laws and practices in the wto . in 1999 , the two tradingpartners filed disputes regarding the u.s. antidumping act of 1916 , a law which allows u.s. firmsto sue foreign companies in u.s. court over dumping of imports and to collect damages if dumpingis found . they claimed it violates the wto antidumping agreement . amending u.s. trade remedy statutes is one option available to congress to cushion theimpact of import competition on american industries . under the safeguards agreement such compensation is delayedfor three years . the united states also has obligations regarding trade remedies vis - a - vis canada and mexicounder the nafta . chapter eight of the nafta provides , among other things , that escape clausemeasures against nafta members generally last no more than three years .