he signed p.l.101-168 . after insisting that congress include language prohibiting the use of districtrevenues to pay for abortion services except in cases where the mother's life wasendangered . the district successfully fought for the removal of the provision limiting district funding of abortion services , when congress considered and passed thedistrict of columbia appropriations act for fy1994 , p.l . the fy1994 actalso reinstated rape and incest as qualifying circumstances allowing for the publicfunding of abortion services . the district's success was short lived . the district ofcolumbia appropriations act for fy1996 , p.l . 104-134 , and subsequent district ofcolumbia appropriations acts , limited the use of district and federal funds forabortion services to cases where the mother's life is endangered or cases where thepregnancy was the result of rape or incest . district officials , when urging president clinton to veto the fy2000 appropriations act , h.r . 2587 , cited the prohibition on the use ofdistrict funds as just another example of congressional intrusion into local matters . district officials had hoped that clinton's veto would lead to the removal ormodification of the abortion provision and other social provisions they feel intrudeon home rule . the abortion prohibition was unchanged during conferenceconsideration of h.r . the prohibition also is included in p.l . return to contents section of this long report . table 1 . status of district of columbia appropriations: fy200 . the creation of a needle exchange program funded with federal or district funds is one of the key policy issues debated during house consideration of the district'sappropriations bills for fy2000 . the controversy surrounding creation of a needleexchange program touched on issues of home rule , public health policy , andgovernment sanctioning and facilitating the use of illegal drugs . proponents of aneedle exchange program contend that such programs reduce the spread of hivamong illegal drug users by reducing the incidents of shared needles . opponents ofsuch efforts contend that such programs amount to government sanctioning of illegaldrugs by supplying drug addicted persons with the tools to use them . they content that public health concerns raised about the spread of aids and hiv through sharedcontaminated needles should be addressed through drug treatment and rehabilitationprograms . another view in the debate focuses on the issue of home rule and thecity's ability to use local funds to institute such programs free from congressionalactions . the conference committee versions of h.r . 3064 , which was vetoed by the president on november 3 , 1999,would have prohibited the use of federal and district funds to finance a needleexchange program . the senate during consideration of its version of h.r . 2587 , the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2000 , didnot include a provision prohibiting the creation of such a program . the housedistrict of columbia appropriations subcommittee also did not include funding forsuch a program in the bill forwarded to the full appropriations committee . for itspart the house appropriations committee reported a bill , h.r . 2587 ,that included a provision prohibiting the use of federal funds for a needle exchangeprogram .