unanimous consent is usually granted . senators may use their right to extended debate and employ other parliamentary maneuvers to delay floor action , a tactic known as a "filibuster. the threat of a filibuster , particularly at the end of a session or near a scheduled recess , can be used to try to extract concessions from the senate leadership . to be sure , it would be impossible for the senate to act on legislation in a timely fashion if senators always exercised their right to extended debate . for this reason , the senate often agrees to debate restrictions as set forth in complex unanimous consent agreements . floor debate on certain types of measures , such as budget resolutions , is often limited by rule - making provisions in statutes , as is the case in the house . when a representative seeks recognition , the speaker will frequently ask: "for what purpose does the gentleman ( gentlewoman ) rise ? the speaker does so in order to determine what business the member wants to conduct . if the business does not have precedence ( eg , a special order speech ) , the speaker can usually deny recognition . the speaker does adhere to some established house practices of recognition , such as giving members of the committee reporting a bill priority recognition for offering floor amendments . a speaker has the right to vote and to debate from the floor , if he wishes . the extent to which this right is exercised varies from speaker to speaker . the speaker presides over house floor proceedings , but not over meetings of the committee of the whole ( formally , the committee of the whole house on the state of the union ) . he appoints a majority party representative to preside as chairman of the committee of the whole . the house resolves into the committee of the whole , a committee to which all members belong , to consider measures that will be amended ( see " amending measures " section ) . a non - partisan parliamentarian , an officer of the house , is always present to advise the presiding officer on rulings and precedents . the vice president of the united states is the senate's official presiding officer ( formally , "president of the senate" ) , as provided in article i of the constitution . the constitution also requires that a "president pro tempore" preside over the senate in the vice president's absence . the president pro tempore , in modern times the most senior senator of the majority party , is elected by a majority vote of the senate . in practice , the vice president and the president pro tempore seldom preside over senate proceedings . the vice president typically presides when he might be required to break a tie vote on an important administration priority . most of the time , the president pro tempore exercises his right under the senate's standing rules ( rule 1 ) to appoint a senator as "acting president pro tempore. this senator , in turn , can appoint another senator to serve as acting president pro tempore .