many countries cannot meet their kyoto targets . the targets themselves are arbitrary and not based upon science . for america , complying with those mandates would have a negative economic impact with layoffs of workers and price increases for consumers . that the kyoto protocol did not meet the conditions of s.res . among the principles that the president argued should guide such a program were the following: we must always act to ensure continued economic growth in prosperity for our citizens and for citizen throughout the world.... and finally , our approach must be based on global participation , including that of developing countries whose net greenhouse gas emissions now exceed those in the developed countries . in its 2006 action plan submitted under unfccc , the george w. bush administration outlined six principles in building a climate change policy: be consistent with the long - term goal of stabilizing greenhouse gas concentrations ; be measured and continually build on new scientific data ; ensure continued economic growth and prosperity ; pursue market - based incentives and spur technological innovation ; be flexible to adjust to new information and take advantage of new technology ; and promote global participation , including developing countries . these countries ratified the kyoto protocol , and the european union ( eu ) in particular has begun implementing reduction policies . thus , the issue with u.s. competitiveness among annex i nations has been addressed . indeed , it is the eu that has raised the prospect of a trade barrier with the united states because of the lack of u.s. carbon policies , not the other way around . instead , those concerns about international competitiveness have refocused on rapidly growing economies in the developing world , particuarly those of india and china . in response to these concerns , competitiveness has received specific attention in legislation introduced in both the house and senate ; legislation that contains provisions providing financial assistance to firms that might be adversely affected by climate change mandates , and requirements that could affect imports from nations without comparable climate change mandates . and third , the unfccc was debated and ratified at a time when the developed , annex i nations dominated ghg emissions ; at that point , it was assumed comprehensiveness could be delayed as non - annex i nations pursued greater economic development and while more environmentally friendly technologies were commercialized and transfered to them . however , time has begun to overtake this strategy . in 2005 china passed the united states to become the world's largest emitter , and 9 of the 20 largest ghg emitting countries were non - annex i countries . without a comprehensive approach , any reductions in emissions from developed countries could be offset by emission increases by developing countries . the unfccc's twin goals of reducing ghg emissions and preserving the right for non - annex i nations to pursue traditional economic policies is increasingly challenged . annex i countries' promises to provide financial and technical assistance have yet to produce the desired results , and the situation may require more fundamental changes in the relationship between annex i and non - annex i countries .