on the more recent three , the same procedure was followed as at the start of a congress . the data presented here cover the period during which the permanent size of the house has been set at 435 members . this period corresponds to that since the admission of arizona and new mexico as the 47 th and 48 th states in 1912 . a majority of the full membership of the house ( 218 , in a house of 435 ) is not required . precedents emphasize that the requirement is for a majority of "the total number of votes cast for a person by name. a candidate for speaker may receive a majority of the votes cast , and be elected , while failing to obtain a majority of the full membership because some members either are not present to vote or instead answer "present" rather than voting for a candidate . during the period examined , this kind of result has occurred five times: in 1917 ( 65 th congress ) , "champ" clark was elected with 217 votes ; in 1923 ( 68 th congress ) , frederick gillett was elected with 215 votes ; in 1943 ( 78 th congress ) , sam rayburn was elected with 217 votes ; in 1997 ( 105 th congress ) , newt gingrich was elected with 216 votes ; and in 2015 ( 114 th congress ) , john boehner was elected with 216 votes . in addition , in 1931 ( 72 nd congress ) , the candidate of the new democratic majority , john nance garner ( later vice president ) , received 218 votes , a bare majority of the membership . the table does not take into account the number of vacancies existing in the house at the time of the election ; it therefore cannot show whether any speaker may have been elected lacking a majority of the then qualified membership of the house . if no candidate obtains the requisite majority , the roll call is repeated . on these subsequent ballots , members may still vote for any individual ; no restrictions have ever been imposed , such as that the lowest candidate on each ballot must drop out , or that no new candidate may enter . because of the predominance of the two established national parties during the period examined , only once in the period did the house fail to elect on the first roll call . in 1923 ( 68 th congress ) , in a closely divided house , both major party nominees initially failed to gain a majority because of votes cast for other candidates by members from the progressive party or from the "progressive" wing of the republican party . many of these members agreed to vote for the republican candidate only on the ninth ballot , after the republican leadership had agreed to accept a number of procedural reforms these members favored . thus the republican was ultimately elected , although ( as noted earlier ) still with less than a majority of the full membership .