administrations . the texts are placed in italics . july 9 , 1971 our military presence in taiwan at this moment is composed of two elements , the two - thirds of it which is related to activities in other parts of asia [the vietnam war] and the one - third of it which is related to the defense of taiwan . we are prepared to remove that part related to activities other than to the defense of taiwan , that's two - thirds of our force ... within a specified brief period of time after the ending of the war in indochina . december 15 , 1978 as of january 1 , 1979 , the united states of america recognizes the people's republic of china as the sole legal government of china . in the future , the american people and the people of taiwan will maintain commercial , cultural and other relations without official government representation and without diplomatic relations . the administration will seek adjustments to our laws and regulations to permit the maintenance of commercial , cultural , and other non - governmental relationships in the new circumstances that will exist after normalization . the united states is confident that the people of taiwan face a peaceful and prosperous future . the united states continues to have an interest in the peaceful resolution of the taiwan issue and expects that the taiwan issue will be settled peacefully by the chinese themselves . december 16 , 1978 as is known to all , the government of the people's republic of china is the sole legal government of china and taiwan is a part of china . the question of taiwan was the crucial issue obstructing the normalization of relations between china and the united states . it has now been resolved between the two countries in the spirit of the shanghai communique and through their joint efforts , thus enabling the normalization of relations so ardently desired by the people of the two countries . as for the way of bringing taiwan back to the embrace of the motherland and reunifying the country , it is entirely china 's internal affair . december 29 , 1978 the republic of china is an independent sovereign state with a legitimately established government based on the constitution of the republic of china . it is an effective government , which has the wholehearted support of her people . the international status and personality of the republic of china cannot be changed merely because of the recognition of the chinese communist regime by any country of the world . the legal status and international personality of the republic of china is a simple reality which the united states must recognize and respect . january 1 , 1979 taiwan has been an inalienable part of china since ancient times .... taiwan's separation from the motherland for nearly 30 years has been artificial and against our national interests and aspirations , and this state of affairs must not be allowed to continue.... unification of china now fits in with the direction of popular feeling and the general trend of development . the world in general recognizes only one china , with the government of the people's republic of china as the sole legal government .