these pollutants are substances that are biodegradable ( i.e. , bacteria can break them down ) , occur naturally in the aquatic environment , and deplete the dissolved oxygen concentration in water , which is necessary for fish and other aquatic life . the act also mandated greater pollutant cleanup than bpt by no later than march 31 , 1989 , generally requiring that industry use the "best available technology" ( bat ) that is economically achievable . bat level controls generally focus on toxic substances . compliance extensions of as long as two years are available for industrial sources utilizing innovative or alternative technology . failure to meet statutory deadlines could lead to enforcement action ( see below ) . the cwa utilizes both water quality standards and technology - based effluent limitations to protect water quality . technology - based effluent limitations are specific numerical limitations established by epa and placed on certain pollutants from certain sources . they are applied to industrial and municipal sources through numerical effluent limitations in discharge permits issued by states or epa ( see discussion of " permits , regulations , and enforcement ," below ) . water quality standards are standards for the overall quality of water . they consist of the designated beneficial use or uses of a waterbody ( recreation , water supply , industrial , or other ) , plus a numerical or narrative statement identifying maximum concentrations of various pollutants that would not interfere with the designated use . the act requires each state to establish water quality standards for all bodies of water in the state . these standards serve as the backup to federally set technology - based requirements by indicating where additional pollutant controls are needed to achieve the overall goals of the act . in waters where industrial and municipal sources have achieved technology - based effluent limitations , yet water quality standards have not been met , dischargers may be required to meet additional pollution control requirements . for each of these waters , the act requires states to set a total maximum daily load ( tmdl ) of pollutants at a level that ensures that applicable water quality standards can be attained and maintained . a tmdl is both a planning process for attaining water quality standards and a quantitative assessment of pollution problems , sources , and pollutant reductions needed to restore and protect a river , stream , or lake . based on state reports , epa estimates that more than 40,000 u.s. waters are impaired and require preparation of tmdls . control of toxic pollutant discharges has been a key focus of water quality programs . in addition to the bpt and bat national standards , states are required to implement control strategies for waters expected to remain polluted by toxic chemicals even after industrial dischargers have installed the best available cleanup technologies required under the law . development of management programs for these post - bat pollutant problems was a prominent element in the 1987 amendments and is a key continuing aspect of cwa implementation .