it also highlights some of the issues confronting the u.s.government . the military forces designed to respond to a crisis differ significantly from unitsdesigned to support the post - crisis consequence management of a terrorist incident . many believe that current u.s. policy fordealing with domestic terrorism lacks coherent focus . recent proposals for restructuringnational - level organizations to deal with a major terrorist event have mostly centered on theconsequence management aspect . crisis response cooperation between the fbi and the military iswell demonstrated . the military has demonstrated that it understands its supporting role to lawenforcement and is prepared to act with technical assistance or tactical forces as called upon . as such , theyare governed by different directives and levels of authorization for their employment . until recently , terrorism to many americans was a remote , if frightening possibility thataffected only individuals or groups outside the territorial boundaries of the united states . eventsof the past decade indicate that the terrorist threat has changed significantly in ways that make itmore dangerous and much more difficult to counter . the terrorist attacks of the 1970s and 1980susually had clear political objectives . these attacks resulted in just enough bloodshed and loss of lifeto gain attention to the terrorists' cause yet not enough to alienate them from the public support theysought . the debate overthe seriousness of the various threats has intensified recently . various studies and commissions haverecommended far reaching changes in the approach to domestic preparedness and response to threatsto the homeland . the threat of domestic terrorism has generated a wide ranging debate regardingall organizational aspects of the problem , including the approach from a strategic perspective andthe more focused aspects of organizational structure , budgetary priorities , and intelligence collection.several recent studies have proposed a greater role for the u.s. military in combating terrorism whileothers call for the creation of entirely new structures to combat the complete spectrum of threats tothe united states , including terrorism and the use of wmd by terrorists . ( 2 ) this paper ( 3 ) outlines current legislation and policies that govern the military's role when supporting lawenforcement in a domestic terrorism crisis . bombings , kidnapings , and aircraft hijacking were accomplished by declared , identifiablegroups with specific political goals in mind . in contrast , the decade of the 1990s has produced adifferent type of terrorism - terrorism designed to produce massive casualties with little regard fordistinct political goals and often no claims of responsibility . recent examples of this type of attack,such as the world trade center bombing in new york city , the alfred p. murrah federal buildingbombing in oklahoma city , the east african embassy bombings in 1998 , and destruction of theworld trade center in 2001 make it appear that a terrorist's aim is to kill as many people as possible . the possible inclusion of weapons of mass destruction in the terrorists' arsenal now makes this aneven more dangerous proposition . recently , in the trial of the perpetrators of the east african embassy bombings , a witnesstestified that usama bin laden's group , al qaeda ( arabic for "the base" ) , sought to acquire chemicaland nuclear material to use against the united states .