reg . 59,941 ( december 4 , 1981 ) , as amended , 50 u.s.c . ยง 401 note , deals with "united states intelligence activities. under section 2.3 of e.o . 12333 , the agencies within the intelligence community are to "collect , retain or disseminate information concerning united states persons only in accordance with procedures established by the head of the agency concerned and approved by the attorney general , consistent with the authorities provided by part 1 of this order...." among the types of information that can be collected , retained or disseminated under this section are: ( a ) information that is publicly available or collected with the consent of the person concerned ; ( b ) information constituting foreign intelligence or counterintelligence , including such information concerning corporations or other commercial organizations . collection within the united states of foreign intelligence not otherwise obtainable shall be undertaken by the fbi or , when significant foreign intelligence is sought , by other authorized agencies of the intelligence community , provided that no foreign intelligence collection by such agencies may be undertaken for the purpose of acquiring information concerning the domestic activities of united states persons ; ( c ) information obtained in the course of a lawful foreign intelligence , counterintelligence , international narcotics or international terrorism investigation ; ( d ) information needed to protect the safety of any persons or organizations , including those who are targets , victims or hostages of international terrorist organizations ; ( e ) information needed to protect foreign intelligence or counterintelligence sources or methods from unauthorized disclosure . collection within the united states shall be undertaken by the fbi except that other agencies of the intelligence community may also collect such information concerning present or former employees , present or former intelligence agency contractors or their present or former employees , or applicants for any such employment or contracting ; ( f ) information concerning persons who are reasonably believed to be potential sources or contacts for the purpose of determining their suitability or credibility ; ( g ) information arising out of a lawful personnel , physical or communications security investigation ; ... ( i ) incidentally obtained information that may indicate involvement in activities that may violate federal , state , local or foreign laws ; and ( j ) information necessary for administrative purposes . in addition , agencies within the intelligence community may disseminate information , other than information derived from signals intelligence , to each appropriate agency within the intelligence community for purposes of allowing the recipient agency to determine whether the information is relevant to its responsibilities and can be retained by it . in discussing collections techniques , section 2.4 of e.o . 12333 indicates that agencies within the intelligence community are to use the least intrusive collection techniques feasible within the united states or directed against united states persons abroad . agencies are not authorized to use such techniques as electronic surveillance , unconsented physical search , mail surveillance , physical surveillance , or monitoring devices unless they are in accordance with procedures established by the head of the agency concerned and approved by the attorney general .