members of both joint committees are elected by the senate by resolution . the sizes of standing committees normally differ . essentially , each senator is limited to service on two of the "a" committees , and one of the "b" committees . service on "c" committees is unrestricted . exceptions to the restrictions are recommended by the pertinent party conference and then officially authorized through senate approval of a resolution affecting one or more senators . sometimes these exceptions are authorized to accord the majority party a working majority on a committee , whereas at other times exceptions are made to accommodate the preferences and needs of individual senators . non - standing committees are divided between the so - called category "b" committees and category "c" committees . the special committee on aging and the joint economic committee , along with four standing committees , are included in the "b" category of committees . under senate rules , no senator may serve on more than one "b" committee , whether standing or non - standing . the select committee on ethics , the committee on indian affairs , and the joint committees on taxation , the library , and printing essentially are treated as "c" committees , although joint library and joint printing are not explicitly listed as such in senate rules . the "c" committees are exempt from the assignment limitations in senate rules , so a senator may serve on any number of them without regard to his or her other assignments . specific rules regarding senate membership on and appointments to non - standing committees often are contained in the legislation creating these panels . thus , the procedures vary from committee to committee . a review of the legislation establishing the non - standing committees , and the appointment practices that have evolved , reveal that party leaders are usually included in the process . the members of the select committee on ethics and the special committee on aging are elected by the senate by resolution , essentially in the same manner as the standing committees . the ethics committee is the only senate committee with an equal party ratio , consisting of three senators from each party . republican members of both committees are chosen by the republican leader and confirmed by the republican conference before election by the full senate . democratic members of the ethics committee are selected initially by the democratic leader . in contrast , democrats on the aging committee are nominated by the steering and outreach committee and confirmed by the democratic conference before election by the full senate . majority - party senators are appointed to the select committee on intelligence on the recommendation of the majority leader , and minority - party senators on the recommendation of the minority leader . senators are appointed to this committee from the appropriations , armed services , foreign relations , and judiciary committees , as well as from the senate "at large. the majority and minority leaders , as well as the chair and ranking member of the armed services committee serve on the committee as ex - officio , non - voting members .