crs report rl30096 . airport improvement program reauthorization legislation in the 106th congress , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs20176 . surface transportation board reauthorization and the 106th congress , by stephen thompson . crs report rs20177 . airport and airway trust fund issues in the 106th congress ,by [author name scrubbed] . this isvery significant from a budgeting standpoint . contract authority is tantamount to , butdoes not actually involve , entering into a contract to pay for a project at some futuredate . under this arrangement , specified in title 23 u.s.c. , authorized funds areautomatically made available at the beginning of each fiscal year and may beobligated without appropriations legislation . appropriations are required to makeoutlays at some future date to cover these obligations . where most federal programs require new budget authority as part of the annual appropriations process , transportation appropriators are faced with the oppositesituation . that is , the authority to spend for the largest programs under their controlalready exists and the mechanism to obligate funds for these programs is also inplace . prior to the fy1999 appropriations act changes in spending in the annual transportation budget component had been achieved in the appropriations process bycombining changes in budget / contract authority and placing limitations onobligations . the principal function of the limitation on obligations is to controloutlays in a manner that corresponds to congressional budget agreements . the authority to set a limitation on obligations for contract authority programs gave appropriators considerable leeway in allocating funds between the variousfederal transportation activities in function 400 , which includes agencies such as thecoast guard and the federal aviation administration . in addition , the inclusion ofthe highway and transit programs and their trust fund generated revenue streams inthe discretionary budget provided appropriators with additional flexibility as part ofthe annual process by which available funds were allocated amongst the 13 standingappropriations subcommittees in the house and the senate . the debate over fy2000 dot appropriations included the major issues of: ( 1 ) allocating funds among competing dot programs and ( 2 ) seeking a compromisebetween the concept of a unified budget versus specifically earmarked , "off budget"activities . competition for funds stems from various transportation interests andfrom the modal administrations themselves . monies have been allocated for adiverse array of purposes , for example , to pay for the expenses of the u.s. coastguard , to improve safety throughout the various modes of transportation , and to helpfinance various infrastructure needs . in the dot and related agenciesappropriations act , monies are also provided to support the national transportationsafety board ( ntsb ) , the surface transportation board ( stb ) , and several othertransportation - related independent agencies . ( 1 ) the perennial question of priorities surrounds the appropriations process . throughout its budget request , the dot continues to emphasize several prioritiesincluding: safety , infrastructure , innovative financing , environmental enhancement,technology , and national security . much of the appropriations process must take place within the framework created by the transportation equity act for the 21st century ( tea - 21 ) , signed intolaw on june 9 , 1998 ( p.l . the act authorizedappropriations for key surface transportation programs through fiscal year 2003 .