the clerk . the names of the honorable paul d. ryan , a representative - elect from the state of wisconsin , and the honorable nancy pelosi , a representative - elect from the state of california , have been placed in nomination . the tellers will come forward and take their seats at the desk in front of the speaker's rostrum . the roll will now be called , and those responding to their names will indicate by surname the nominee of their choosing . the reading clerk will now call the roll . the tellers having taken their places , the house proceeded to vote for the speaker . the clerk . the tellers agree in their tallies that the total number of votes cast is 433 , of which the honorable paul d. ryan of the state of wisconsin has received 239 , the honorable nancy pelosi of the state of california has received 189 , the honorable tim ryan of the state of ohio has received 2 , the honorable jim cooper of the states of tennessee has received 1 , the honorable john lewis of the state of georgia has received 1 , and the honorable daniel webster of the state of florida has received 1 . therefore , the honorable paul d. ryan of the state of wisconsin , having received a majority of the votes cast , is duly elected speaker of the house of representatives for the 115 th congress . after the speaker's election , the clerk appoints a bipartisan committee to escort the speaker - elect to the speaker's chair on the dais . the speaker - elect is escorted by leaders of both parties and , often , by representatives - elect from his or her home state . he or she is introduced to the chamber by the minority leader , who might deliver a statement from the chair . the speaker may make a statement of his or her own and then takes the oath of office . by precedent , the dean of the house , the most senior ( longest - serving ) member , regardless of party , administers the oath to the speaker . that oath is identical to that of the other members . ( see " oath of office for members - elect ." the speaker during the day's proceedings delivers a letter to the clerk listing members in the order in which they may act as the speaker pro tempore , should a vacancy occur in the office , until a new speaker is elected . after taking the oath , the speaker administers the oath to all members of the house , en masse , including the nonvoting delegates and resident commissioner . the speaker directs the representatives - elect to rise and raise their right hands .