intermediate scrutiny . this level of review is not as rigorous as strict scrutiny . a classification will survive intermediate scrutiny if it is substantially related to achieving an important government objective . sex classifications are subject to intermediate scrutiny . rational basis review . this least active form of judicial review allows a classification to survive an equal protection challenge if the classification is rationally related to a legitimate government interest . this level of review is characterized by its deference to legislative judgment . most economic regulations are subject to rational basis review . the court's adoption of intermediate scrutiny for sex classifications did not occur until 1976 . in craig v. boren , the court declared unconstitutional an oklahoma statute that prohibited the sale of "nonintoxicating" 3.2% beer to males under the age of 21 and to females under the age of 18 . females between the ages of 18 and 21 , however , were allowed to purchase 3.2% beer . although the court agreed with the state's argument that the protection of public health and safety is an important government interest , it found that the gender classification employed by the statute was not substantially related to achieving that goal . the statistical evidence presented by the state to show that more 18 to 20-year - old males were arrested for drunk driving and that males between the ages of 17 and 21 were overrepresented among those injured in traffic accidents could not establish that the statute's gender classification was substantially related to ensuring public health and safety . in establishing an intermediate level of review for sex classifications , the craig court identified what has been a common theme in sex discrimination cases under the fourteenth amendment: stereotypes and generalizations about the sexes . in craig , the court acknowledged its previous invalidation of statutes that premised their classifications on misconceptions concerning the role of females . the court's rejection of the use of stereotypes may be seen in many of the cases in this area . the court's more recent decisions similarly allude to the use of stereotypes and generalizations . for example , in j.e.b . v. alabama , the court determined that the state could not use its peremptory challenges to exclude male jurors in a paternity and child support action . in reaching its conclusion , the court reviewed the historical exclusion of women from juries because of the belief that women were "too fragile and virginal to withstand the polluted courtroom atmosphere. , the court questioned the state's generalizations of male jurors being more sympathetic to the arguments of a father in a paternity action and female jurors being more receptive to the mother . the court maintained that state actors who exercise peremptory challenges in reliance on gender stereotypes "ratify and reinforce prejudicial views of the relative abilities of men and women. the court feared that this discriminatory use of peremptory challenges not only would raise questions about the fairness of the entire proceeding , but also would create the impression that the judicial system had acquiesced in the denial of participation by one gender .