the house passed h.r . 2745 on june 17 , 2006 ( roll no . companion legislation was introduced in the senate ( s. 1394 ) . following the passage of the iraq sanctions act of 1990 [ p.l . 101-513 ] , u.s. law stipulated that any country violating u.n. sanctions against iraq should be denied u.s. foreign assistance unless the president certified to the congress that u.s. assistance was "in the national interest. in spite of public evidence that jordan and turkey were purchasing iraqi oil in violation of the u.n. sanctions regime , subsequent administrations issued presidential waivers to congress justifying the continued provision of u.s. foreign assistance to each country from fy1994 through fy2003 . all iraqi oil sales outside of the auspices of the u.n. offp were prohibited by u.n. sanctions . governments , individuals , and commercial entities engaged in buying and selling iraqi oil outside the auspices of the offp did so in violation of the u.n. sanctions regime . the united states and other members of the u.n. sanctions committee took note of iraq's illicit oil sales to some of its neighbors but , for a number of reasons , chose not to take direct action to halt the sales or punish states or entities engaged in them prior to the onset of operation iraqi freedom in march 2003 . given contemporaneous u.s. concerns about iraq's efforts to reconstitute its wmd programs and its alleged support for international terrorism , inclusion of estimates of the proceeds of iraq's oil sales in the memoranda of justification may have provided members with a more complete understanding of the possible costs of continuing to provide bilateral u.s. assistance to countries that were openly violating the u.n. sanctions regime . in considering steps to reform congressional oversight of u.s. sanctions policy , members may consider including more specific reporting requirements to accompany presidential waiver authority provisions so that the possible costs of choosing to waive sanction provisions are described as completely as the possible benefits of continued u.s. foreign assistance to various recipients . bills addressing allegations of oil - for - food program abuse and the iic investigation were introduced in the 109 th congress: s. 291 , the united nations oil - for - food accountability act of 2005 , would have mandated percentage reductions ( 10% in fy2006 and 20% in fy2007 ) in u.s. contributions to the united nations unless the president certified u.n. cooperation ( providing requested documents , waiving immunity from u.s. prosecution for u.n. officials ) with u.s. inquiries into the oil - for - food allegations . companion legislation was introduced in the house ( h.r . 4369 would have withheld $100 million in u.s. contributions to the united nations for each fiscal year fy2007-fy2009 until the secretary of state certified that the unedited and uncensored archives and files of the iic were transferred to a non - un entity and made accessible to the public ( including u.s. authorities ) for at least five years . the findings of subsequent investigations regarding these illicit fundraising and political activities are described in further detail below .