100-297 , dfsca ) . the safe and drug - free schools and communities act is administered by the department of education . grants are authorized for state programs and for a variety of national programs to promote school safety and assist in preventing drug abuse in the nation's schools . for the program's appropriations and funding history , see crs report rl33870 , the safe and drug - free schools and communities act: reauthorization and appropriations , by [author name scrubbed] . as previously stated the sdfsc act is up for reauthorization in the 110 th congress . how the program is administered under current law is discussed below . part is an instrument that was developed by the administration to examine the performance of certain programs across federal agencies . the no child left behind act ( p.l . also , in 2003-04 , teachers were less likely to report being physically attacked than in 1993-94 . between 1993-94 and 2003-04 , teachers in central city schools were more likely to be threatened with injury or physically attacked than those who worked in urban fringe areas or in rural schools . furthermore , in 2003-04 , a larger percentage of male teachers than female teachers reported being threatened with injury , while female teachers were more likely to have been physically attacked than their male counterparts . secondary school teachers were more likely to have been threatened with injury by a student than elementary school teachers , while elementary school teachers were more likely to have reported being physically attacked . since 1975 , the university of michigan's institute for social research has conducted the monitoring the future ( mtf ) study , funded by the national institute on drug abuse at the national institutes of health of hhs . high school seniors and , since 1991 , 8 th and 10 th grade youth have been canvassed annually about their behavior , attitudes , values in general , and substance use . at each grade level , responses of students surveyed were used to represent all students nationwide in public and private secondary schools . for the 2006 mtf study , 48,460 students in 410 secondary schools were surveyed about their use of illicit drugs , alcohol , cigarettes and smokeless tobacco within three prevalence periods , that is , lifetime , annual ( or 12 months ) , past month ( or 30-day ) , and daily use . overall , for 2006 , illicit drug use and alcohol consumption continued a decade - long decline . decreases since 2005 , however , were relatively small and , while statistically significant for all grades combined , were not for any one individual grade . lloyd johnston , mtf's principal investigator , noted that the "youngest students that we survey — the 8 th graders — have shown the largest proportional drop in their use of nearly all of the illicit drugs since the recent peak rates of the mid to late 1990s... , but their improvements now seem near an end . the older teens , on the other hand , are showing a continuation of their decreases , as they catch up with the progress of the younger age groups .