what oversight there is tends to be corporation - specific . 102-486 ; 106 stat . 2776 ) established the u.s. enrichment corporation as a wholly owned government corporation . the general intent of the legislation was to "privatize" the two plants and let them compete in the world market . a privatization plan was delivered by the usec to the president and congress in 1995 . the plan suggested that there were two primary methods of corporate divestiture: an initial public offering ( ipo ) and a merger or acquisition with another corporation or group of corporations . after considerable discussion , the ipo option was selected , as it had been with conrail . the ipo of stock was completed on july 28 , 1998 , and raised an estimated $1.9 billion for the federal government . the usec transition process highlighted , however , one of the perennial problems in privatization efforts . congress may intend a corporation to be private , but it also may want the corporation to continue to be involved in public policy implementation . the gcca is not a general incorporation act such as is in effect in the states . the charter for each federal government corporation is the separate enabling legislation passed by congress . the gcca also does not offer a general definition of what constitutes a government corporation . it simply enumerates the organizations covered by the act . in addition to the enumeration of corporations in the gcca , there have been several other listings of corporations available , each different and based upon the definition employed by the compiler . one of the assets transferred from the doe to the usec in the divestiture was the right to commercialize a new enrichment technology called "atomic vapor laser and isotope separation" ( avlis ) , a technology in which doe had invested over $2 billion . on june 9 , 1999 , the board of directors of the usec determined that avlis was not commercially viable and canceled the program . the board's decision made manifest the fiduciary distinctions between a government and private corporation . the federal government may , for whatever reason , choose to directly divest itself of a commercial activity or asset and not follow the transition corporation option to establish its value in the market . although a transition corporation had been recommended by an outside study , the department of energy determined to directly divest itself of the california fields of the elk hills national petroleum reserves . the government corporation form of federal agency is a useful option to consider when establishing or reorganizing an agency with revenue potential . it is helpful to bear in mind , however , that there is no general provision in law that defines what , precisely , government corporations are . when writing the gcca , congress and the executive branch simply viewed the various corporate bodies , and defined them by enumeration , rather than by required characteristics . this relatively unstructured approach has meant that some corporate bodies ( eg , the u.s .