market . this time , however , the slowdown in the united states is being spread to many of thecountries in asia that depend on exports to the u.s. market . particularly in information technology,as the bust in u.s. information technology markets has proceeded , some of the first suppliers to becut off have been those overseas . secondwere bankers and corporations who borrowed short - term on international markets to financelong - term investments - some of dubious value - in booming local economies . third were emergingmarkets without developed financial infrastructure and with insufficient regulation and marketdiscipline in which the allocation of capital and resources was influenced excessively by personalconnections and politics ( cronyism ) . fourth were highly confident businesses that overbuiltmanufacturing capacity and office buildings in asia and began to default on bank loans . fifth werereal estate and stock market bubbles by which excess liquidity was poured into land and corporateequities creating a euphoria as prices rose but also generating huge losses as prices fell . some of the above problems have been corrected as part of the reforms following the asian financial crisis , but some are so deep - rooted in economies that they remain today . the most progresshas been made with exchange rate regimes . countries now rely on a variety of exchange rateregimes that allow for more flexibility . some countries , such as china / hong kong , argentina,estonia , and a number of smaller nations still peg their exchange rate against a single or compositeof currencies . most large economies allow their currencies to fluctuate either freely or withinspecific crawling bands . figure 2 shows the value of the thai baht , indonesian rupiah , south korean won , japaneseyen,brazilian real , and russian ruble relative to the u.s. dollar . the currency depreciation that beganin thailand in july 1997 rapidly spread across southeast asia and affected other currencies as well . the dramatic fall in the value of the ruble did not occur until august 1998 . by march 2000 , thesouth korean won and thai baht had recovered to about 80% and the brazilian real to about 60%of their pre - crisis values . the indonesian rupiah was at about 32% and the russian ruble at about20% of their 1997 values , while in 1999-2000 the japanese yen had appreciated to a level higher thanits pre - crisis level . following the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , most of these currencies dipped momentarily before recovering . despite the direct attack on the united states , the lowering of u.s.interest rates , and the prospect that the federal government could return to deficit spending , thevalue of the dollar has been rising . the japanese yen , in particular , has declined in value . still , therehave been no precipitous drops in exchange values , except that of brazil , whose rate declined andthen recovered . the most precarious situation in late 2001 was in argentina . it must chose betweendevaluing its currency , fully dollarizing its economy ( adopting the dollar as its domestic currency ) ,or taking similar drastic action . what is the mechanism by which weakness in one currency drives down the values of other currencies ?