most of the other factors cannot be controlled by the minority party and its leaders . yet there is no set formula on how this is to be done . "if the history of elections is any guide," wrote a congressional scholar , "it seems apparent that the congressional record of the minority party is only one of many factors that may result in majority status . there is one central dilemma that confronts the minority leader: inferior numbers . this limitation can be overcome on occasion with the right strategic approach , but on many issues this might not be possible . one study of the house minority party summarizes the strategic challenge succinctly: the minority party in the house faces a strategic problem: how do you respond when given only a small slice of the legislative pie ? do you accept the slice you've been given , bargain for more , or use every means at your disposal to win the right to cut the pie yourself ? it is this problem , and how the minority party chooses to solve it , that underlies the logic of minority party politics in the house of representatives . the defeated candidates were not automatically looked to for leadership. in the judgment of one congressional scholar , since 1883 "the candidate for speaker nominated by the minority party has clearly been the minority leader. however , this assertion is subject to dispute . on december 3 , 1883 , the house elected democrat john g. carlisle of kentucky as speaker . republicans nominated j. warren keifer of ohio , who was speaker the previous congress . but keifer was viewed by his colleagues as a discredited leader in part because as speaker he arbitrarily handed out "choice jobs to close relatives ... all at handsome salaries. keifer received "the empty honor of the minority nomination . but with it came a sting — for while this naturally involves the floor leadership , he was deserted by his [party] associates and his career as a national figure terminated ingloriously. representative thomas reed , r - me , who later became speaker , assumed the de facto role of minority floor leader in keifer's stead . "[a]lthough keifer was the minority's candidate for speaker , reed became its acknowledged leader , and ever after , so long as he served in the house , remained the most conspicuous member of his party. although congressional historians disagree as to the exact time period when the minority leadership emerged officially as a party position , it seems safe to conclude that the position was established during the latter part of the 19 th century . this era was "marked by strong partisan attachments , resilient patronage - based party organizations , and ... high levels of party voting in congress. these conditions were conducive to the establishment of a more highly differentiated house leadership structure in which members assumed more specialized roles within the institution . ( see the appendix for a list of house minority leaders selected since 1899. ) one other historical point merits brief mention .