figure 1 . map of regio . povertyremains a problem . in 2003 , the world bank estimated that 10% of the population of serbia andmontenegro was under the poverty line , defined as 60 euros ( about $73 ) a month . serbia and montenegro's economic policies have been supported by the internationalmonetary fund and other international financial institutions . in may 2002 , the imf extended athree - year , $889 million loan to serbia and montenegro , after disbursing the final part of a $249million standby loan offered in 2001 . the imf has urged serbia and montenegro to push forwardwith the restructuring and privatization of "socially - owned" firms , cut public spending , and reversethe recent spike in inflation . the loan program was completed in early 2006 . it is unclear whetherserbia will seek another imf loan , given the improved state of its external finances , although it maydo so to secure an international imprimatur for its reforms so as to encourage foreign investment . serbia and montenegro has made substantial progress in reducing its foreign debt , due in part to debtforgiveness deals with the paris club in 2002 and the london club in 2004 . under djukanovic , montenegro pursued a separate economic policy from serbia during themilosevic period . its switch to the deutschmark ( and later the euro ) as its currency limited thedamage of milosevic's lax monetary policies . it has pursued sound fiscal and monetary policies . inflation remains lower than in serbia , at 1.8% in 2005 . montenegro's real gdp grew by 4.1% in2005 . however , the republic's few industries need extensive restructuring , and its economy isheavily dependent on tourism and on trade with serbia and foreign countries . privatization hasaccelerated in the past year , spurring large inflows of foreign direct investment . nevertheless , a fewbig firms remain to be sold off . some have complained about corruption in the privatizationprocess . in its policy toward serbia and montenegro , the administration has supported the country'sdemocratic transition and integration into euro - atlantic institutions . however , the united states hascontinued to insist that belgrade meet its international obligations , including to the internationalcriminal tribunal for the former yugoslavia ( icty ) . the administration has advocated serbia andmontenegro's membership in nato's partnership for peace , if it delivers icty indictee ratkomladic to the tribunal . on may 7 , 2003 , president bush signed a presidential determination thatpermits serbia and montenegro to receive u.s. defense articles , services , and assistance . the united states backed eu efforts that produced the serbia and montenegro union in 2003that replaced the federal republic of yugoslavia . in testimony before the senate foreign relationscommittee on november 8 , 2005 , undersecretary of state nicholas burns said that the united statesdid not oppose the montenegrin government's efforts to hold an independence referendum butwarned that the referendum must be held peacefully and as the result of a process that "all sides"accept as legitimate . he added that the main u.s. goal in the region is "reform and progress towardeurope for both serbia and montenegro , in or outside the state union.