congress provided the statutory framework for nsa and its activities . laws have beenenacted that carefully prescribe the limits ofnsa's electronic surveillance of u.s. persons . congress has been increasingly inclined to take public notice ofproblems at nsa and is supporting reforms thatare designed to make nsa more effective in current technological and geopolitical environments . the challenges facing nsa are formidable ; a difficult operational environment as well as limitations on spending levels for intelligence call into question thefuture capabilities of nsa . ( 55 ) some media accounts state that this entire cooperative endeavor has the codename project echelon ; others believe that echelon refers only to the process by whichcomputers operated by cooperating sigint agencies sift through many thousands of intercepts for ones containingpre - programmed key words . ( 56 ) u.s. intelligence officials have responded to these charges by describing the statutory framework under which nsa operates and the oversight mechanisms inplace in both the executive and legislative branches . there have been categorical denials that intelligence is passedto u.s. companies to provide themcommercial advantages although it is freely acknowledged that sigint is used to provide the u.s. government withinformation about bribery and other illegalpractices of foreign firms and that this information has been used as the basis for diplomatic complaints . ( 57 ) nsa has successfully persuaded the congressional leadership that it faithfully and responsibly conducts its electronic surveillance activities in accordance withlaw and relevant executive orders . section 309 of the intelligence authorization act for fy2000 ( p.l . 106-120 ) required that the director of nsa submit a report ( to be prepared jointly by the director of nsa , the dci , and the attorney general ) providing a detailed analysis ofthe legal standards used in conducting signalsintelligence activities , including electronic surveillance . the report was submitted in february 2000 and set forththe legal bases for nsa's activities,emphasizing its commitment to respect the privacy rights of u.s. persons . the complete final report of the house select committee on intelligence ( known as the pike committee ) was never made public , but its publishedrecommendations also included a proposal that the existence of nsa be recognized by specific legislation , that suchlegislation provide for civilian control ofnsa , and that the role of nsa with reference to the monitoring of communications of americans be defined . ( 45 ) many of the most important statutory provisions relating to nsa were enacted in the wake of these congressional investigations . congress passed the foreignintelligence surveillance act of 1978 ( fisa ) ( 50 usc 1801 ) which establishes procedures for electronicsurveillance in the united states for foreign intelligencepurposes . ( 46 ) it provides that the attorney generalmay authorize surveillance in situations wherein the target is communications of foreign powers ; in cases inwhich communications of u.s. persons might be acquired , then approval of a court , created pursuant to the fisa,would be required . information acquired inaccordance with fisa provisions is to be used for foreign intelligence purposes ( even though in recent yearscongress has expanded fisa to permit use of sometypes of information acquired under its provisions to be used for law enforcement purposes in certaincircumstances ) .