115-404 , accompanying h.r . 2810 ) included language limiting funds to be expended on f - 35 follow - on modernization ( i.e. , the block 4 software ) pending receipt of a previously required report that contains the basic elements of an acquisition program baseline for that modernization . lieutenant general bogdan's comments regarding the difficulty of cost control in a sole - source environment ( see " engine costs ," above ) reflect a broader issue affecting defense programs as industry consolidates and fewer sources of supply are available for advanced systems . 4909 ) to do likewise failed in markup by a vote of 28-41 . section 223 of the conference report on the fy2018 national defense authorization act ( h.rept . congress may wish to consider the merits of maintaining competition when overseeing system procurements ( for example , the use of competition to maintain cost pressure was a principal argument in favor of the f - 35 alternate engine program ) . on the f - 35 program , that competition could include contracting for lifecycle support . in the specific case of the f - 35 , pratt & whitney and the joint program office have declined to reveal the cost per engine in each lrip contract , replacing dollar costs with percentage savings and aggregate contract values that include items other than the engines themselves . congress may wish to consider whether this approach is sufficient to provide useful oversight , and weigh that value against a contractor's right to protect competition - sensitive data . a possible analogue can be found in the debate over whether public disclosure of the contract value for the b - 21 bomber might reveal more data than prudent , or whether that is a reasonable cost to allow proper program oversight . an additional potential issue for congress for the f - 35 program concerns the affordability of the f - 35 , particularly in the context of projected shortfalls in both air force fighters and navy and marine corps strike fighters . although the f - 35 was conceived as a relatively affordable strike fighter , some observers are concerned that in a situation of constrained dod resources , f - 35s might not be affordable in the annual quantities planned by dod , at least not without reducing funding for other dod programs . as the annual production rate of the f - 35 increases , the program will require more than $10 billion per year in acquisition funding at the same time that dod will face other budgetary challenges . the issue of f - 35 affordability is part of a larger and long - standing issue concerning the overall affordability of dod's tactical aircraft modernization effort , which also includes procurement of f / a - 18e / fs . table 6 shows the procurement request in greater detail . the f - 35's cutting - edge capabilities are accompanied by significant costs . some analysts have suggested that upgrading existing aircraft might offer sufficient capability at a lower cost , and that such an approach makes more sense in a budget - constrained environment .