interest . u.s. - ukrainian relations suffered serious setbacks from late 2000 until early 2003 . u.s. officials repeatedly expressed concern about political pressure on the media and the harassment ofjournalists . the united states called on the ukrainian government to conduct a credible investigationof the gongadze affair . in 2001 , the united states granted political asylum to mykola melnychenko,the ex - bodyguard who had produced the tapes allegedly implicating kuchma in the murder ofgongadze . while many of them have engaged in questionable activities , they also represent an important powercenter in the country , perhaps far more important than many pro - reform groups . some of them mayalso have an interest in developing the rule of law in order to safeguard their property , whichcurrently can be placed in jeopardy with a reversal of their political fortunes . u.s. policymakerscould try to convince them to encourage a smooth transition of power to a more democraticpost - kuchma future . although these questions are significant , many experts stress that ukraine's problems do notstem from the personal failings of one or another leader , and conversely that ukraine's success doesnot hinge on the fate of a particular reformer . ukraine's problems , they underline , are morefundamental . these analysts call on the united states to focus on helping to build the political,economic and social infrastructure that will provide a foundation for democracy , rule of law andeconomic reform in the medium and long - term . they advocate emphasis on aid to independentmedia , "think - tanks" and other non - governmental organizations , and small business . they say moreof this aid should take the form of direct grants rather than technical assistance . ( 9 ) many also call foran expansion of exchange programs between ukraine and the united states to introduce emergingleaders in ukraine to the u.s. example . however , u.s. policymakers may face increasing difficultiesin achieving these goals , given the substantial decreases in aid to ukraine planned for fy2005 andsubsequent years . another problem u.s. policymakers face is how to shore up ukraine's sovereignty and independence and promote closer ties with the west . perhaps the biggest obstacles to this goal areeconomic . ukraine's sovereignty would be bolstered if the united states and other westerncountries could help ukraine deal with such issues as ukraine's energy dependency on russia . solutions could include new pipelines from the caspian sea region to diversify ukraine's sourcesof energy supplies , upgrading ukraine's current pipeline system and reform of the energy sector , andrestructuring of ukrainian industries to make them more energy efficient . to achieve these goals , ukraine needs balanced investment , both from the west and russia . but while russian firms are adept at fishing in the murky waters of ukraine's political and economicsystem , western firms demand transparency , and have been reluctant to invest in ukraine . the u.s.government can only play a limited role in encouraging private investment , except by continuing topush for transparency in ukraine and by helping u.s. firms learn of opportunities that emerge if thesituation improves . the united states is also trying to help ukraine prepare for world tradeorganization membership .