table 2 . agricultural exports to ftaa countries , 2002 source: usda imports of agricultural products from the hemisphere that compete with the output of u.s. domestic producers accounted for 80% of the total . non - competitive products not produceddomestically ( such as bananas and coffee ) represented 20% of these imports . table 3 . agricultural imports from ftaa countries , 2002 source: usd . discussions on how to proceed to eliminate border protection and other barriers to agriculturaltrade have occurred primarily in two of the nine formal negotiating groups created for ftaanegotiations . these are the negotiating group on agriculture ( ngag ) , and the negotiating groupon market access ( ngma ) . their focus has been on identifying the key issues and formulating therules to be followed in negotiating hemispheric free trade in agricultural and food products . theirwork resulted in the consolidation by the end of 2000 of the first "bracketed" ftaa draftagreement . ( 3 ) two chapters laid out text onagricultural provisions and guidelines on how marketaccess for agricultural products should be negotiated , respectively . trade ministers released a secondconsolidated draft text in november 2002 . ( 4 ) itsagriculture chapter reportedly differs little from thetext in the first draft , continuing to reflect the wide range of positions between individual countries,or groups of countries . seeking to keep to the timetable adopted at the april 2001 , quebec city summit , trade ministers in august 2002 reached agreement on the "methods and modalities" ( the procedures , formulas,targets , rules , and timetables used to put negotiating objectives into practical terms ) to be followedto make tariff reductions ( see market access below for background ) . this provided the basisforeach country to prepare for the process of exchanging tariff and other market access concessions ona product - or sector - specific basis . trade ministers agreed that all countries ( except caricommembers - - comprising most caribbean islands , belize in central america , and guyana andsuriname in south america ) could start tariff cuts from current applied rates rather than from thehigher bound rates that all wto members adopted in the last multilateral negotiating round . ( 5 ) caricom countries will be allowed to identify those agricultural and other products where themaximum bound rate could be used as the reference point for reducing tariffs . the november 1,2002 , meeting of trade ministers in ecuador finalized the negotiating pace and process to be followedover the 2003-2004 period . these final stages of the ftaa negotiations are being co - chaired bybrazil and the united states . all ftaa countries met the february 15 , 2003 deadline for presentingtheir initial tariff reduction offers ( see u.s. market access offer for information on what u.s.negotiators tabled ) . other departments , particularly the agencies of the u.s.department of agriculture ( usda ) , provide input to ustr and have assigned staff to serve asexperts to lead negotiators . usda representatives have also been actively involved in developingthe u.s. positions in relevant areas . ftaa trade ministers in 1998 agreed on several objectives to be followed in negotiatinghemispheric free trade in agricultural products . these have guided the work of the ngag and thengma .