moreover , these requirements change and are added to over time . such an approach to powerplant emissions would have several tradeoffs . emissions of so 2 and of nox contribute to the formation of these very fine particles . in 1998 , electric utilities accounted for approximately 67% of u.s. emissions of so 2 , 25% of nox , and 11% of pm 10 . the evolution of air pollution controls over time and as a result of developing scientific understanding of health and environmental impacts has led to the multilayered and interlocking patchwork of controls , which are outlined in more detail below . moreover , additional controls are in the process of development , in particular with respect to nox as a precursor to ozone , and to both nox and so 2 as contributors to pm 2.5 . in addition , fossil fuel fired electric generating facilities produce two other gases of environmental and health concern: mercury ( hg ) and carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) . while some sources of mercury are currently regulated , emissions from electric utilities are not . however the clean air act amendments of 1990 designated hg as a hazardous air pollutant subject to a regulatory regime spelled out in â§112 . epa was also required to study hazards to public health from hazardous air pollutant emissions of electric utility steam generating units in general ; and , separately , to report to congress on mercury emissions from major sources , including electric utility steam generating units . sulfur oxides have health effects and are a major contributor to acid rain and visibility impairment . nitrogen oxides have direct health effects , contribute to acid rain and visibility impairment , and are a precursor to ozone , a primary constituent of smog . particulates have health effects , with the smallest particles now thought to be the most serious causative agents ; current regulations focus on particles 10 microns in size or smaller ( pm 10 ) and new regulations would control particles less than 2.5 microns in diameter ( pm 2.5 ) . this study , completed in 1997 , concluded mercury is a hazard to public health ; and it found that electric utility steam generating units account for about one - third of the nation's mercury emissions . on december 14 , 2000 , epa announced its intention to regulate utility hg emissions in 2004 , with an effective date of 2007 or 2008 . carbon dioxide is a major greenhouse gas , and fossil fuel fired electric generating facilities account for about 36% of u.s. emissions . while co 2 emissions are not currently regulated , the united states is a signatory of the united nation framework convention on climate change , which involves a voluntary commitment to hold greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels . at present , u.s. emissions of co 2 are running some 10% over that goal .