committee on the budget . tax expenditures: compendium of background material on individual provisions . 113 th congress , 2 nd session , december 2014 . provides description , revenue loss estimate , and economic analysis of the effects of governmental bonds and each major category of private - activity bond . zimmerman , dennis . the private use of tax - exempt bonds: controlling public subsidy of private activity ( washington: the urban institute press , 1991 ) . provides institutional background: history , legal framework , and industry characteristics . provides discussion of tax - exempt bonds as an economic policy tool affecting: intergovernmental fiscal relations , the federal budget deficit , efficient resource allocation , and tax equity . provides a history and economic analysis of tax - exempt bond legislation from 1968 to 1989 . auction rate securities ( arss ) are long - term debt obligations with the unique feature of adjustable or variable interest rates . in contrast to long - term , fixed rate securities , issuers go to auction periodically ( anywhere from every 7 to 35 days ) to reset the interest rate on the debt outstanding . the auction mechanism and interest rate parameters vary by issuer ( and issue ) , though most use what is termed a "dutch auction" where each bidder submits a bid for the amount they are willing to purchase at a given interest rate . all bids are ordered from lowest interest rate to highest interest rate and the rate where the market clears , that is , where all bonds would be purchased , establishes the new ars rate received by all bidders . arss typically have a "call option" where the issuer can buy the ars back at par ( face value ) at any scheduled auction and then retire the debt . most arss are insured by the issuer because they do not carry a "put" option that would allow bondholders to sell the bonds at a specified price to the issuer or a designated third party . the bond insurance reduces risk and thus interest rate , making the bonds less costly to issuers . for this reason , arss are heavily influenced by credit ratings , and typically require bond insurance to make them marketable . the existing holders of arss offer bids as well as new bidders . u.s. senate . if all bids of both existing bond holders and new participants fail to clear the market , the auction is termed a "failed auction. in this scenario , the original agreement with the bondholder stipulates a "reservation" interest rate the issuer must pay in the event of a failed auction at least until the next successful auction . because the reservation rate is typically higher than market interest rates , issuers of arss would prefer to avoid paying the reservation rate . the issuance of arss grew considerably from 1988 through 2007 . in 1988 , the bond buyer identified one ars issue valued at $25 million ; none were issued in 1987 . in 2004 , the peak year , 438 ars bonds valued at $42.5 billion were issued .