on june 26 , 1986 , h.r . these programs included the emergency food and shelter program ( p.l . 98-8 ) , the emergency shelter grants program ( p.l . no further action was taken on either measure , however . later that same year , legislation containing title i of the homeless persons' survival act — emergency relief provisions for shelter , food , mobile health care , and transitional housing — was introduced as the urgent relief for the homeless act ( h.r . the legislation passed both houses of congress in 1987 with large bipartisan majorities . specific programs covered under the mckinney - vento act , as well as other federal programs responding to homelessness , are discussed in this report . there is no single federal definition of what it means to be homeless , and definitions among federal programs that serve homeless individuals may vary to some degree . as a result , the populations served through the federal programs described in this report may differ depending on the program . the definition of "homeless individual" that was originally enacted in the mckinney - vento act is used by a majority of programs to define what it means to be homeless . the mckinney - vento act defined the term "homeless individual" for purposes of the programs that were authorized through the law ( see section 103 of mckinney - vento ) , though some programs that were originally authorized through mckinney - vento use their own , less restrictive definitions . in 2009 , the mckinney - vento act definition of homelessness was amended by the homeless emergency assistance and rapid transition to housing ( hearth ) act , enacted as part of the helping families save their homes act ( p.l . programs that use the definition in section 103 of the mckinney - vento act are hud's homeless assistance grants , fema's emergency food and shelter program , the va homeless veterans programs , and dol's homeless veterans reintegration program . ( throughout this section of the report , the term "section 103 definition" is used to refer to the original mckinney - vento act definition of homelessness. ) this section describes the original mckinney - vento act section 103 definition of homeless individual , how the definition compares to those used in other programs , and how it has changed under the hearth act and hud's implementing regulations . the following subsections describe each of the federal programs targeted to assist homeless individuals , arranged by the agency administering the programs . where relevant , there are references to other crs reports that go into more detail about the programs . for nearly 10 years , since 2009 , agencies within the federal government have focused on ending homelessness among all people experiencing it by focusing on specific populations , including veterans , families with children , youth , and people considered chronically homeless . however , efforts to bring about an end to homelessness began almost 20 years ago , when the concept was introduced in a report from the national alliance to end homelessness ( naeh ) , which outlined a strategy to end homelessness in 10 years .