committee chairmansen . biden expressed concern about the united states not taking on a leadership role in themacedonian conflict . he cited the inability of past european efforts to resolve earlier conflicts inthe balkans . at a march 2002 hearing before the house international relations subcommittee on europe , assistant secretary of state elizabeth jones said that the united states remained committed to an"in together , out together" policy with the european allies . in the long term , she said that the u.s.strategy for the balkans was to deal with the region "normally," through trade and investment andwithout troops on the ground . corruption is considered endemic . ( 4 ) in april 2001 , macedonia becamethe first southeast european country to conclude a stabilization and association agreement with theeuropean union . however , the eu repeatedly postponed a planned donors' conference formacedonia because of macedonia's lack of progress in implementing political reforms . theconference was finally held in march 2002 , during which donor countries pledged over $500 millionin financial and developmental assistance . macedonia's military , the army of the republic of macedonia ( arm ) , has been undergoing a major restructuring and reform process . macedonia participates in nato's partnership for peace ( pfp ) program and is among the "vilnius" group of ten countries seeking to join nato . the armyof the republic of macedonia comprises about 16,000 active duty soldiers , 60,000 reserves , and10,000 paramilitary police . it is organized into two infantry brigades and one border guard brigade . the arm includes a small marine wing and an army air force with a limited number of aircraft andhelicopters . ( 5 ) since early 2001 , ukraine and bulgariahave served as macedonia's primary armssuppliers . in addition to the state security structures , other armed groups gained prominence duringthe 2001 conflict , including the ethnic albanian national liberation army and albanian nationalarmy . several macedonian paramilitary groups also emerged , with some reportedly in close contactwith the regular army and police . notwithstanding the achievement of reaching agreement on the framework peace document,its swift implementation was considered key to preventing a resumption of violent conflict . resistance by both sides in the conflict delayed implementation of various aspects of the accords . western leaders and mediators feared that extremist elements on both sides might encourage amilitary solution over political reforms . eu envoy alain le roy has encouraged macedonia'spolitical leaders to move beyond the 2001 conflict and focus on the country's substantial economicand development challenges . on the macedonian side , the more nationalist political leaders initially accused the west of supporting the albanian rebel cause and resisted pressure by the international community to moveforward in implementing the framework agreement . prime minister georgievski , considered to beamong the most hardline and nationalist slav macedonian politicians , referred to the peaceagreement as "shameful" because it came while the rebels still occupied macedonian territory.georgievski also criticized the number of weapons that nato agreed to collect , calling thedisarmament terms "humiliating. ( 18 ) on thealbanian side , the nla's exclusion from the politicaltalks was thought to undermine the rebels' commitment to disarm .