these differences are shown in table 2 . to propose tradeoffs between an environmental regulation and a potential alternative federal program disregards the different circumstances of the decisionmakers involved . for the regulatory mandate , the federal decisionmaker knows what purpose the dollars will be spent on ; if the federal decisionmaker decides not to impose that mandate , those dollars remain available to the state / local , private sector , or individual decisionmaker to spend . if the regulatory mandate is not imposed or is rescinded as not cost - effective , there is little reason to assume that the state / local , private sector , or individual decisionmaker controlling those dollars will view an alternative public service program as a preferred destination for the monies freed up . as a practical matter , the alternative to a specific federal regulatory mandate is some unknown option ( s ) on which other decisionmakers responding to other values or pursuing other goals will spend those unmandated dollars . it is certainly possible — some would say highly likely , even indisputable — that some portion of dollars spent to meet federal requirements could be better spent otherwise by state and local governments , private businesses , or individuals . underlying this tradeoff is the debate over the share of incomes that most effectively and efficiently advances national interests by being spent by government ( federal or state or local ) rather than privately ( individually or corporately ) . compare the following viewpoints ( referring to taxes , but the principles expressed apply analogously to regulation , often called a "hidden tax" ) : .. . given a choice between keeping taxes high so the government has more money to spend and ... reducing the tax burden so families can put more money aside to invest in their own child - care needs , retirement needs , health - care needs or whatever needs they choose , my preference is the latter... . letting people keep their money is the best way to address the social problems that confront us , now and in the future . * * * * * sen. pete domenici ( r - n.m. ) publicly tells me i "ought to pay less taxes , ought to keep more" of my money because i "can make better decisions than we [our elected leaders in washington] can. similarly , the mid - 1990s debate over proposed national ambient air quality standards for ozone and particulate matter was not over whether the multibillion dollar tab should be spent on cleaner air or on mammograms or some particular thing else , it was over whether to set standards that would result in those regulated to spend more ( or less ) money on cleaner air . for a legislator who faces a vote on imposing costs — for example , the clean air act amendments of 1990 — or a policymaker who faces a decision on a regulation — for example , the ozone and particulate matter standards — the choice is basically up - or - down and more - or - less , not on tradeoffs with other programs .