brussels conference . donors met again to assess progress on the tmaf benchmarks and pledged more funds for afghanistan at a donors meeting in brussels on october 4-5 , 2016 . the conference welcomed afghanistan's new "national peace and development framework" and its efforts to fight corruption . at the conclusion of the meeting , donors announced pledges of $15.2 billion for the period of 2017-2020 ( about $5 billion per year ) , of which about 20% will be provided by the united states . among multilateral lending institutions , the world bank has been key to afghanistan's development . in may 2002 , the world bank reopened its office in afghanistan after 20 years . its projects have been concentrated in the telecommunications and road and sewage sectors . the asian development bank ( adb ) has also been playing a major role in afghanistan , including in financing railway construction . the adb funded the paving of a road from qandahar to the border with pakistan and contributed to a project to bring electricity from central asia to afghanistan . on the eve of the london donor's conference of january 28 , 2010 , the imf and world bank announced $1.6 billion in afghanistan debt relief . efforts to build the legitimate economy are showing some results , by some accounts . some sectors , discussed below , are being developed primarily ( although not exclusively ) with private investment funding . private investment has been the main driver of much of the new construction evident particularly in kabul , including luxury hotels ; a $25 million coca cola bottling factory ( opened in september 2006 ) ; apartment and office buildings ; and marriage halls and other structures . the bottling factory is located near the bagrami office park ( another private initiative ) , which includes several other factories . the serena luxury hotel was built by the agha khan foundation , a major investor in afghanistan . a multi - billion dollar development near the kabul airport , called "new kabul city," has been constructed . an arm of dod , called the task force for business and stability operations ( tfbso ) , sought to facilitate additional private investment in afghanistan . however , a sigar report of november 2014 assessed that the task force's efforts yielded very little result . the tfbso concluded its operations in march 2015 after its authorities expired the previous year . funding for the task force is included in table 11 at the end of this report . uncertainty about the post - 2014 political and security situation caused some afghan businessmen to relocate outside the country , or to develop external components of their business in case the situation in afghanistan deteriorates . the following sections outline what has been accomplished with u.s. and international donor funds and private investment . continuing taliban attacks on schools have caused some ( "over 1,000" according to a january 2017 address by the acting minister of education ) to close and hindered efforts to enroll afghan students .