this requirement is not always observed . a review of 10 one minutes containing extraneous matter from january to july 1997 found that in each case the extraneous matter was printed in the house section ( not in the "extensions of remarks" ) of the congressional record along with the one - minute speech . the joint committee on printing's regulations also require that one - minute speeches longer than 300 words "delivered during the morning business" ( i.e. , during the one - minute speech period at the start of the day ) be printed "following the business of the day. in practice , these one minutes usually appear in the house section of the congressional record immediately before the five - minute special orders . instead of delivering a one - minute speech on the house floor , a member may insert the speech in the house section of the congressional record alongside the one minutes delivered on the floor that day . the representative asks unanimous consent to insert the one - minute speech in the congressional record and yields back his time . the inserted speech is published in a distinctive typeface . the practical difference between inserting and delivering a one - minute speech is the speech's audience . inserted one minutes are available to readers of the hard copy and online versions of the congressional record . by contrast , delivered one minutes reach a larger audience through c - span's televised coverage of house floor proceedings . the unrestricted content and short length of one - minute speeches make them an attractive communication tool for individual members and the party leadership . in addition , the usual position of one minutes at the start of day means they can be covered by broadcast news organizations in time for evening news programs . individual members often use one minutes to share information with colleagues such as announcing a new bill they have introduced or explaining a floor amendment they will offer later that day . in practice , these one minutes serve as a visual "dear colleague" letter . representatives also use one - minute speeches to deliver eulogies and tributes concerning individuals and organizations in their congressional district . one minutes also provide members with an opportunity to express their views on bills , policy issues , and local , national , and international events . for junior members , one - minute speeches provide a valuable debate opportunity . representative chabot highlighted this point in a 105 th congress one - minute speech on the importance of one minutes: "as my colleagues know , a freshman or sophomore member might sit at a committee meeting for two hours before being able to pose one question to a witness . he or she , if lucky , might get 30 seconds to debate a pending bill on the floor . one - minute speeches give these members and the people they represent back home a chance to be heard. some representatives have made one - minute speeches a regular part of their media and communication strategy . by delivering one minutes , they reach a national audience of c - span television viewers and webcast users , including constituents .