federal funds . the bill includes several social rider provisions that are viewed as controversial or intrusive by somedistrict officials and residents . the house bill includes a provision barring thefederal funding of needle exchange programs aimed at reducing the spread of aidsand hiv among drug users . table 2 . the amendment would prohibit the use of federal funds for a needleexchange program . the committee rejected an amendment that would have restrictedthe distribution of hypodermic needles . the provision would have prohibited thedistribution needles within 1,000 feet of a public or private day care center , schoolor university , public swimming pool , park , playground , video arcade , youth center,or near any event sponsored by these facilities . the committee also included a provision in the appropriations bill that would allow the district to implement a provision in a proposed health insurance coveragefor contraceptive act of 2000 . the proposed legislation would require employerswith employee health plans to pay for contraceptive services if they have aprescription drug plan , even if the employers may object to the use of contraceptiveson religious or moral grounds . the chairman of the house district of columbiaappropriations subcommittee included a provision in the subcommittee draft of thedistrict of columbia appropriations act for fy2001 that would have prohibited thecontraceptive provision from taking effect . 4942 , an amendment was introduced by delegate norton ( d - d.c. ) that would have eliminated a provision ( section 168 ( a ) ) of the bill that would prohibit the district from implementing the health insurance coverage for contraceptive act of 2000 . the amendment wasrendered moot after mayor williams vetoed the legislation . senate appropriations committee . on september 13 , 2000 , the senate appropriations committee reported s. 3041 , a bill appropriating funds for the district of columbia forfy2001 ( s.rept . federal funds . the senate appropriations committee bill includes $445 million in special federal assistance . the majority of these funds ( $390.2 million ) would be allocated to courts , prisons,and criminal justice activities including offender services . in addition , the billappropriates $17 million for college scholarship program , and $25 million forconstruction of a new york avenue metro station . this is the full federalcommitment to the project , which is expected to receive an additional $50 millionfrom the city and the private sector . local funds . the district's budget as approved by the senate appropriations committee includes $4.680 billion ingeneral fund operating expenses and $654 million in enterprise funding for a total of$5.334 billion in total operating expenses for fy2001 . the budget supports aproposed $3.360 million increase in funding for the authority for fy2001 . theincrease was proposed to cover the cost of severance pay for the agency's staff . the authority is preparing to be phrased out of existence in anticipation of the districtmeeting the congressionally mandated requirement of four consecutive years ofbalanced budgets before the restoration of home rule . general provisions . the bill includes several social rider provisions that are viewed as controversial or intrusive by somedistrict officials and residents including a provision barring the federal and cityfunding of needle exchange programs aimed at reducing the spread of aids andhiv among drug users .