the time limits for probation are comparable . the court may set the term of probation for a juvenile under 18 years of age at no longer than the sooner of ( a ) the date on which the juvenile will turn 21 years of age ; or ( b ) five years ( or one year if the misconduct in an adult would be punishable by imprisonment for not more than five days ) . for juveniles between the ages of 18 and 21 , the limit is the shorter of ( a ) three years ; or ( b ) one year ( if the misconduct in an adult would be punishable by imprisonment for not more than five days ) . the adult mandatory and discretion condition statutes apply , including the requirement that any discretion conditions involve only such deprivations of liberty or property as are reasonably necessary to comply with statutory sentencing principles . the court may later revise or revoke a juvenile's probation and order the juvenile's detention for violation of his probation conditions . detention authority following revocation mirrors the court's initial detention authority with two exceptions . first , regardless of the juvenile's age at the time of revocation , the court is initially governed by the time limits that apply to the detention of juveniles between the ages of 18 and 21 . second , an individual who is 21 years of age or older may not be detained beyond the age of 23 , or beyond the age of 25 if the misconduct is punishable by imprisonment for 12 years or more . subject to those restrictions , when the misconduct that resulted in the delinquency determination would be punishable by a maximum term of imprisonment of 12 years or more , the court may order a term of detention no longer than the shorter of ( i ) five years ; or ( ii ) the term at the top of the sentencing range under the sentencing guidelines that would apply had the juvenile been an adult . for less serious forms of misconduct , the limit is the shorter of ( i ) three years ; ( ii ) the term at the top of the sentencing range under the sentencing guidelines that would apply had the juvenile been an adult ; or ( iii ) the maximum term of imprisonment that would apply had the juvenile been an adult . when a court orders juvenile detention , it may also impose a term of juvenile delinquent supervision to be served after the individual's release from detention . juvenile delinquent supervision has its own time limits and its own set of conditions . the conditions are the same as those available when the court sentences a juvenile to probation . the initial term of juvenile delinquent supervision may not exceed the juvenile's 21st birthday if the individual is under the age of 18 when the detention order is issued . if the individual is between 18 and 21 , the initial time limits are those that apply to detention , less the time served in detention .