there are some disadvantages to having tax - exempt status . organizations may be restricted in their activities , such as their ability to participate in lobbying or political campaign activity . additionally , organizations will have to comply with annual reporting requirements and disclose certain information to the public [see "reporting requirements" and " public disclosure of returns " sections , below] . it is not unusual for different types of exempt organizations to form affiliates or related organizations to more effectively perform their missions . for example , labor unions often have a related 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) scholarship fund , which is eligible to receive tax - deductible contributions , and a 527 political action committee , which can conduct campaign / endorsement activities that the union cannot legally carry on inside the union itself . if the request is made in person , the organization must generally provide the copies on the same day ; if the request is made in writing , the organization must generally respond withing 30 days . similarly , a trade association might have a lobbying affiliate , a charitable affiliate , and a political action committee . so long as the entities carefully observe the requirements that the organizations be separate , these types of relationships are not prohibited . in general , the organizations described in irc â§â§ 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) , ( c ) ( 4 ) , ( c ) ( 5 ) and ( c ) ( 6 ) must apply to the irs to be recognized as tax - exempt , while 527 organizations must notify the irs of their existence . in general , tax - exempt organizations must report information to the irs by filing information and tax returns . while the reporting requirements are similar for 501 ( c ) organizations and 527 organizations , 527 organizations have an additional requirement to report information on their expenditures and contributions . under irc â§ 6104 , all the 501 ( c ) organizations discussed in this report are required to make available for public inspection a copy of their three most recent information returns [form 990] and any materials relating to their applications for exempt status . in addition , the pension protection act of 2006 ( p.l . 109-280 ) added a requirement that 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations also disclose their unrelated business tax returns ( form 990-t ) . 527 organizations must meet the same requirement for their forms 990 , notification of 527 status ( form 8871 ) , and returns for disclosing contributions and expenditures ( forms 8872 ) . with respect to form 990's schedule b , although 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations disclose the names and addresses of their substantial contributors to the irs , they are not required to disclose any identifying information to the general public unless the organization is a private foundation . 527 organizations must disclose the names and address of their substantial contributors to the irs and the public . the other 501 ( c ) organizations do not have to disclose the information about substantial contributors to the public . there are two parts to the public disclosure requirements .