that is not what we intended . or , when we make a mistake , change it . who is to say ? the day may come when we will say: well , yes , we didn't do that right ; we didn't figure some of the things that might happen or the way the rules might be used or abused . if that happens , then we will have to deal with it . senator daschle and i will have to go to the member on his side of the aisle or my side of the aisle and say: that is not in good faith . appendix a. s.res . 8 107 th congress 1 st session s. res . 8 relative to senate procedure in the 107 th congress . in the senate of the united states january 5 , 2001 mr. daschle ( for himself and mr. lott ) submitted the following resolution ; which was considered and agreed to resolution relative to senate procedure in the 107 th congress . 1 resolved , that notwithstanding the provisions of rule 2 xxv , or any other provision of the standing rules or 3 standing orders of the senate , the committees of the sen - 4 ate , including joint and special committees , for the 107 th 5 congress shall be composed equally of members of both 6 parties , to be appointed at a later time by the two leaders ; 7 that the budgets and office space for such committees , and 8 all other subgroups , shall likewise be equal , with up to an 9 additional 10 percent to be allocated for administrative ex - 10 penses to be determined by the rules committee , with the 11 total administrative expenses allocation for all committees 12 not to exceed historic levels ; and that the chairman of 1 a full committee may discharge a subcommittee of any 2 legislative or executive calendar item which has not been 3 reported because of a tie vote and place it on the full com - 4 mittee's agenda . 5 sec . provided , that such committee ratios shall 6 remain in effect for the remainder of the 107 th congress , 7 except that if at any time during the 107 th congress ei - 8 ther party attains a majority of the whole number of sen - 9 ators , then each committee ratio shall be adjusted to re - 10 flect the ratio of the parties in the senate , and the provi - 11 sions of this resolution shall have no further effect , except 12 that the members appointed by the two leaders , pursuant 13 to this resolution , shall no longer be members of the com - 14 mittees , and the committee chairmanships shall be held 15 by the party which has attained a majority of the whole 16 number of senators . 17 sec .