for example , h.r . 4328 , the omnibus consolidated and emergency supplemental appropriations act of 1998 , mandated the treasury department to study current tax depreciation rules and how they relate to tax burdens . this report provides background information relating to tax depreciation of structures , including a discussion of the methods of measuring economic depreciation . this method has components that are not based on empirical evidence , such as the depreciation method . note that economic depreciation only fulfills its function of correctly measuring income if it is indexed for inflation . to compare effective tax rates across assets , estimates of economic depreciation rates for equipment as well as structures are needed . for obvious reasons , it is difficult to rely on either rental data or benchmark asset data . most machinery is not rented and an independent aggregate source of asset value is not available . thus , these depreciation estimates tend to be based on the vintage price approach . the most extensive study of equipment depreciation was made by hulten and wykoff . estimates by oliner of machine tools depreciation tend to be generally compatible with hulten and wykoff's estimates , although somewhat lower . estimates by beidleman for capital used in the machine tool industry , which mostly included machine tools , were higher . there are alternative approaches that rely on observations of investment combined with output ( rather than benchmark assets ) . these are generally in broad aggregates , for either investment as a whole or a particular industry . thus , these measures ( which are summarized by jorgenson ) are conceptually similar to studies of depreciation rates for structures based on rents . they are not very useful for identifying depreciation rates for particular assets , however . while recognizing the uncertainty attached to depreciation estimates , it is still useful to compare effective tax rates on structures and equipment . in the tax reform act of 1986 , efforts were made , within the limits of current information about economic depreciation rates and the practicalities of tax administration , to set economic and tax depreciation roughly equal . the methods adopted were accelerated ( based on empirical evidence ) , but depreciation was not indexed for inflation . these tax benefits and penalties for most assets were roughly offsetting . since 1986 , several changes have altered those relationships . in 1993 , the depreciation life for nonresidential structures was lengthened from 31.5 to 39 years . this increase was adopted in part to finance revenue losses associated with liberalizing passive loss restrictions for certain investors . tax rates were also increased at that time , for corporations and for high income individuals . these changes had the effect of raising tax burdens . at the same time , the expected inflation rate fell , changes that had the effect of lowering tax burdens . the net results of these effects did not have equal effects on all assets , as demonstrated in table 2 , which reports effective tax rates . these calculations suggest that while equipment had a somewhat more favorable treatment in 1986 than structures , the gap between the two has widened .