no recommendations were included . the house rules committee held hearings on the 1999 report in april 1999 . as discussed earlier , daily special orders entail congressional record printing expenses for delivered and inserted special orders and the costs of keeping the house in formal session for delivered special orders ( eg , electricity , salaries of house staff and officers ) . on february 9 , 1999 , representative lynn rivers introduced h.res . 47 , a resolution to amend house rules to require that "the expenses of special - order speeches be paid from the members' representational allowances of members making such speeches. each representative has a members' representational allowance ( mra ) for expenses related to official and representational duties ( eg , employment of staff , travel , franked mail , supplies ) . 47 was referred to the house committee on rules upon introduction but did not receive committee action in the 106 th congress . representative rivers introduced identical resolutions ( h.res . 97 ) in the 105 th congress and ( h.res . 263 ) in the 104 th congress , but no action was taken on either measure . they also present eulogies and tributes . special orders are also used to debate specific legislation and policy issues outside the time restrictions that govern legislative debate in the house and the committee of the whole . as mentioned earlier , each party's leadership sometimes reserves a 60-minute special order to present party views on a particular bill or policy issue . in addition , members of both parties may coordinate their special orders to debate legislation . for example , in the 104 th congress , the two parties reserved consecutive , 60-minute special orders to conduct a "real give - and - take kind of debate" of h.j.res . 159 ( a proposed constitutional amendment to require two - thirds majorities for bills increasing taxes ) . majority and minority members participated in each party's 60-minute special order . in a departure from regular practice , these special orders took place in the middle of the day before the house considered the joint resolution . the special order period also provides a forum where members can practice and hone their debate skills . veteran representatives have advised new members , in particular , to reserve special orders for this purpose: ... before you participate in general debate on a bill ... get some practice . get a special order and have a few of your friends participate with you . get the feel of being in the well of the house , how the lectern can move up and down , how the microphones work . practice in the somewhat stilted language of yielding to other colleagues and so forth , so that when you do get into the real legislative fight it isn't all new ; you have a little bit of the feel of debating in the house . during special orders , freshmen majority members also have an opportunity to gain experience presiding as speaker pro tempore . the speaker's current announced policies on special orders build upon earlier policies , mainly those implemented on february 23 , 1994 .