( 59 stat . this act was similar in most respects to the 1939 act in thatit provided for congressional rejection of a plan by a concurrent resolution , ( 12 ) and expressly prohibitedthe abolition or transfer of all functions of executive departments and certain designated agencies . congress next renewed the president's reorganization authority by passing the reorganizationact of 1949 ( 63 stat . 203 ) , major provisions of which remained in force until 1977 . although theact was patterned , in the main , after the reorganization acts of 1939 and 1945 , there were severalimportant differences . ( 13 ) at the urging of the first hoover commission , whose report appeared in 1949 , ( 14 ) congress gave thepresident much greater latitude than he had enjoyed under the earlier acts because it appeared toauthorize submission of plans to reorganize executive departments and virtually all agencies . oncea reorganization plan was submitted , congress could not amend the plan but had either to accept orreject it in toto . a reorganization plan "... is effective at the end of the first period of 60 calendardays of continuous session of congress after the date on which the plan is transmitted to it unless,between the date of transmittal and the end of the 60 day period , either house passes a resolutionstating in substance that the house does not favor the reorganization plan. the 1949 act , therefore,established a one - house veto procedure for reorganization plans . in the immediate wake of the hoover commission report and the passage of thereorganization act , a large number of reorganization proposals were effected by the regularlegislative process , administrative order , and lastly , by reorganization plans . with respect to thelatter , president truman in 1949 initially submitted eight reorganization plans , of which six becameeffective , while in 1950 , 20 of the 27 were allowed to go into effect . these plans included proposalsfor strengthening the executive office of the president , broadening the authorities of independentregulatory commission chairmen , and transferring the public roads administration to thedepartment of commerce . legislative bills were also enacted , most notably the national securityact amendments . the ease with which most of the reorganization plans became effective reflectedtwo factors: the existence of a consensus that the president ought to be given deference andassistance by congress in meeting his managerial responsibilities , and the fact that most of thereorganization plans were pretty straightforward proposals of an organizational character . this highrate of passage , however , was misleading in that it tended to obscure the emergence , even at thisearly date , of opposition to the reorganization process itself . in the 28 years between 1949 and 1977 , the reorganization act of 1949 was renewed seventimes . as renewals were sought , debated , and granted , amendments were adopted altering theoriginal act . the thrust of these amendments was toward limiting the president's discretion in whatcould be included in reorganization plans , and what procedures would have to be followed in theapproval process . the limitations included modifications to the effect that only one plan could besubmitted within a 30 day period , and could include only logically consistent subject matter .