( 2 ) following the passage of p.l . 104-106 , president clinton created the chief information officers council . established by executive order 13011 , federalinformation technology , on july 16 , 1996 , it serves as "the principal interagency forum to improve agencypractices on such matters as the design , modernization,use , sharing , and performance of agency information resources. others are the result of differingopinions regarding how informationtechnology fits into the general scope of governance . crs report rl30153 , critical infrastructures: background and early implementation of pdd - 63 , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl30745 , electronic government: a conceptual overview , by harold c. relyea . crs report rl31088 , electronic government: major proposals and initiatives , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl30661 ( pdf ) , government information technology management: past and future issues ( the clinger - cohen act ) , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report 98-67 stm , internet: an overview of key technology policy issues affecting its use and growth , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , glenn j.mcloughlin , and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl31057 , a primer on e - government: sectors , stages , opportunities , and challenges of online governance , by [author name scrubbed] . ( 3 ) the ciocouncil is comprised of the cios and deputy cios from twenty - eight federaldepartments and agencies . ( 4 ) the deputy director for management for theoffice of management and budget ( omb ) serves as the chair of the cio council andthe vice chair is elected from the membership . the cio council meets monthly and has six committees to addressspecific information technology managementconcerns such as enterprise interoperability , security and privacy , and e - government . the committees work to helpfacilitate the growth of government standards,share best practices , and help agencies work to be in compliance with reform legislation such as the governmentperformance and results act ( gpra ) . thecouncil's materials are sometimes used by the general accounting office ( gao ) to help inform its methodologywhen evaluating the information technologymanagement progress of various agencies . other critics argued that creating a federalcio was adding another layer of bureaucracy and centralizing decisionmaking procedures . they contended thatit was counterproductive to the purpose of theclinger - cohen act , which was to decentralize decisionmaking processes and purchasing decisions away from thegeneral services administration ( gsa ) to theindividual executive agencies . a third argument made by some critics at the time was that the role of a federal ciowas too big for any one person or agency tohandle . proponents of this view noted that the size of the department of defense alone was larger than some stategovernments , and that cross - agency groupsfocusing on specific problems would be a more effective approach . in light of this opposition , congress decidedto instead designate a cio in each of the majorexecutive branch agencies .