m argin requirements . the fed sets margin requirements on the purchases of certain securities , such as stocks , in certain private transactions . the purpose of margin requirements is to mandate what proportion of the purchase can be made on credit . the fed attempts to mitigate systemic risk and prevent financial instability through these regulatory responsibilities , as well as through its lender of last resort activities and participation on the fsoc ( whose mandate is to identify risks and respond to emerging threats to financial stability ) . r egulation of the payment system . the fed regulates the retail and wholesale payment system for safety and soundness . the flattening of the yield curve ( i.e. , long - term treasury yields are similar to short - term treasury yields ) is seen by some as a warning signal that rates are too high . although there is a risk of stimulative monetary policy causing the economy to overheat , there is also a risk that tightening too quickly could be harmful if the economy slows . some critics would prefer clear evidence that inflation is above the fed's target or financial conditions are unstable before the fed raises rates again . monetary policy refers to the actions the fed undertakes to influence the availability and cost of money and credit to promote the goals mandated by congress , a stable price level and maximum sustainable employment . because the expectations of households as consumers and businesses as purchasers of capital goods exert an important influence on the major portion of spending in the united states , and because these expectations are influenced in important ways by the fed's actions , a broader definition of monetary policy would include the directives , policies , statements , economic forecasts , and other fed actions , especially those made by or associated with the chairman of its board of governors , who is the nation's central banker . the fed is also the prudential regulator of u.s. branches of foreign banks and state banks that have elected to become members of the federal reserve system . often in concert with the other banking regulators , it promulgates rules and supervisory guidelines that apply to banks in areas such as capital adequacy , and examines depository firms under its supervision to ensure that those rules are being followed and those firms are conducting business prudently . the fed's supervisory authority includes consumer protection for banks under its jurisdiction that have $10 billion or less in assets . p rudential regulat ion of nonbank systemically important financial institutions . the dodd - frank act allows the financial stability oversight council ( fsoc ) to designate nonbank financial firms as systemically important ( sifis ) . designated firms are supervised by the fed for safety and soundness . since enactment , the number of designated firms has ranged from four , initially , to none today . it also operates parts of the payment system , such as interbank settlements and check clearing .