i'm not interested. no one has to make any special excuse or listen to the presentation of the person on the line . consumers can go to a local library and ask for help in finding information on telemarketing and telemarketing scams . the library's internet connection ( if available ) will provide access to the websites listed in this report . if no internet connection is available , one may contact the ftc to request information about the telemarketing sales rule . federal trade commission public reference branch sixth street and pennsylvania avenue , nw washington , dc 20580 http: / / www.ftc.gov contacting the local better business bureau ( bbb ) to obtain information about telemarketing and the various types of telemarketing scams is another option . the better business bureau also provides information at its website http: / / www.bbb.org / alerts / article.asp ? if a letter or postcard arrives or there is a message on a home answering machine stating that someone has won a free trip or a prize or a sweepstakes , be cautious . consumers should check the area code for the number that must be called to claim a prize or respond to a telemarketing call before they make the call . most caribbean countries and canada have area codes that are integrated into the u.s. telephone system and may be reached by direct dialing without using separate country codes . simply making a call to certain area codes may incur substantial long - distance charges . those charges will depend upon the area code called , long - distance carrier , length of call , a customer's long - distance calling plan ( or lack thereof ) , and other factors . about 207 of them are within the united states . area codes are constantly being added or revised . the toll - free telephone prefixes used in the united states are 800 , 877 , 888 , 866 , and 855 . , unless they completely understand all charges , procedures , and details concerning the offer . there are many different types of telemarketing scams involving many different types of products and services . for example , some of the known scams deal with stocks and other investments , automatic debit , charitable donations , easy credit , credit cards , credit repair , advanced fee loans , magazine subscriptions , international telephone calls , prizes , sweepstakes , work - at - home schemes , and travel . if there is doubt , people can request that written documentation explaining the prize , product , or service be forwarded to them . any reputable telemarketer will send the information . consumers should take their time and not be pressured into responding immediately . if a consumer believes that he / she is a victim of a telemarketing scam or that a telemarketing concern is violating existing rules , they should report the incident ( s ) . first , contact a local or state consumer affairs office or the state attorney general's office . the ftc's telemarketing sales rule permits local authorities to prosecute telemarketing scam operators who operate across state lines , and individual states may have passed their own laws or established regulations concerning telemarketing .