if so , at what cost ? are there any pilots qualified to teachand train pilots ? opponents of this idea argue that un - retiring the sr - 71 would be too expensive ameasure to simply bridge the gap between the u - 2 and global hawk . it is likely that congress will play a key role in dealing with the futures of the global hawk andthe u - 2 . direct congressional interest in uavs is longstanding and funding and policy direction forthe global hawk has been reflected in a series of appropriations and authorization acts . similarly,congress has also monitored the u - 2 program closely in recent years , identifying funding forupgrades to the aircraft and for additional surveillance and communications equipment . plans forthe early retirement of the u - 2 force will undoubtedly be viewed with care and there will be interestin the progress of global hawk acquisition and its integration into the operating forces . actd advanced concept technology demonstration aef air expeditionary force asars advanced synthetic aperture radar system bda battle damage assessment cinc commander in chief ( of a u.s. unified or specified command ) comint communications intelligence darp defense airborne reconnaissance program dod department of defense elint electronic intelligence emd engineering , manufacturing and development eo electro optical faa federal aviation administration gao general accounting office hd / ld high demand , low density ioc initial operational capability ir infra red isr intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance lre launch , recovery unit jsaf joint signals intelligence avionics family mce mission control element pgm precision guided munition rdt&e research , development , test and evaluation sar synthetic aperture radar sigint signals intelligence slar side looking airborne radar syers senior year electro optical reconnaissance system tad temporary additional duty uav unmanned aerial vehicl . this idea has received some congressional attention . ( 39 ) someobservers believe that this may be a cost - effectiveway to make additional platforms available in a relatively short period of time . someobservers have suggested that examining the utility of opening additional u - 2 bases in differenttheaters may be in order . another inventory management issue pertains to the expeditionary air force concept . to increase deployment predictability and more evenly distribute the deployment burden , the air forceis dividing its people and forces into 10 air expeditionary forces ( aefs ) . these aefs are looseamalgams of resources that will rotate through set training and deployment cycles . currently , the airforce does not have a similar strategy for its "high demand , low density" ( hd / ld ) assets such asthe u - 2 . instead , u - 2s are sent to a given theater as demand rises . some within dod have suggestedthat the u - 2 and other isr assets could be included in the current aef concept and thus increase u - 2deployment predictability . most importantly,it places pilots at risk of death or capture . proponents of re - opening the u - 2 line counter , however,that it should be possible to manufacture future u - 2s that don't require a pilot .