additional office are planned . the plan was expected to entail the assignment of a total of some 130specialagents and a lesser number of support staff . ( 30 ) these offices are expected to serve a number of purposes . they permit the establishment of close "cop - to - cop" relationships by which law enforcement information can be exchanged with host - country officials . concern for legal standards leads many to argue that , in most cases , alleged terrorists and narcotics smugglers should be tried in courts of law rather than dealt with as if they were military opponents . some terrorists and international narcotics traffickers are sufficiently dangerous as to lead the united states to capture alleged perpetrators and bring them to justice even if other countries' laws must beevaded . nevertheless , the u.s. must continue to deal with certain groups and governments even when they have relationships with terrorist groups and even narcotics smuggling . some threats are sufficiently grave to require a military response or a covert action . ( 75 ) the most appropriate instrument will continue to depend heavily on the specifics of each situation . in the wake of the terrorist attacks on september 11 , 2001 , some attention was given to the question of whetherthe osamabin laden network in afghanistan should be dealt with as a law enforcement or a military matter . choosing the best response to transnational threats will inevitably be affected by important , and not always compatible,assumptions: terrorism and narcotics smuggling have risen to the status of threats to u.s. national security . the bushadministration , unable to persuade afghan authorities to arrest and hand over bin laden , quickly decided on amilitaryoption supported by covert intelligence units . ( 76 ) the approach was directly approved by congress by a joint resolution ( p.l . recognizing that a need would continue for related efforts by law enforcement agencies , theadministrationalso pressed for passage of legislation to enhance their authority to acquire information on terrorist activities bymonitoringvarious forms of communications in the united states and to detain non - u.s. persons suspected of terrorist ties . in addition , the administration sought authority to make available to intelligence agencies foreign intelligence informationderived from grand jury disclosures and criminal investigations . this provision generated significant controversybased onconcerns that such transfers would encompass extensive and sensitive personal information obtained by lawenforcementagencies being made widely available to intelligence agencies . some expressed concern about potential abuses,noting thatsuch information could be related to "entirely lawful activities , business transactions , political relationships , orpersonalopinions. ( 77 ) the resultant statute , the usa - patriot act ( p.l . 107-56 ) , eased restrictions on law enforcement agencies established in theforeign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) of 1978 . fisa was modified to permit exploitation of changinginformationtechnologies - roving surveillance , pen registers , and trap and trace authorities .