there are at least two reasons . first , senators recognize that the rules they invoke today may be used against them tomorrow with equally powerful effect . the senate is a continuing body in a human sense as well as a parliamentary sense . senators who choose to be obstructive may succeed in reaching their immediate objectives , but only at the longer run cost of jeopardizing achievement of their own positive legislative goals . second , senators exercise self - restraint so that the senate as an institution can operate with reasonable order and efficiency . senators must work together in relative harmony if the senate is to respond to policy demands and meet its constitutional responsibilities . and ultimately , the ability of senators to achieve their individual goals is inextricably tied to the standing of the institution in which they serve . thus , individual senators and groups of senators can take advantage of significant parliamentary opportunities to delay or prevent actions they oppose , but senators always recognize that in doing so they are balancing short - term benefits against longer - term potential costs , both personal and institutional . the single most powerful weapon available to individuals and minorities in the senate is the ability to delay . this power derives from the senate's rules governing debate , and may be used not only to prevent action but also to extract substantive policy concessions from the majority , whether it is partisan or bipartisan . paragraph 1 of rule xix states that no senator may speak more than twice on the same question on the same day , except by unanimous consent . the "question" may be a pending measure , amendment , or debatable motion ; every senator may make two speeches on the same day on each such question , including a series of amendments and motions that may be offered during floor consideration of the same bill or resolution . furthermore , senate rule xxvi requires that "[n]o measure or matter or recommendation shall be reported from any committee unless a majority of the committee were physically present. so a sizeable minority of a committee's membership may be able to prevent a measure from being reported simply by refusing to attend a committee meeting for that purpose . the effectiveness of these tactics depends on such factors as the number of senators opposing the measure or matter , its importance to the majority , the determination of its supporters and opponents , and the number of other measures competing for the committee's time and attention . on relatively minor measures , extended opposition in committee may be sufficient to convince the committee's leadership that the measure should be set aside , at least temporarily . ( for purposes of this rule , a senator completes a speech when he yields or loses the floor after having been recognized in his own right. ) the two - speech rule is enforced only under the most contentious circumstances because doing so could interfere with effective debate and impede the natural flow of discussion on the floor .