it saw no further action . on january 4 , 2011 , president obama signed into law the america competes reauthorization act , fy2010 ( p.l . the law authorizes appropriations for the nsf from fy2011 through fy2013 ( fy2011 , $7,424.4 million ; fy2012 , $7,800.0 million ; and fy2013 , $8,300.0 million ) . the authorization does not provide any specific funding levels for epscor . however , the legislation includes language stating that the nsf director shall continue epscor to help eligible states develop their research infrastructure that will make them more competitive for research funding . what level of progress must a state achieve to justify that it is no longer eligible for epscor resources ? the cov admitted that graduation / progression from the epscor program is a "challenging" issue and has been debated from the beginning of the program within nsf and among the various stakeholders and participating states and jurisdictions . the review determined that it has become necessary to revisit what it means to "graduate" from the program . questions included what initiatives are there to promote graduation from epscor and mainstreaming in the regular grant making process ? because of the importance in developing a mechanism or measure for graduation from the program , the cov proposed the creation of a dedicated epscor advisory committee ( external ) that would make recommendations for both eligibility for and graduation from epscor . the report stated that clearly , a fixed definition of graduation would be a moving target , especially in an environment where jurisdictions are still being added to the epscor family . the current office head has articulated a vision of "programmatic graduation / progression," which necessarily includes the evolution of the epscor programs themselves as infrastructure continues to grow . this vision should be further developed , vetted , and eventually implemented . the issue of increasing the number of states seeking support through the program was addressed in the review . the cov noted that the increase in the number of eligible jurisdictions has strained limited resources . in fy2002 , 5,595 proposals were received , and 1,511 awards were made with a funding rate of 27.0% . in fy2006 , 7,037 proposals were received , and 1,489 awards were made with a funding rate of 21.0% . the report stated that given the likely budgetary constraints to be imposed on epscor in the coming years , the program runs the danger of not being able to serve its core clientele with the limited funds available if the number of eligible states and institutions continues to increase . at some point , the foundation must more fully address infrastructure , capacity , and geographic distribution in its other grant programs . one solution might be for the foundation to re - organize some of its existing programs in order to create an epscor - like program that used "institutional competitiveness" rather than "state competitiveness" as the primary definitional criterion for support . additional issues and questions were included in the august 2005 review by the cov . the review found that the majority of epscor programs were capacity building based ( infrastructure ) .