this is no longer the situation . on april 1 , 1999 , the office of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation ( aspe ) at the department of health and human services ( hhs ) sent out a notice inviting applications for fy1999 funding for studies on the status of applicants and potential applicants to the tanf program , individuals and families in the tanf program , and individuals and families who leave tanf . six out of the seven fy1999 welfare outcomes grants were awarded by aspe to states that proposed to study the impact of welfare reform on tanf applicants . subsequent to the fy1999 grants , another four states received aspe funding . the 10 aspe grantees with an applicant diversion component to their studies included the following states ( see footnote below for citations ) : arizona , two consortia of counties in california , florida , illinois , new york , south carolina , texas , washington , milwaukee county , and wisconsin . the reports of these studies have been completed . most of the reports discuss a variety of information about individuals and their families who were formally or informally diverted from tanf , including their economic and noneconomic well - being and participation in government programs . readers should note that only texas and north carolina studied "formal" diversion programs . the other states did not study this population partially because of low participation in formal lump - sum diversion assistance programs . a synthesis of some of the diversion studies funded by the aspe indicates that a significant proportion of families who were diverted from tanf were receiving tanf benefits some 12 months later . the final rule on the tanf program was published in the federal register on april 12 , 1999 . under the final regulations , non - recurrent , short - term benefits ( provided for four months or less ) for crisis situations do not count as tanf assistance . further , child care , transportation , and work supports for employed families are not considered "assistance. since diversion is not to be considered tanf assistance , families receiving diversion aid are not subject to tanf work requirements , time limits , child support assignment , or data reporting requirements . ten years after the 1996 welfare law was enacted , the tanf block grant program was reauthorized . 109-171 , the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( enacted on february 8 , 2006 ) included , among other things , an extension of the basic tanf block grant through fy2010 at an annual $16.5 billion funding level . 109-171 requires that the secretary of health and human services issues regulations regarding the tanf program by june 30 , 2006 . in fy2004 , $271 million in combined federal and state funds was spent on cash payments for diversion assistance or other non - recurrent short term benefits ( i.e. , emergency assistance , housing aid , transportation aid , etc .

 ) as noted above , one strategy states are using to reduce the need for ongoing welfare is referred to as "diversion"assistance .