crs report rl30096 . airport improvement program reauthorization legislation in the 106th congress , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs20176 . , by rob bamberger . this is very significant from a budgeting standpoint . contract authorityis tantamount to , but does not actually involve , entering into a contract to pay for a project at somefuture date . under this arrangement , specified in title 23 u.s.c. , authorized funds are automaticallymade available at the beginning of each fiscal year and may be obligated without appropriationslegislation . appropriations are required to make outlays at some future date to cover theseobligations . where most federal programs require new budget authority as part of the annual appropriations process , transportation appropriators are faced with the opposite situation . that is , the authority tospend for the largest programs under their control already exists and the mechanism to obligate fundsfor these programs is also in place . crs report 98-63e . transportation trust funds: budgetary treatment , by john w.fischer . crs report 98-646 enr . transportation equity act for the 21st century ( p.l . 105-178 ) : an overview of environmental protection provisions , by david m.bearden . crs report rl30246 ( pdf ) . coast guard: analysis of the fy2000 budget , by martin lee . crs report rs20600 . coast guard: fy2001 budget issues , by martin lee.crs report rl30659 . amtrak: overview and options , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs20469 . bicycle and pedestrian transportation policies , by williamlipford and [author name scrubbed] . http: / / ostpxweb.dot.gov / budget / http: / / www.house.gov / appropriations http: / / www.nhtsa.dot.gov / nhtsa / whatis / planning / perf - plans / gpra - 96.pln.html http: / / www.gpo.gov / usbudget / fy1998 / fy1998_srch.html http: / / www.senate.gov / committees / committee_detail.cfm ? prior to the fy1999 dot appropriations act , changes in spending in the annual transportation budget component had been achieved in the appropriations process by combining changes inbudget / contract authority and by placing limitations on obligations . the principal function of thelimitation on obligations is to control outlays in a manner that corresponds to congressional budgetagreements . the authority to set a limitation on obligations for contract authority programs gave appropriators considerable leeway in allocating funds among the various federal transportationactivities in function 400 , which includes agencies such as the coast guard and the federal aviationadministration . in addition , the inclusion of the highway and transit programs and their trust - fundgenerated revenue streams in the discretionary budget provided appropriators with additionalflexibility as part of the annual process by which available funds were allocated amongst the 13standing appropriations subcommittees in the house and the senate . with release of the clinton administration's fy2001 budget proposal onfebruary 7 , 2000 , the budget debate began in earnest . in proposing an overalltransportation spending level of nearly $55 billion , the administration continued toemphasize its safety , research , environmental , infrastructure , and mobility prioritieswhich complement vice president gore's proposals concerning the administration's"livability agenda. additional issues arose during congressional consideration of theappropriations legislation . the fy2001 dot appropriations debate was lesscontentious than last year's debate .