the senate has no comparable provision . the record of experience with reconciliation legislation over the period covering 1980 to the present indicates considerable variation in the time needed to process such measures from the date the reconciliation instructions take effect ( upon final adoption of the budget resolution ) until the resultant reconciliation legislation is approved or vetoed by the president . as figure 2 shows , the processing interval for the 20 enacted and four vetoed reconciliation measures ranged from a low of 27 days ( for the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ) to a high of 384 days ( for the tax increase prevention and reconciliation act of 2006 ) . on average , completing the process took about five months ( 155 days ) , well beyond the two months contemplated by the timetable in the 1974 congressional budget act . reconciliation is a multi - stage process . first , reconciliation instructions are included in the budget resolution directing the appropriate committees to develop legislation achieving the desired budgetary outcomes . the house passed five other reconciliation measures during the session , but the senate did not act on any of them . table 4 provides information on the dates of initial consideration by the house and senate of these 24 measures , as well as the dates that the two chambers acted on the relevant conference reports . as the table shows , the senate devoted more than twice as many days ( 81 days ) to initial consideration of these measures than did the house ( 33 days ) . initial senate consideration of these measures ranged from two to eight days , while house consideration took one or two days , except in 1989 ( when the house considered the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1989 for six days ) . of the 155 days needed ( on average ) to develop , consider , and enact into law ( or veto ) a reconciliation bill , about half were required to secure initial passage in the house and senate . the remaining days were taken up by conference meetings , adoption of the conference report , enrollment of the legislation , and consideration and approval by the president . the second step involves consideration of the resultant reconciliation legislation by the house and senate under expedited procedures . a budget resolution typically reflects many different assumptions regarding legislative action expected to occur during a session that would cause revenue and spending levels to be changed from baseline amounts . however , most revenue and direct spending occurs automatically each year under permanent law . therefore , if the committees with jurisdiction over the revenue and direct spending programs do not report legislation to carry out the budget resolution policies by amending existing law , revenue and direct spending for these programs will likely continue without change . the house and senate adopted four of these budget resolutions ( for fy1994 , fy2000 , fy2001 , and fy2004 ) on time , but the others were adopted behind schedule .