these measures must be funded by the applicant . again , economic impacts maywell be a factor in several of these evaluations and measures . an exemption must be granted for an agency action if the secretary of defense finds theexemption is necessary for reasons of national security . ( 19 ) the committee may not grant an exemption that the secretaryof state finds would violate a treaty or other international obligation of the united states . it will be updated ascircumstances warrant . the esa defines an "endangered species" as any species which is "in danger of extinctionthroughout all or a significant portion of its range. excepted from this definition , however , are"species of the class insecta determined by the secretary to constitute a pest whose protection underthe provision of this chapter would present an overwhelming and overriding risk to man. thislanguage appears to recognize the economic or health threats that some insects present . a"threatened" species is one likely to become an endangered species within the foreseeable futurethroughout all or a significant portion of its range. the secretary of the interior ( with respect to terrestrial species ) and the secretary ofcommerce ( with respect to anadromous fish and certain other marine species ) decide whether to lista species as endangered or threatened . the listing of a species triggers certain duties for federalagencies and applicants for federal permits , authorizations , or funding to consult with the secretary ( in practice either the fish and wildlife service or the national marine fisheries servicerespectively ) if a proposed action may affect a listed species . this consultation will determine ifthe proposed action is likely to jeopardize the continued existence of a species or destroy oradversely modify habitat of a species determined by the secretary to be critical . ( 3 ) if so , the secretary is tosuggest reasonable and prudent alternatives to the proposed action that would avoid jeopardizing thelisted species . listing a species as endangered also means that the prohibitions of the esa regarding the"taking" of endangered species apply . "taking" means to harass , harm , pursue , hunt , shoot , wound,kill , trap , capture , or collect , or to attempt to engage in any such conduct . ( 4 ) the meaning of "harm" iselaborated on in regulations to include destruction of habitat severe enough to actually kill or injurewildlife by significantly impairing essential behavioral patterns , including breeding , feeding , orsheltering . ( 5 ) currentregulations provide that unless a special rule has been promulgated for a threatened species,threatened species shall receive the same protections as endangered species . ( 6 ) exceptions to the takingprohibitions are allowed as a result of either the consultation process under â§ 7 of the act , or underthe â§ 10 provisions that allow "incidental take permits" to be issued . if a development or activity cannot be modified so that it avoids jeopardizing a listed species,the person or agency proposing the action must either desist , risk penalties for unlawful takes , orpursue the exemption process provided under the esa to exempt that activity ( not the species ) fromthe penalties of the act .