reorganization plan no . 3 of 1970 proposed the establishment of epa to integrate the administration of numerous federal pollution control laws that had been carried out by several federal agencies . this plan was part of a broader effort to reorganize an array of environmental responsibilities of many federal agencies , which also resulted in the creation of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) . the nixon administration created epa and noaa through this reorganization with congressional approval under procedures established in the reorganization act of 1949 , as amended . the reorganization act authorizes the president to propose reorganizations to congress that would promote the "better execution" of federal laws , the "more effective" management of individual agencies and their functions , and the "efficiency of the operations of government to the fullest extent practicable. president nixon determined that the consolidation of federal pollution control responsibilities under one agency was necessary to meet these statutory objectives , and proposed a reorganization of the executive branch to establish epa under reorganization plan no . the plan was based largely on recommendations of the "ash council," which president nixon had formed to examine the organization of environmental responsibilities among federal agencies . the 91 st congress approved this plan , leading to the creation of epa on december 2 , 1970 . over time , epa's authorities have grown as congress has enacted an increasing number of environmental statutes and major amendments to these statutes . epa's primary responsibilities have evolved to include the regulation of air quality , water quality , and chemicals in commerce ; the development of regulatory criteria for the management and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes ; and the cleanup of environmental contamination . although epa sets uniform pollution control standards and regulations on a national level , the implementation and enforcement of many of these federal standards and regulations are delegated to the states . epa also provides financial assistance in the form of grants to states and local governments to aid them in administering pollution control programs and in complying with certain federal environmental requirements . the states also have enacted their own pollution control authorities and programs , which complement the federal role of epa in protecting human health and the environment . this report presents a summary of the body of federal environmental statutes that together constitute the main authorities of epa , but this report is not comprehensive in terms of discussing all federal statutes that may authorize certain activities of the agency . this report highlights prominent provisions of the selected statutes discussed herein , characterizes the purpose and scope of major programs and activities authorized in each statute , and explains the definitions of key statutory terms that establish the parameters of the agency's authorities in these instances . although congress somewhat recently has renewed the authorization of appropriations for certain epa programs and activities through targeted amendments to various statutes , a more comprehensive reauthorization of many of the statutes that epa administers has not been enacted for a number of years .