little coca is grown in ecuador . ( 2 ) determining the role of atpatariff preferences in this trend , however , presents a difficult challenge because their effects must beisolated from other counternarcotics and economic development efforts . studies by the u.s. international trade commission ( usitc ) of atpa's trade effects suggest that overall , the program had a positive , but small influence on the volume and composition of u.s.imports from atpa countries . for example , although total u.s. imports from atpa countries ona dollar - value basis grew 85% through the decade 1990-99 , this was much less than some had hopedfor and represented no growth of atpa imports relative to u.s. import growth worldwide . further,the composition of u.s. imports from andean countries changed only slightly in favor of productsthat were atpa eligible . this suggests that there was no major change in the production structureof atpa economies , particularly in the biggest atpa beneficiary , colombia , which actuallyexperienced a large increase in coca production in the 1990s . one of the most telling indicators of atpa's limited influence was that u.s. imports given preferential treatment exclusively under atpa represented only 10% of total imports from the foureligible countries . ( 3 ) this constituted a smallpercentage of trade and did not grow through the lifeof the atpa program . without legislative change to the atpa program , a larger response wasthought to be limited in the short run by the andean export sector's dependence on a fewnatural - resource based products and simple manufactures , atpa's program exclusion of manymajor andean products ( e.g . petroleum products , textiles , certain leather goods ) , and the fact thatmany products were already eligible for duty - free or preferential treatment under other tradearrangements . in short , as elaborated below , although there was a positive response to the atpa preferential tariff provisions , the overall impact was small and operated at the margin of andean trade . similarly , the tariff preferences had little effect on the united states economy , suggesting the costof these preferences was low . colombia and bolivia qualified as atpa first beneficiaries in mid - 1992 , with ecuador andperu following one year later . despite atpa , aggregate u.s. trade with beneficiary countriesremained small and grew in line , more or less , with the average for u.s. trade worldwide . for thedecade 1990 to 2000 , u.s. exports to atpa countries rose by 84% , less than total export growth ( see appendix 2 for aggregate trade data. ) relative to the rest of the world , u.s. exports to atpacountries declined slightly to less than 1% of total exports , although there was an upward trend inthe mid - 1990s . u.s. imports from atpa countries , although rising by 105% in dollar terms from1990 to 2000 , also declined slightly on a relative basis to less than 1% of total u.s. imports from theworld . in addition to trade volume , another indicator of atpa's possible effects is change in the composition of atpa imports . figure 1 contrasts the composition of u.s. imports from atpacountries between 1994 and 2000 .