the hans court found that article iii did not have this effect . the church challenged the zoning decision under rfra . the supreme court reiterated that section 5 of the fourteenth amendment gave congress the power to enforce existing constitutional protections , but found that this did not automatically include the power to pass any legislation to protect these rights . instead , the court held that there must be a "congruence and proportionality" between the injury to be remedied and the law adopted to that end . for instance , the court's decision in katzenbach v. morgan of allowing the banning of literacy tests was justified based on an extensive history of minorities being denied suffrage in this country . in contrast , the court found no similar pattern of the use of neutral laws of general applicability disguising religious bigotry and animus against religion . rather than an attempt to remedy a problem , rfra was seen by the court as an attempt by congress to overturn an unpopular supreme court decision . the law focused on no one area of alleged harm to religion , but rather just broadly inhibited state and local regulations of all types . consequently , the court found rfra to be an overbroad response to a relatively nonexistent problem . the scope of the enforcement power under section 5 of the fourteenth amendment also has become important in cases where the court has found that congress has overreached its power under other provision of the constitution , or is limited by some provision thereof . for instance , as discussed in detail below , the supreme court has held that the eleventh amendment and state sovereign immunity generally prohibit individuals from suing states for damages under federal law . however , the supreme court has also held that congress can abrogate state sovereign immunity under the fourteenth amendment . this means that in many cases , litigants suing states will have to find a fourteenth amendment basis for federal legislation in order to defeat an eleventh amendment defense . for instance , a significant amount of federal legislation is clearly supported by the commerce clause , but it might not be supported under section 5 . recently , the court decided two cases that illustrate the difficulties of establishing fourteenth amendment authority for such legislation . in college savings bank v. florida prepaid postsecondary education expense board , the supreme court considered an unfair competition suit brought by a new jersey savings bank against the state of florida . the new jersey savings bank had developed a patented program where individuals could use a certificate of deposit contract to save for college . the state of florida set up a similar program , and the college savings bank sued florida for false and misleading advertising under a provision of the trademark act of 1946 ( lanham act ) , alleging that florida had made misleading representations about its own product . the court first noted that under seminole tribe of florida v. florida , article i , powers such as the power to regulate commerce were insufficient to abrogate eleventh amendment immunity .