administrations . the former clinton administration asked congress in 1997 to begin supporting a new "partnership for freedom" initiative as part of boosted eurasian assistance that would emphasize grass - roots economic and social reforms , including health . additional aid was sought for hospital and health facility partnerships , programs to combat infectious diseases , and efforts to bolster clean water supplies , childhood survival , and maternal health . the request for a large boost in eurasian aid was not supported by congress , but many of the programmatic emphases , including health aid , were endorsed by congress . building on the "partnership for freedom" initiative , usaid increasingly emphasized social needs in eurasia . usaid came to argue that economic reforms in the eurasian states had not always contributed to the growth of middle classes , and also helped create "a new class of chronically poor," who lost the meager state benefits they received under communism . while democratization and economic reforms remained u.s. objectives , usaid stressed that without adequate healthcare and other social services , populations in the eurasian states would lose faith in the reform process . usaid stated that it would increasingly take social issues into account in designing and implementing programs , so that "the broadest possible spectrum of [eurasian] citizens ... have the opportunity to enjoy the benefits of reform. in 2005 , usaid's bureau for europe and eurasia launched a health sector strategy: 2005-2010 and beyond that called for u.s. health assistance to be used "to improve the health of [europe and eurasian] populations in order to support a successful transition to democracy and free - market economies. the strategy "builds upon the region's current epidemiological and economic realities and usaid's experience and successes to date . it preserves a focus on hiv / aids , tuberculosis and reproductive health , while explicitly recognizing the enormous deleterious effect that non - communicable disease is having on the region. usaid has long stressed the restructuring of post - soviet healthcare systems in order to improve measures of health in eurasia . programs to "strengthen" healthcare systems deal with public - private partnerships ; finance , policy , management , and organization ( including devolution and decentralization and provider payment systems ) ; procurement ( including rational drug use ) ; primary care , family medicine , and public health ; quality improvement ; information systems ; human resources development ; privatization , and ngo development . usaid's quality public health and primary health care in central asia ( "zdrav - reform," "zdrav plus," and "zdrav plus ii" ) began in 1994 ( involving four of the five regional states ; tajikistan joined in 2005 ) , and by the end of 2009 , $30 million had been allocated to the program to restructure the health care systems of the states to bolster the government's stewardship ( policies , laws , and institutions ) of healthcare , financing , and delivery , particularly of primary care .