appendix a . selected crs products on senate procedure most of these reports are available to congressional staff through the crs home page at http: / / www.crs.gov . these reports may also be accessed through the congressional process , administration , and elections section of the crs website at https: / / www.crs.gov / iap / congressional - process - administration - and - elections . crs report 98-853 , the amending process in the senate , by christopher m. davis . crs report r41003 , amendments between the houses: procedural options and effects , by elizabeth rybicki . crs report rl30862 , the budget reconciliation process: the senate's "byrd rule , " by bill heniff jr. crs report 96-708 , conference committee and related procedures: an introduction , by elizabeth rybicki . crs report rl30360 , filibusters and cloture in the senate , by valerie heitshusen and richard s. beth . crs report 98-865 , flow of business: a typical day on the senate floor , by christopher m. davis . crs report r43563 , "holds" in the senate , by mark j. oleszek . crs report rs20668 , how measures are brought to the senate floor: a brief introduction , by christopher m. davis . crs report 98-425 , invoking cloture in the senate , by christopher m. davis . crs report 96-548 , the legislative process on the senate floor: an introduction , by valerie heitshusen . crs report 98-306 , points of order , rulings , and appeals in the senate , by valerie heitshusen . crs report r42929 , procedures for considering changes in senate rules , by richard s. beth . crs report 98-696 , resolving legislative differences in congress: conference committees and amendments between the houses , by elizabeth rybicki . crs report rl33939 , the rise of senate unanimous consent agreements , by walter j. oleszek . crs report rl31980 , senate consideration of presidential nominations: committee and floor procedure , by elizabeth rybicki . crs report 98-308 , senate legislative procedures: published sources of information , by christopher m. davis . crs report 98-311 , senate rules affecting committees , by valerie heitshusen . crs report 96-452 , voting and quorum procedures in the senate , coordinated by elizabeth rybicki . appendix b. senate parliamentary reference information available online the vast majority of the referenced links found throughout this report can be accessed through one of two "gateway" websites maintained by legislative branch organizations: congress.gov ( a website of the library of congress ) and govinfo.gov ( a website of gpo ) . each of these sites provides an entry point for research into senate procedures . the websites provided for the documents discussed in this report are current as of the report's publication date . congress.gov http: / / www.congress.gov congress.gov is the official website for u.s. federal legislative information . the site is designed to provide access to accurate , timely , and complete legislative information for members of congress , legislative agencies , and the public . congress.gov also contains information on topics such as nominations , public laws , communications , and treaties .