most of these capabilities have been developed covertly . u.s. intelligence on foreign wmd programs can vary dramatically not just among countries , but also among such programs for a single country . in general , nuclear and ballistic missile programs are more easily detectable than biological and chemical weapons programs because the former often have specific characteristics ( eg , flight tests , reactor operations ) which are more easily observed . table 1 does not attempt to portray a country's intent — how serious its pursuit of nbc weapons capability is , or what its ultimate objectives might be . these variables would have a significant impact on threat assessments of wmd capability . in numerical terms , nbc weapons , missiles and programs have not grown much in the last decade , as proliferation by a few countries has been offset by reductions in weapons by others . however , some countries are actively building nbc weapon stockpiles and they are improving capabilities to deliver these weapons , taking advantage of increasingly available missile technology . these states are seeking or have developed indigenous production capabilities , and some have themselves become suppliers of nbc weapon or missile technologies . some of these new suppliers either support terrorism or have terrorist activities on their soil . the potential for additional countries , or possibly terrorist groups , to produce nbc weapons using available technology , has become a greater concern in recent years . despite increasingly available technology , states are not driven inexorably toward acquiring nbc weapons and missiles , as is apparent in table 1 . political and economic trends can yield incentives or disincentives for states ( and , perhaps , terrorist organizations ) to develop , maintain , or abandon nbc weapon or missile capabilities . some developments in the last ten to fifteen years that have helped shape the international environment for nonproliferation are listed below . table 2 ( page 22 ) shows membership in international control regimes . the risk of a massive exchange of nuclear weapons , and of massive biological or chemical attacks , has decreased in the last decade . the reduction of nuclear weapons under start and the moscow treaty , continuing unilateral reductions , and improved safeguarding of nuclear weapons and materials continue to decrease the risk of nuclear war in europe and north america , an accidental launch , and the proliferation of nuclear weapons . more recently , the united states has established several vehicles to improve cooperation with allies on controlling the transfer of sensitive technologies , particularly to combat terrorist acquisition of nbc weapons and related materials . these include the g - 8 global partnership , the proliferation security initiative , and passage of u.n. security resolution 1540 . in addition , the fact that a future nuclear attack may consist of a small number of detonations rather than a catastrophic exchange of hundreds or thousands of nuclear warheads may lead some to feel the threat is reduced . other observers regard any developments that make nuclear weapons more usable ( i.e. , smaller yields , less radiation fallout , or tailored for specific missions ) as potentially destabilizing .