no appeal was taken from this decision . in 1999 , 26 members of the house initiated a suit in the case of campbell v. clinton , asking for a declaratory judgment that u.s. participation in nato's military actions against yugoslavia in the kosovo situation violated congress's constitutional power to declare war or otherwise authorize military action and that the war powers resolution required the termination of u.s. participation "no later than sixty calendar days after march 24 , 1999" ( the date nato began bombing yugoslavia ) , unless congress authorized continued u.s. involvement . moreover , he said , it was doubtful that the statutory claim that the president continued the war for more than 60 days without congressional authorization met the "capable of repetition" element . president clinton , he noted , was the first president "who arguably violated the 60-day provision," and the plaintiffs themselves stated that in modern times most u.s. attacks on foreign nations "will be over quickly , by which they mean less than 60 days. the congressional appellants sought further review in the supreme court , but on october 2 , 2000 , the court denied review . in doe v. bush , 12 members of the house of representatives , 3 members of the military , and 15 parents of service members instituted suit to enjoin president george w. bush from launching a military invasion of iraq to remove saddam hussein from power and to enforce iraq's disarmament . notwithstanding enactment in october 2002 of the authorization for the use of force against iraq resolution ( p.l . 107-243 ) , the plaintiffs contended that the authorization unconstitutionally delegated congress's power to declare war to the president or , alternatively , that an invasion of iraq would exceed the authority granted by the authorization . on february 24 , 2003 , the reviewing federal district court held the suit to raise a nonjusticiable political question and dismissed the case . on march 13 , 2003 , the u.s. court of appeals for the first circuit affirmed on the basis that the issues in the case were not ripe for judicial review and that the october authorization did not constitute an unlawful delegation of congress's constitutional authority . citing baker v. carr , discussed supra , the trial court held that judicial resolution of a war powers issue would be appropriate "only when the actions taken by congress and those taken by the executive manifest clear , resolute conflict. the constitution , it said , commits the conduct of the nation's foreign relations to the political branches of the federal government . as a consequence , "absent a clear abdication of this constitutional responsibility by the political branches , the judiciary has no role to play. in this instance , the court ruled , there was no "intractable constitutional gridlock. in the october 2002 authorization , it noted , "congress has expressly endorsed the president's use of the military against iraq" ; and as of the day of its decision , it said , "the president , for his part , has not irrevocably committed our armed forces to military conflict in iraq.