yes . because the national guard is , uniquely , both a state and federal organization ( see question 5 ) , its members can be called to active duty either in an exclusively federal status , in an exclusively state status , or under state control with federal pay and benefits . as members of the reserve component , national guardsmen can be called to federal active duty in the same way as other reservists ( see question 9 ) . are there other ways in which members of the national guard can be activated ? for more information on state active duty and duty under title 32 of the u.s. code ) . data from the office of the assistant secretary of defense for manpower and reserve affairs ( oasd / m&ra ) shed more light on the growing contribution of reservists to federal missions . according to oasd / ra , reservists contributed about 1 million duty - days per year to their respective services between fiscal years 1986 and 1989 . this contribution increased since then to the point where reservists contributed about 13 million duty - days per year between fiscal years 1996 and 2001 . with the large mobilization of reservists in the aftermath of the september 11 th attacks , reservists contributed about 41.3 million days in fy2002 , rising to a peak of 68.3 million days in fy2005 . this metric dropped to 17.3 million days by fy2014 , but it still represents a vastly higher level of activity than typically occurred in the cold war era . the continuing mobilization of reservists to participate in these operations lends support to the idea that the reserve component has been transformed from a "force of last resort" in the cold war era into a more integrated part of the military services in the post - cold war era . for more information on the history of reserve activations , see crs report rl30637 , involuntary reserve activations for u.s. military operations since world war ii , by [author name scrubbed] . the posse comitatus act ( 18 u.s.c . 1385 ) , along with other related laws and administrative provisions , prohibits the use of the military to execute civilian laws unless expressly authorized by the constitution or an act of congress . as a part of the military , the reserve components are generally covered under these provisions and thus are restricted in the same way that active component forces are . however , there are important exceptions to this general rule . first , congress has made a number of exceptions to the posse comitatus act that permit military involvement in law enforcement . for example , congress has enacted several statutes that authorize the president to use military forces to suppress insurrections and domestic violence . if these statutes were to be invoked , the president could use the reserve component in the same way as active component forces to put down a rebellion or to control domestic violence . another important exception relates to the coast guard , which congress has vested with broad law enforcement authority .