the changes under p.l . 113-255 do not apply to military servicemembers ; the default tsp investment option for military servicemembers remains the "g" fund . the thrift savings plan is administered by an independent government agency , the federal retirement thrift investment board , which is charged in statute with operating the thrift plan prudently and solely in the interest of the participants and their beneficiaries . the assets of the thrift plan are maintained in the thrift savings fund , which invests the assets in accordance with participant instructions in five investment funds authorized by congress to be included in the plan . the thrift board currently contracts with blackrock institutional trust company to manage the index funds in which the f , c , s , and i fund assets are invested . the contracts for each fund are open to competitive bids by qualified investment managers every three to five years . the costs of administering the tsp are paid from the assets of the thrift fund . administrative costs of the tsp in 2013 were 2.9 basis points ( one basis point is 1 / 100 th of 1 percent , or 0.01% ) , or about 29 cents for each $1,000 invested . participant accounts the thrift plan maintains individual accounts for each participant . participant accounts are credited with the participant's contributions and agency contributions , and are charged for withdrawals . the value of the participant's account reflects the number of shares and the daily share prices of the funds in which the account is invested . administrative expenses are a component of the share price calculation . the benefit to which a participant is entitled is the participant's vested account . thrift plan participants can receive account - balance information and conduct transactions by automated telephone service or on the thrift plan's website . the federal retirement thrift investment board the federal retirement thrift investment board was established by the fers act of 1986 . the board is responsible for developing the investment policies of the thrift plan and overseeing the management of the plan , which is under the day - to - day direction of an executive director appointed by the board . three of the five members of the board — including the chairman — are appointed by the president . the president chooses a fourth member of the board in consultation with the speaker of the house and the house minority leader and a fifth member in consultation with the majority and minority leaders of the senate . members of the board serve four - year terms and all nominations are subject to senate confirmation . the law requires that all nominees to the board must be individuals with "substantial experience and expertise in the management of financial investments and pension benefit plans. communication and education the thrift board communicates with plan participants to help them better understand the investment choices , benefits , and administration of the tsp . employing agencies distribute information , including the summary of the thrift savings plan for federal employees , which provides a comprehensive description of the plan , as well as booklets describing the loan program , withdrawal programs , and annuity options under the plan .