fire and ecosystems . new york , ny: academic press , 1974 . 542 p. national academy of public administration . wildfire suppression: strategies for containing costs . washington , dc: sept. 2002 . there is a final significant question: would it work ? the answer depends , in part , on how one defines successful fire protection . fuel reduction might help restore "more natural" conditions to forests and rangelands , as many advocate , and would likely yield some social benefits ( eg , improved water quality , more habitat for fire - dependent animal species ) . others , however , advocate fuel reduction to allow greater use of forests and rangelands , for timber production , recreation , water yield , etc . fuel reduction will certainly not reduce the conflict over the goals and purposes of having and managing federal lands . reducing fuel loads might reduce acreage burned and the severity and damages of the wildfires that occur . research is needed in various ecosystems to document and quantify the relationships among fuel loads and damages and the probability of catastrophic wildfires , to examine whether the cost of fuel reduction is justified by the lower fire risk and damage . however , it should also be recognized that , regardless of the extent of fuel reduction and other fire protection efforts , as long as there is biomass for burning , especially under severe weather conditions ( drought and high wind ) , catastrophic wildfires will occasionally occur , with the attendant damages to resources , destruction of nearby homes , other economic and social impacts , and potential loss of life . agee , james k. fire ecology of pacific northwest forests . washington , dc: island press , 1993 . 493 p. brown , arthur a. and kenneth p. davis . forest fire control and use . 2 nd ed . new york , ny: mcgraw - hill book company , 1973 . 686 p. carle , david . burning questions: america 's fight with nature's fire . westport , ct: praeger publishers , 2002 . 298 p. chandler , craig , phillip cheney , philip thomas , louis trabaud , and dave williams . fire in forestry . volume i: forest fire behavior and effects . new york , ny: john wiley & sons , 1983 . 450 p. chandler , craig , phillip cheney , philip thomas , louis trabaud , and dave williams . fire in forestry . volume ii: forest fire management and organization . new york , ny: john wiley & sons , 1983 . 298 p. gonzalez - caban , armando and philip n. omi , technical coordinators . proceedings of the symposium on fire economics , planning , and policy: bottom lines . general technical report psw - gtr - 173 . berkeley , ca: usda forest service , pacific southwest research station , dec. 1999 . 332 p. kozlowski , t.t . ahlgren , eds . 2 volumes . nelson , robert h. a burning issue: a case for abolishing the u.s. forest service . lanham , md: rowman & littlefield publishers , inc. , 2000 . 191 p. o'toole , randal . reforming the fire service: an analysis of federal fire budgets and incentives .