calea ( 47 u.s.c . 1002 ) directs the telecommunications industry to design , develop , and deploy solutions that meet certain assistance capability requirements for telecommunications carriers to support law enforcement in the conduct of lawfully - authorized electronic surveillance . pursuant to a court order or other lawful authorization , carriers must be able , within certain limitations , to: ( 1 ) expeditiously isolate all wire and electronic communications of a target transmitted by the carrier within its service area ; ( 2 ) expeditiously isolate call - identifying information that is reasonably available on a target ; ( 3 ) provide intercepted communications and call - identifying information to law enforcement ; and ( 4 ) carry out intercepts unobtrusively , so targets are not made aware of the electronic surveillance , and in a manner that does not compromise the privacy and security of other communications . the fbi and fcc continue to monitor and review the implementation of this program . calea requires telecommunications carriers to assist law enforcement in performing electronic surveillance on their digital networks pursuant to court order or other lawful authorization . the telecommunications industry , privacy rights groups , and law enforcement agencies agree that calea was not intended to expand law enforcement's authority to conduct electronic surveillance . on the contrary , calea was intended only to ensure that after law enforcement obtains the appropriate legal authority , carriers will have the necessary capabilities and sufficient capacity to assist law enforcement in conducting digital electronic surveillance regardless of the specific telecommunications systems or services deployed . to allow carriers to give law enforcement the means to conduct its wiretaps , calea ( 47 u.s.c . 1003 ) requires the attorney general to determine the number of simultaneous interceptions ( law enforcement agencies' estimate of their maximum capacity requirements ) that telecommunications carriers must be able to support . to maintain privacy rights of individuals , calea ( 47 u.s.c . 1004 ) requires telecommunications carriers to ensure that any interception of communications or access to call - identifying information that is conducted within their premises can only be done with a court order . it also requires the specific intervention of an officer or employee of the carrier acting in accordance with regulations prescribed by the federal communications commission ( fcc ) . calea ( 47 u.s.c . 1005 ) directs telecommunications carriers to consult with telecommunications equipment manufacturers to develop equipment necessary to comply with the capability and capacity requirements identified by the fbi . the fbi argued that the deployment of digital technologies in public telephone systems was making it increasingly difficult for law enforcement agencies to conduct electronic surveillance of communications over public telephone networks . as a result of these arguments and concerns from the telecommunications industry , as well as issues raised by groups advocating protection of privacy rights , the communications assistance for law enforcement act ( calea ) was enacted on october 25 , 1994 ( 47 u.s.c . 1001-1021 ) , in the final days of the 103 rd congress .