frederick a . rose . in recognition of "assistant - surgeon frederick a . rose , of the british navy , who volunteered , with the permission of his commanding officer , to join the susquehannah ," at a time when many of its crew had yellow fever , "at imminent personal risk , devoted himself , on the voyage from jamaica to new york , to care for the sick remaining on board. approved may 11 , 1858 ( 11 stat . major general ulysses s. grant . "who that received this medal in the past," he asked , "was not worthy of it ? he also expressed dismay "that the committee on rules refused to allow consideration of a key amendment that would strike a section of bill that only permits the granting of congressional gold medals to individuals. although crowley tended "to agree with the notion that distributing what is an exceptional honor to too many individuals could devalue the symbolic worth of a gold medal , there are occasions when more than one person is justified to receive the medal for their honorable actions in tandem with others. he continued by emphasizing that had this bill already been law , "congress would not have been able to issue" a congressional gold medal "to the little rock nine," to "president and mrs. reagan," or to "martin luther king and coretta scott king. congress from the outset was "imbued with the conviction that only the very highest achievements [were] entitled to such a distinction , and that the value of a reward is enhanced by its rarity ! instituting such a tradition was considered "both a legitimate function and powerful instrument of nationality. "few inventions," colonel david humphrey wrote in 1787 , "could be more happily calculated to diffuse the knowledge and preserve the memory of illustrious characters and splendid events than medals — whether we take into consideration the imperishable nature of the substance whence they are formed , the facility of multiplying copies , or the practice of depositing them in the cabinets of the curious. with these words , humphrey , who had the responsibility for having the first gold medals struck in paris , captured the essence of the feelings which inspired the continental congress to choose medals as its highest distinction and expression of national appreciation . following a long - standing historical practice , congress commissioned gold medals as tributes for what were considered to be the most distinguished achievements . silver and bronze medals , and ceremonial swords , were awarded for less eminent , but still notable , accomplishments . of these , only the gold medal has been continuously awarded to the present day . the continental congress had not yet proclaimed its independence from great britain when , on march 25 , 1776 , george washington , commander of the continental army , was tendered the first congressional gold medal for his "wise and spirited conduct" in bringing about british evacuation of boston . during the next 12 years , the continental congress authorized an additional six gold medals for revolutionary military and naval leaders .