what is the cost of inflation ? it is customary in textbooks to answer this question in terms of a situation where the rate of inflation is anticipated by all market participants who can either continuously re - contract or in which everyone is protected from inflation through indexation . in this world the cost to an economy from inflation is the increased resource cost from conducting transactions with reduced holdings of money — popularly termed "shoe leather" costs . if the inflation is serious , this cost is by no means trivial . however , inflations are seldom perfectly anticipated . in this situation , perhaps the most serious real effect comes from the ability of rising prices to jam the price signals that are so important to the smooth and efficient functioning of a market economy . evidence suggests that this may not have been a problem for the united states in the post - world war ii era . in general , the cost of inflation to an economy will be larger the higher the rate of inflation , the more variable the rate , the less it is anticipated , the greater is the uncertainty it causes , and the less indexed is the economy . when comparing purchasing power over two time periods , the overall ( referred to as "headline" ) inflation rate is the relevant measure . comparisons over time of wages , wealth , rates of return , government transfers such as social security payments , and so on should all use a headline measure of inflation , because all of these concepts depend on a broad measure of inflation . although the headline rate of inflation can provide much useful information to policymakers on the state of the economy , it can also be misleading since it responds to both systematic and random forces . the latter can be seen by reference to the food component of the cpi . an unusual cold spell in florida in january that damages a substantial part of the fresh produce crop can send food prices and the cpi soaring . a similar effect can be produced by an unusually wet summer in the midwest . alternatively , an unusually good combination of rain and sunshine can produce a bountiful harvest and lower prices . energy prices are also susceptible to such random effects associated with events such as turmoil in major oil producing nations . to minimize the confusing signals that could arise from the use of the actual rate of inflation , some economists prefer to use a price index that reflects basically only systematic forces to measure inflation . for some economists , this can be achieved by using the cpi less its food and energy components . ( it should be noted that food and energy represent about 25% of the current cpi. ) others want to use a moving average either of the cpi itself or of the current cpi less its food and energy components . the use of a moving average is based on the belief that if there are random factors that influence the actual inflation rate , they have an average value of zero . hence , the use of a moving average should minimize their influence .