labor . ( 29 ) under the fta , the united states andjordan reaffirm their obligations as members of the international labor organization ( ilo ) and theircommitments under the ilo declaration on fundamental principles and rights at work and itsfollow - up . mirroring the language used in the section on environmental standards , the fta statesthat "the parties recognize that it is inappropriate to encourage trade by relaxing domestic labor laws . accordingly , each party shall strive to ensure that it does not waive or otherwise derogate from , oroffer to waive or otherwise derogate from , such laws as an encouragement for trade with the otherparty. ( article 6.2 ) the agreement also recognizes the right of each country to establish its owndomestic labor standards , laws , and regulations , striving to ensure that these are consistent withinternational recognized labor rights . environment . in the fta , the united states and jordan recognize the principle that it is "inappropriate to encourage trade by relaxing domesticenvironmental laws . accordingly , each party shall strive to ensure that it does not waive orotherwise derogate from , or offer to waive or otherwise derogate from , such laws as anencouragement for trade with the other party. ( article 5.1 ) the agreement also recognizes the rightof each country to establish its own levels of domestic environmental protection , policies , andpriorities . the fta states that "a party shall not fail to effectively enforce its environmental laws,through a sustained or recurring course of action or inaction , in a manner affecting trade between theparties. ( article 5.3 ( a ) ) the united states and jordan also issued a joint statement onenvironmental technical cooperation . the joint statement establishes a joint forum onenvironmental technical cooperation , which will work to "advance environmental protection injordan by developing environmental technical cooperation initiatives , which take into accountenvironmental priorities , and which are agreed to by the two governments , consistent with the u.s.country strategic plan for jordan , and complementary to u.s. - jordanian policy initiatives. anannex to the joint statement details ongoing and future u.s. - jordanian environmental technicalcooperation programs . the fta states that "a party shall not fail to effectivelyenforce its labor laws , through a sustained or recurring course of action or inaction , in a manneraffecting trade between the parties. ( article 6.4 ( a ) ) electronic commerce . the fta states that the united states and jordan will seek to refrain from deviating from the existing practice of notimposing customs duties on electronic transmissions or imposing unnecessary barriers on electronictransmissions . safeguard measures . the fta contains safeguard measures to ensure that if the implementation of the agreement leads to "a substantialcause of serious injury , or threat thereof" to a domestic industry , either country may temporarilysuspend further tariffs reductions on the affected goods . if either country decides to implement asafeguard measure , its duration cannot exceed 4 years or the 10-year transitional period , and nomeasure shall be maintained "except to the extent and for such time as may be necessary to preventor remedy serious injury and to facilitate adjustment. ( article 10.2 .