government. furthermore , the law provides that "an officer or employee of the corporation is not an officer or employee of the government. whether congress has the constitutional authority to assign an entity "private" status when in fact it has substantial "governmental" attributes has been subject to debate and judicial opinion . in the 106 th congress , a new entry was included in part b of subtitle ii of title 36 , the national recording preservation foundation ( foundation ) . the background for this foundation requires some explanation . appendix ; 86 stat . 700 ) so as to include two title 36 corporations , the national academy of public administration and the national academy of sciences , under specific provisions involving the appointment , permissible activities , and reports of corporation committees doing work for executive agencies ( p.l . 105-153 ; 111 stat . this is the first instance in which congress has made title 36 , subtitle ii corporations subject to the provisions of a general management law , and while the action may be supportable on public policy grounds , it does , to the extent of the applicable provisions , diminish the private character of the affected organizations . as such , it constitutes a precedent with implications . corporate charters are granted in law by act of congress . the procedure for the grant begins like any other act of congress , with the introduction of a bill by a member of either the house of representatives or the senate . bills proposing title 36 corporate bodies are generally referred to the judiciary committees of each house . if the measure is reported out of committee and approved by that house , it is sent to the other house for approval , and then on to the president for signature , whereupon it becomes law . prior to 1965 , requests for congressional charters were considered on a case - by - case basis without standards or criteria for incorporation . that year president lyndon johnson vetoed h.r . 339 ( 89 th congress ) , a bill that would have granted a corporate charter to the youth councils on civil affairs . in his veto message president johnson raised several questions about the wisdom of continuing to grant charters on a case - by - case basis "without the benefit of clearly established criteria as to eligibility. in the president's veto message to congress , he noted: for some time i have been concerned with the question of whether we are granting federal charters to private organizations on a case - by - case basis without the benefit of clearly established standards and criteria as to eligibility . worthy civic , patriotic , and philanthropic organizations can and do incorporate their activities under state law . it seems obvious that federal charters should be granted , if at all , only on a selective basis and that they should meet some national interest standard . the president requested in his veto message that the two judiciary committees conduct a comprehensive study on the entire matter . various proposals had been made over the years to adopt federal statutory procedures for chartering nonprofit organizations , but congress has not enacted any of them .