, pp . the politics of presidential appointments . new york: the free press , 1981 . oleszek , walter j . "preliminary legislative action," congressional procedures and the policy process , 7 th ed. washington: cq press , 2007 . the presidential appointee ' s handbook , 2 nd ed . aberbach , joel d. "what's happened to the watchful eye ? congress and the presidency , vol . 1 ( spring 2002 ) , pp . cohen , richard e. "crackup of the committees. sinclair , barbara . unorthodox lawmaking: new legislative processes in the u.s. congress . washington: cq press , 2000 . unekis , joseph k. "committee hearings. in donald c. bacon , roger h. davidson , and morton keller , eds. , the encyclopedia of the united states congress , vol . 1 , pp . new york: simon and schuster , 1995 . u.s. general accounting office . office of special investigations . investigators ' guide to sources of information . washington: gpo , 1997 . wells , william g. jr. "hearings and testimony. working with congress: a practical guide for scientists and engineers , pp . washington: american association for the advancement of science and carnegie commission on science , technology , and government , 1992 . follow - up questions may be prepared and submitted to witnesses for written replies to expand on their testimony . witnesses may be asked to expand on answers given at the hearing or to discuss new matters raised in the course of the hearing . often the chair will announce that the hearing record will be left open for a period of time so that additional information can be entered into the formal hearing record . if the hearing is investigative , the committee can prepare and issue its report . if the hearing is legislative , the committee may proceed to markup and report a measure to the senate floor . finally , committees attend to administrative details following a hearing , such as restoring the hearing room to its original condition and sending thank - you letters to witnesses . points of order against actions that occurred during a committee hearing are normally ruled upon by the chairman . in any case , pursuant to senate rules ( rule xxvi , paragraph 7 ( a ) ( 3 ) ) , no point of order for a violation of committee hearing rules will be entertained subsequently on the senate floor if a measure has been properly reported . this rule states in part , "action by any committee in reporting any measure or matter in accordance with the requirements of this subparagraph shall constitute the ratification by the committee of all action theretofore taken by the committee with respect to that measure or matter...." thus , if a senator believes a hearing was conducted improperly , he or she must make this belief known in committee , and the point of order must be timely raised . once the measure reaches the senate floor , a point of order because of procedural infractions during the hearing would not be sustained . aberbach , joel d. keeping a watchful eye: the politics of congressional oversight . washington: the brookings institution , 1990 .