continuously updated . davidson , basil . 103-274 ) was passed . the act set policy objectives for u.s. assistance inthe horn and included provisions to promote democracy . congress enacted the comprehensive anti - apartheid act ( p.l . 99-440 ) over president reagan's veto . the act set policy objectivesfor the united states in south africa , imposed a number of sanctions , and provided for "positive measures" toimprove the lives of black southafricans . congress passed a large emergency supplemental appropriation for african famine relief ( p.l . the move followed extensivemedia coverage of famine in ethiopia and sudan , and some criticism of the adequacy of the executive branchresponse . - - - the international security and development cooperation act of 1985 repealed the clark amendment ( see below,1976 ) . congress created the african development foundation to promote grassroots development through small grants to african self - helporganizations ( p.l . congress , in effect , repealed the byrd amendment ( see below , 1971 ) by ending its application to rhodesia . the "clark amendment," sec . 404 of the international security assistance act of 1976 ( p.l . 94-239 , later sec . 96-533 ) ,prohibited aid that would help any group in angola conduct military or paramilitary operations . the prohibitioncould be waived by a joint resolution . theamendment was sponsored by senator dick clark of iowa . ( the clark amendment followed an earlier , temporaryban known as the "tunneyamendment." the "byrd amendment," named for its sponsor , senator harry f. byrd , jr. of virginia , was passed . this amendment to the armedforces appropriation ( p.l . 92-156 ) partially exempted the united states from participating in u.n. sanctionsagainst white - ruled rhodesia by prohibiting thepresident from enforcing the u.n. trade embargo with respect to imports of critical and strategic materials , such aschromium and nickel . bohannan , paul and philip curtin . africa and africans , 4th ed . prospect heights,illinois: waveland press , 1995 . the black man's burden: africa and the curse of the nation state . new york , times books , 1992 . gordon , david f. , david c. miller , jr. , and howard wolpe . the united states and africa: a post - cold war perspective . new york: w.w. norton , 1998 hochschild , adam . king leopold's ghost . boston: houghton mifflin , 1998 . herbst , jeffrey . states and power in africa: comparative lessons in authority and control . princeton , princeton university press , 2000 . joseph , richard , ed . state , conflict , and democracy in africa . boulder , colorado: lynne reinner publishers , 1999 . pakenham , thomas . the scramble for africa , 1876-1912 . new york: random house , 1991 . these wereexchanged with farmers for grains and otheressentials . ( 6 ) large towns and cities had notdeveloped , probably because large settlements were likely to be struck down by the parasites and otherdisease - causing organisms that had evolved with homo sapiens in africa . ( 7 ) human populations outside africa , by contrast , had largely escaped thesediseasesand hence could more easily build cities .