withdrawal. ( 59 ) he , and others , noted that russia had convinced the united states to continue negotiations onreductions in strategic offensive forces , which represented a significant achievement for russian diplomacy . furthermore , defense minister sergei ivanov notedthat the u.s. missile defense system did not yet exist and , therefore , there was no reason for russia to retaliate . ( 60 ) the russian duma , on the other hand , criticized the u.s. withdrawal , calling it a "gross political mistake" and proposed that , in response , russia "declare itselffree from its commitments under the start ii treaty. ( 61 ) the russian government took this step on june 13 , 2002 , when the foreign ministry issued astatement saying that russia no longer felt bound by the treaty . ( 62 ) this step , however , was largely symbolic . officials in both the u.s. and russian governmentshave indicated that the treaty has been set aside ; they acknowledged its absence when they referred to the starti treaty as "start" in the text of the newstrategic offensive reductions treaty . hence , although russian officials criticized u.s. missile defense plans and promised to take military and diplomatic steps in response to the u.s. withdrawal fromthe abm treaty , the russian reaction when the event occurred was far less aggressive . the changes in theinternational security environment , and the continuingimprovements in the u.s - russian relationship , had essentially buried the debate over the abm treaty . he said that the u.s.withdrawal would not create any problems forrussia's military security for 10-15 years . he also supported the negotiation of a new strategic framework , arguingthat it "would be extremely undesirable toremain in a legal vacuum on strategic stability matters for a long time. ( 57 ) some in russia , however , offered a more negative response . the dumaapproved aresolution that called the u.s. withdrawal "mistaken and destabilizing. ( 58 ) by the time the u.s. withdrawal took effect , on june 13 , 2002 , the united states and russia had negotiated a new treaty limiting strategic offensive weapons andthe presidents had signed a joint declaration outlining a new framework for cooperation between the two nations . although some tensions remained in thisrelationship , particularly with respect to russia's nuclear cooperation with iran , cooperation between the two nationscontinued to grow . the u.s. withdrawalfrom the abm treaty no longer seemed like a potentially divisive issue . foreign minister ivanov noted the event,but stated the "the primary aim now is tominimize the negative consequences of the u.s . and russia would retainenough nuclear weapons to saturate the u.s.defenses and threaten the survival of the united states . this debate grew silent in september 2001 , after the terrorist attacks on the world trade center and pentagon . russia's president putin was the first internationalleader to call president bush after the attacks and he quickly offered his support to the u.s. war on terrorism . the clinton administration realized thatits plans for nmd would exceed the limitsimposed by the 1972 anti - ballistic missile treaty between the united states and soviet union .