instead , they are claims on the treasury . they do not affect the government's budget deficit or surplus because no money is received or spent by the government . cash is rarely involved in intragovernmental transfers because individual government agencies , in general , have no cash to spend . what congress appropriates to federal agencies each year is budget authority . budget authority is legal permission for an agency to spend money from the accounts of the u.s. treasury . the treasury takes in money from the public by collecting taxes and by borrowing , and in most cases it is only the treasury that disburses cash to the public . it has been suggested from time to time that the csrdf should be taken "off budget," as has already been done with the financing of social security benefits ( but not social security administrative costs ) . taking an account off budget means that its income and expenditures are not included in calculations of the government's annual budget surplus or deficit . off - budget accounts are portrayed separately in the budget documents prepared by the office of management and budget and the congressional budget office ( cbo ) . however , both omb and cbo also publish unified budget accounts that include social security and other programs that are off budget . this is done because taking an account off budget does not end the activity or remove its effects from the u.s. economy . whether social security—or civil service retirement—is on - budget or off - budget , it still collects revenues from the public , pays benefits to the public , and affects the nation's financial markets by influencing the amount of private capital that is absorbed by government borrowing . taking the csrdf off - budget would not affect the government's revenues or outlays in the unified budget accounts , but it would affect the size of the budget deficit or surplus as portrayed in any budget documents that excluded the csrdf . for example , employee contributions to csrs and fers that are now counted as revenue to the treasury would not be treated as revenue if they were paid to an off - budget csrdf . the money that federal agencies now send to the trust fund in the form of intragovernmental transfers would instead be recorded as outlays , and would therefore increase the government's reported budget deficit or reduce the budget surplus in the year that the transfer occurs rather than in the future when benefits are paid . the outlays made by the fund to pay civil service annuitants would not appear at all in the federal budget . the net effect of these changes if the csrdf had been off - budget in fy2018 would have been an increase of about $17.6 billion in the government's reported budget deficit , even though the amount of money collected from the public and the amount of money paid to civil service annuitants would have been no different than under current law . one purpose of the federal budget is to show whether the government's revenues and outlays are in balance or out of balance . therefore , taking any account off - budget distorts the picture of the government's fiscal condition .