in addition to a general legalization program , p.l . 99-603 included two industry - specific legalization programs — the special agricultural worker ( saw ) program and the replenishment agricultural worker ( raw ) program — that were intended to compensate for the act's expected impact on the farm labor supply and encourage the development of a legal crop workforce . these provisions of the act have not operated in the offsetting manner that was intended , however , as substantial numbers of unauthorized aliens have continued to join legal farm workers in performing seasonal agricultural services ( sas ) . on the basis of case studies that it sponsored , the commission on agricultural workers concluded in its 1992 report that individuals legalized under the saw program and other farm workers planned to remain in the agricultural labor force "indefinitely , or for as long as they are physically able. according to the dol's national agricultural workers survey , two - thirds of so - called saws stated that they intended to engage in field work until the end of their working lives . for many saws , the end of their worklives — at least their worklives in farming — may now be near at hand . the diminished physical ability generally associated with aging in combination with the taxing nature of crop tasks could well be prompting greater numbers of saws to leave the fields . the commission on agricultural workers noted that the typical saw in 1990 was a 30-year - old male who "is likely to remain in farm work well into the 21 st century," but dol estimated the average age of saw - legalized workers in 2007 was 47 . growers counter that they would rather not employ unauthorized workers because doing so puts them at risk of incurring penalties . they argue that the considerable presence of unauthorized aliens in the u.s. farm labor force implies a shortage of legal workers . farm worker groups and some policy analysts contend that even if the previously mentioned dhs and ssa activities were to deprive farmers of many of their unauthorized workers , the industry could adjust to a smaller supply of legal workers by ( 1 ) introducing labor - efficient technologies and management practices , and ( 2 ) raising wages which , in turn , would entice more authorized workers into the farm labor force . the perception that government actions negatively affect u.s. agriculture has prompted a legislative response in the past . this report first examines the composition of the seasonal agricultural labor force and presents the arguments of grower and farm worker advocates concerning its adequacy relative to employer demand . in response , farm worker supporters note that wages are a small part of the price consumers pay for fresh fruits and vegetables and accordingly , higher wages would result in only a slight rise in retail prices . these remain untested arguments as perishable crop growers have rarely , if ever , had to operate without unauthorized aliens in their workforces . trends in the farm labor market generally do not suggest the existence of a nationwide shortage of domestically available farm workers , in part because the government's statistical series cover authorized and unauthorized workers .