there they regrouped . australian and new zealand militaryintelligencereportedly believe the hard core strength of the militia groups is no more than several hundred ; but they also havea broaderbase of followers of 1,000-2,000 . ( 2 ) after their withdrawal , the militia usedtheir control over the east timorese refugeecamps in west timor to recruit new members . they also reorganized and rearmed reportedly with direct aid fromelementswithin the tni , including the elite special forces ( kopassus ) . by mid - 2000 , the militia groups were armed withstandardtni automatic weapons and grenades and tni combat clothing . ( 3 ) after the murder of u.n. workers by militia members in september 2000 , president wahid ordered the tni to send moretroops to west timor "to help control the situation. the tni responded with the dispatch of three army battalionstotaling800 troops . nevertheless , wahid's order appears to have had no appreciable impact on militia activities . the tnihas notused force against the militia groups . as the militia groups revived in west timor , they began to infiltrate members back into east timor . their aim appears tobe to re - establish a presence and be able to challenge east timor's civil authorities when the untaet ends andeasttimor becomes independent . a spokesman for the u.n. peacekeeping force stated in september 2000 that tenwell - armedmilitia groups , of 5 to 30 men each , had infiltrated . at least one group had reached the central region of east timor . several clashes occurred with australian , new zealand , and nepalese peacekeepers patrolling the border with westtimor . ( 4 ) australian foreign minister alexander downer and u.s.ambassador to indonesia , robert gelbard , accused thetni of supporting the militia buildup and infiltrations . gelbard warned that "by abetting the militias [the indonesiangovernment] is on the verge of allowing a guerrilla war to be waged in east timor. ( 5 ) statements by militia leaders alsosuggested that they hope that control of refugees and the threat of armed infiltration would give them negotiatingleveragewith the future east timor government to bargain for an amnesty for the crimes committed in 1999 . the peacekeeping force of 8,000 has had about 2,200 troops , mainly australians and new zealanders , deployed along thenearly 150 mile border between east and west timor . the remainder are located in the central and eastern regionsof easttimor . the australians and new zealanders adopted more aggressive patrolling in the summer of 2000 , resultinginincreased armed clashes with the infiltrators . there were complaints in the summer of 2000 that the over 1,000 manportuguese force in the central sector was not patrolling aggressively to locate infiltrators that had reached thatarea . ( 6 ) aggressive patrolling appears to be necessary , given the apparent militia strategy to establish base areas and waituntil theunited nations , including the peacekeepers , depart . some u.n. officers believe the peacekeepers need more mobileequipment , including helicopters , to deal with the infiltration . a continued existence of large numbers of forcibly held east timorese and a continued base of operations for the militiagroups in west timor likely would result in a tense and possibly hostile relationship between east timor andindonesiaafter east timor becomes independent .