presence. prior to september 11 , 2001 , the united states fostered military - to - military cooperation through nato's pfp , which all the central asian states except tajikistan had joined by mid - 1994 . similar legislation was sponsored in the house by representative benjamin gilman ( 105 th ) and representative doug bereuter ( 106 th ) . in introducing the silk road act in the 106 th congress , senator brownback pointed out that the central asian and south caucasian states are "caught between world global forces that seek to have them under their control. to counter such forces , he argued , the united states should emphasize democratization , the creation of free markets , and the development of energy and trade with the region to bolster its independence and pro - western orientations . the silk road language was eventually enacted by reference in h.r . 3194 ( istook ) , consolidated appropriations act for fy2000 , and signed into law on november 29 , 1999 ( p.l . the silk road language calls for enhanced policy and aid to support conflict amelioration , humanitarian needs , economic development , transport ( including energy pipelines ) and communications , border controls , democracy , and the creation of civil societies in the south caucasian and central asian states . many u.s. policymakers argue that u.s. and other western aid and investment strengthen the independence of the states and forestall russian , iranian , and chinese attempts to dominate the region . some observers warn that a more authoritarian russia might seek to reabsorb central asia into a new empire . others , however , discount such plans by a russia facing immense internal economic , political , ethnic , and military disorder , but nonetheless endorse close monitoring of russian activities that might infringe on the independence of the soviet successor states . some appear to acquiesce to russia's argument of historic rights to a "sphere of influence" in central asia that provides a reduced scope for u.s. involvement . according to some observers , u.s. policy should focus more clearly on refereeing russian , iranian , and chinese influence in the region , since these states are bound to play roles in the region , with the aim of maximizing the independence of the central asian states and protecting u.s. interests . u.s. interests may correspond to other outside states' interests in political and economic stability and improved transport in the region , so that the coordination of some activities in the region becomes possible . alternatively , u.s. interests might conflict with those of russia , iran , or china , leading to compromises , tradeoffs , or deadlock . the u.s. interest in restricting iran's financial ability to sponsor international terrorism , for instance , may conflict with central asian - iranian energy cooperation . u.s. - iranian rapprochement might contribute to a less hostile iranian attitude toward u.s. regional investment . poor u.s. - iranian relations and questions about russia's role contributed to u.s. support for the btc pipeline and the scp .