, their relative gdp ) . in 1955 , nato determined that each country's future contribution would be based on its average past expenditures for the civil and military budgets , and also agreed not to continue to review cost shares annually . how have these national shares been determined in the past ? the 2001 nato handbook noted that [b]y convention , the agreed cost - sharing formulae which determine each member country's contributions are deemed to represent each country's "ability to pay" . however the basis for the formulae applied is as much political as it is economic . in may 1998 , the u.s. government accountability office ( gao ) , responding to a congressional request , issued a report on the history and apportionment of nato common funds shares . according to gao , nato cost shares had not been reviewed regularly , but had been changed in response to requests from individual member states , or to major events , such as changes in membership . like all nato decisions , burdensharing arrangements are based upon members' consensus . nato has revised relative member contributions based on "event - driven" changes . the gao cited the following: ( 1 ) the 1966 french withdrawal from the military command , described below ; ( 2 ) the admission of spain in 1982 ( to which could be added the more recent enlargements in 1999 , 2004 , and 2009 ) , for which shares were renegotiated among all members ; and ( 3 ) canada's 1994 unilateral 50% reduction of its nsip contribution , for which several european member countries agreed to defray the cost among themselves . in addition to changes caused by specific events , the alliance has periodically subjected shares to comprehensive reviews . in the early years of nato , the alliance agreed to split up members' shares by grouping countries according to their economic strength , and then assigned members within the different groups identical shares , referencing those countries' contributions to the united nations . in 1952 , the three largest member states ( the united states , the united kingdom [u.k.] , and france ) each paid 22.5% of the budget , while the other nine founding member countries ( plus greece and turkey , which joined in february 1952 ) were assessed according to their ability to pay ( i.e. since then , relative shares of the civil account have remained unchanged . the military account was revisited in 1965 , when the u.k. requested a review of that budget to take into account changed relative economic conditions among member states . the following year , france withdrew from the nato military structure , and reduced its contributions ( since made on a unilateral , ad hoc basis ) ; this change was accommodated by prorating shares among the other members . the net effect of both the british - requested review and the partial french pullout was a small redistribution of shares of the military budget . shares of the nsip account have been examined somewhat more frequently . the changes have been made through negotiations , but the complete rationales behind the share revisions have not been made public .