amendment no . 2981 , sponsored by senator james inhofe , would haverestricted the administration from closing bases with 225 or more civilian personnel ( a reductionfrom the current threshold of 300 set in law ) . it would also have restricted the pentagon fromrealigning bases with 750 civilian personnel , or more than "40% of the total number of civilianpersonnel authorized to be employed at such military installation. further , the amendment wouldhave prevented the pentagon from closing a base within four years after completing a realignmentof such base . the intent of this provision was to delay , if not block , the department of defense fromquickly moving to close a particular base by reducing the number of civilian employees to less than225 . in addition , the inhofe amendment expressed congressional opposition to any new rounds ofclosures and realignments until all actions from previous rounds had been completed . the inhofe amendment was dropped from the fy1999 defense authorization bill during conference . the congressional budget office submitted its review of dod's base realignment and closurereport on july 1 , 1998 . ( 21 ) it stated that the reportprovided most , but not all , of the information thatthe congress had requested . it found dod's estimates of savings from previous closure rounds , asfully implemented , consistent with its own estimates: $5.6 billion as compared to $5 billion . however , cbo explained that the firm measures of brac savings requested by the congress "donot - - and cannot exist. it elaborated , as follows: brac savings are really avoided costs - - costs that dod would have incurred if brac actions had not taken place . because those avoided costs arenot actual expenditures , dod cannot observe them and record them in its financial records . as aresult , dod can only estimate savings rather than actually measurethem . in its review , cbo observed that dod's report had provided a clear and coherent summary of why future base closure rounds would produce significant savings . it noted , however , that dodprovided "little analysis of those data or insight into the number and types of installations that mightbe closed in the event of future brac rounds. other significant cbo findings included: an analysis of the likely impact of future base closures on local communities cannot be attempted until the specific communities are identified ; even then,it would be very difficult to do . dod was unable to locate some of the requested data , including the original cost and savings estimates that it gave to the braccommissions . estimates of brac costs and savings would be more accurate if they included [dod's] environmental and caretaker costs for some bases after thesix - year implementation period is over . the general accounting office submitted its review of dod's report on november 13 , 1998 . ( 22 ) it was longer and provided more supporting detail than the cbo review . gao gave dod generallygood grades . it said that , overall , dod had provided most of the information required by section2824 . gao affirmed that the four previous brac closure rounds would result in substantial netsavings .