or do we know ? myers: it's not necessarily true . what we know is that a center barrel costs about $5 million . and a center barrel is going to be required on the earlier lot aircraft , meaning lot 16 and earlier . what we know is that the inner wing could cost as much as $4 million or $5 million . what we know is that the inner wing is a focus area of the aircraft that have gone through the depot , in terms of the additional hot spots we're focused — but what we don't know is whether or not all of the aircraft that go through are going to need all of those repairs . so it could be expensive , and it might not . and right now , that's what the second phase... akin: so we don't have a current cost estimate of what it would take — if we wanted to extend the service life on them ? we don't really know what that number is , is what you're saying ? depends on the individual plane — is that what you're basically saying ? myers: yes , sir . it depends on the plane . we have programmed some monies , because we do know about the center barrel replacements . and the analysis that will go on through the summer , and is expected to finish in the march 2010 timeframe , is set to be a palm ( ph ) 12 [sic: pom 12] issue , and that's the way we've set up the analysis — to feed into palm ( ph ) 12 [sic: pom 12] . and that would be — give us enough time to buy the equipment and make sure that we programmed in place everything we need in the depots or the slep [service life extension program] . akin: i think the navy has completed its analysis of the benefits of the multiyear procurement of the f - 18as . what's the minimum number of aircraft required to be purchased over the contract period that would result in a savings of at least 10 percent , as required by law ? is there some particular number that you've got to get ? because we saved , what , a billion dollars on that before on multi - year two ? architzel: sir , if i could take that question . that's funded in the budget when we go forward . that runs at about , just for the center build , about $2.5 billion — $2.5 million excuse me . so if you would then add in... akin: ok . so $2.5 million for a center barrel and then you've got the — let's say you had to do the wings . architzel: well , the number i have is 2.5 , and so we'll have to get back to you then . they're being quoted 4.5 here so — but the center if you hit the wing sections and the center fill , it's just about $5 million for those . now as general trautman says , if you take wings off an existing aircraft , ( inaudible ) you still have to rework those wings .