these include e.o . 12844 , which urged federal agencies to exceed epactpurchase requirements ; e.o . 13031 , which required that federal agencies meet epact requirementsregardless of budget ; and e.o . 13149 , which aims to drastically reduce federal governmentpetroleum consumption through the use of afvs and hybrid vehicles . the major alternative fuelslegislation and relevant executive orders are summarized in table 1 and discussed further below . is there any practical replacement for gasoline and diesel fuel in automobiles ? since the oilcrises of the 1970s and the rise in the awareness of environmental and security issues , policy makershave often considered this question . for many reasons , the united states has searched foralternatives to petroleum fuels . these reasons include limiting dependence on imported petroleum,controlling the emissions of pollutants into the air , and limiting the emissions of greenhouse gases . several fuels are considered alternative transportation fuels by the federal government . these fuels are electricity , natural gas , propane ( liquefied petroleum gas , or lpg ) , ethanol , methanol,biodiesel , and hydrogen . some of these fuels are similar to conventional fuels , and can be used inconventional vehicles with little or no modification to the vehicle . however , some of these fuels aresignificantly different , and require the use of completely different engine , fuel , and drive systems . consequently , cost as well as performance of the associated alternative fuel vehicles ( afvs ) mustbe part of the discussion . key factors in the ultimate success or failure of any alternative fuel includethe relative cost of the fuel , the ability to develop and expand fueling stations , and the performanceand safety of the fuel . for various reasons - - notably cost , performance , and availability - - alternative fuels have yet to play a major transportation role in the united states . many argue that the government must stepin . congress , recent administrations , and state governments have instituted some key programs topromote the use of alternative fuels . these programs include tax incentives for the purchase ofalternative fuels and alternative fuel vehicles ( afvs ) , purchase requirements for government andprivate fleets , and research grants for the study of alternative fuels . despite these efforts , only about480 million gallons ( 1 ) of alternative fuels wereconsumed in 2004 , just 0.3% of motor fuel demand ( 136 billion gallons of gasoline and 36 billion gallons of diesel ) . the three most important statutes concerning alternative fuels are the alternative motor fuelsact of 1988 ( amfa , p.l . 100-494 ) , the clean air act amendments of 1990 ( caaa , p.l . 101-549 ) ,and the energy policy act of 1992 ( epact , p.l . amfa promoted federal governmentuse of alcohol - and natural gas - fueled vehicles . epact requires that federal and state agencies , aswell as private firms that distribute alternative fuels , must purchase for their fleets a certainproportion of vehicles that are capable of being fueled by specific non - petroleum fuels . furthermore,epact grants the department of energy ( doe ) the authority to make similar requirements of localgovernments and private fleets .