appendix a . membership on the senate select committee on standards and conduct , 1965-1976 created in the 89 th congress ( 1965-1966 ) , a total of 14 senators served on the senate select committee on standards and conduct prior to its being disbanded with the creation of the senate select committee on ethics in the 95 th congress ( 1977-1978 ) . table a - 1 provides a list of all members who served on the senate select committee on standards and conduct , their party affiliation , and their state . majority party members are listed first . pursuant to s.res . 338 ( 88 th congress ) , the select committee on standards and conduct was given the authority to ( 1 ) investigate allegations of improper conduct which may reflect upon the senate ; ( 2 ) investigate violations of laws , rules , and regulations of the senate relating to the conduct of members , officers , and employees in their official duties ; ( 3 ) recommend disciplinary action , when appropriate ; and ( 4 ) recommend additional senate rules to insure proper conduct . following the creation of the select committee on ethics , the senate adopted s.res . 110 ( 95 th congress ) and transferred the jurisdiction of the former select committee on standards and conduct and made the new committee responsible for enforcing and interpreting the senate code of official conduct . procedures for the select committee on ethics are established pursuant to s.res . 338 ( 88 th congress ) , as amended ; p.l . 400 ( 94 th congress ) ; and 5 u.s.c . section 7342 . 110 amended s.res . 338 , the 1964 resolution that created the procedures of the select committee on standards and conduct , which became the select committee on ethics . the amendments required the select committee to receive complaints and investigate alleged violations of the senate code of official conduct and to publish necessary regulations to implement the code . title ii also required the publishing of advisory opinions in the congressional record , if requested by specified individuals . appendix b . membership on the senate select committee on ethics , 1977-2019 created in the 95 th congress ( 1977-1978 ) , the senate select committee on ethics has had a total of 57 different members . table b - 1 provides a list of all members who have served on the senate select committee on ethics , their party affiliation , and their state . majority party members are listed first . the ethics committee may initiate an inquiry or investigate allegations brought by senators , senate officers , senate staff , or outside individuals and groups . while the committee does not have formal procedural requirements for filing a complaint , the committee can issue public statements regarding a specific inquiry . if the committee chooses not to issue a public statement , all allegations are treated confidentially and the committee has a practice of neither confirming nor denying that a matter is before the committee . no action was taken on senator morse's proposal . in 1958 , congress established the first code of ethics for government service ( code of ethics ) .