rev . kim is said to have told his coworkers on that day that he would go out for lunch with two north korean defectors . citing the report in dong - a ibo , a seoul daily ( february 3 , 2000 ) , seoul's yonhap news agency reported that those defectors were actually north korean agents disguised as defectors and that ten people were involved in rev . kim's kidnapping . in october 2000 , south korea's national intelligence service reportedly confirmed that rev . kim was kidnapped by north koreans in yanbian , china , on february 1 , 2000 . in october 2000 , south korea's national intelligence service reportedly confirmed that rev . kim was kidnapped by north koreans in yanbian , china , on february 1 , 2000 . 03 / 2000 — on march 9 , north korea rejected a u.s. request that it stop providing shelter to members of the now - defunct japanese communist league - red army faction , who had hijacked a japanese airliner to pyongyang in 1970 ( see 03 / 1970 above ) , and expel or deport those members still in the north . in a statement carried by the official kcna news agency , north korea claimed , "it is the sovereign state's legitimate right recognized by international law to protect members of the japanese 'red army' who sought political asylum in the dprk , and nobody can put his nose into this issue. a state department counter - terrorism expert was reported as saying that sheltering hijackers remained a serious offence , even if they had not carried out acts of violence for years . 03 / 2000 — on march 23 , north korea unilaterally declared new navigation "zones and waterways" in the yellow sea in disputed waters near the northern limit line ( nll ) , which the united states - led united nations command has maintained as a de facto sea border between the two koreas since august 30 , 1953 . the declaration covers waters near five south korea - held islands , all located west and south of the nll but within north korea's claimed territorial waters . it would allow passage by south korean ships near , to and from , the islands but only within and through the north korean - designated zones and waterways . north korea threatened military action against intruders "without warnings. south korea responded that pyongyang's violation of the nll would constitute "a provocation" and reaffirmed its resolve to "defend" the sea border 07 / 2000 — through its radio pyongyang broadcast beamed to south korea , north korea threatened to "blow up" ( p ' okp ' a ) the conservative mass - circulation daily choson ilbo for "slandering our republic" by claiming that the korean war was started by a southward invasion of north korea . north korea argued that the newspaper's action , harmful to national unity and reunification , "is not a matter of freedom of the press but of high treason. 07 / 2000 — north korea assailed south korea's opposition leader , lee hoi - chang , as "an anti - reunification element...a traitor , a fool , and an imbecile.