the report will be revised as events warrant . the united states has been a strong advocate for the construction of close economic ties among the west european countries since the end of world war ii . in 2012 , the eu accounted for $265.1 billion of total u.s. exports ( or 17.1% ) and for $380.8 billion of total u.s. imports ( or 16.7% ) for a u.s. trade deficit of $115.7 billion . at the same time , the united states is the largest non - eu trading partner of the eu as a whole . in 2012 , eu exports to the united states accounted for 17.1% of total exports to non - eu countries , while eu imports from the united states accounted for 11.4% of total imports from non - eu countries . for a number of years , the united states realized trade surpluses with the eu . however , since 1993 , the united states has been incurring growing trade deficits with the eu ( $125.1 billion in 2013 ) . among the top u.s. exports to the eu have been aircraft and machinery of various kinds , including computers , integrated circuits , and office machine parts . as a result , u.s. - eu trade tends to be intra - industry trade ; that is , trade in similar products , such as cars and computers , dominates two - way trade flows . furthermore , the united states and the eu have advanced and integrated financial sectors which facilitate large volumes of capital flows across the atlantic . these capital flows account for a significant portion of the bilateral economic activity . the dominance of security and defense matters is another factor influencing u.s. - eu ties . twenty - two of the eu - 28 are members of nato , and represent an overwhelming majority of nato's 28 members . nato members must deal with a number of issues that pertain to foreign trade , such as defense - related government procurement , product standardization , controls of exports of dual - use technologies and related products , and economic sanctions . national security and foreign policy concerns strongly dominated the u.s. - european relationship during the cold war . the 159-member wto ( and its predecessor , the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) ) is a critical part of the eu - u.s. bilateral economic framework . the wto provides the principles and rules under which the united states and the eu conduct much of their trade . the basic principles of most - favored - nation ( mfn ) , or nondiscriminatory , treatment and of national treatment of imports of goods and services and of foreign investments , along with wto rules on trade - related intellectual property rights , investment , and trade remedy practices ( antidumping and countervailing duties and safeguards ) , are the foundation of u.s. and european trade and investment policies . the wto also provides the mechanism by which the united states and the eu resolve many of their bilateral trade disputes . to a lesser extent , the oecd is an important element in the u.s. - eu framework .