its capital is agana . in 1968 , the island was allowed to elect its own governor ; in 1972 , to elect a non - voting delegate to the u.s. congress . prior to world war ii , socio - economic and cultural conditions in guam were quite different from those of the united states or other industrialized countries . through the years , the insular labor force and wage structure appear to have remained multi - tiered with separate rates for alien workers imported from the philippines , for native guamanians , for americans recruited on guam , and for american workers recruited from the states . when the civil government was established ( 1950 ) , colonial administration appears to have been somewhat chaotic . one observer stated , for example: "... existing laws represented a hodge - podge of rules , regulations , laws , naval expressions of policy , and letters and other documents having the force and effect of law. as a "territory or possession" of the united states , guam was covered under the original flsa ; but , it seems that the statute was not enforced there . thus , for these several reasons , guamanian employers do not appear to have been involved in discussions during 1939 and 1940 which led congress to alter the act with respect to puerto rico and the virgin islands . guam , of that period , was simply too far removed from washington to be really at issue . with the war in the pacific , guam became immediately of interest . the island was occupied by the japanese from late 1941 until 1944 . when the united states reclaimed the island , much of its infrastructure appears to have been devastated . much of the economy fell under government control and regulation . there was a significantly expanded post - war military population that was not native to the island — plus a major population of filipinos brought into the island by american contractors . the case for enforcement of federal minimum wage standards in guam was strengthened with the 1948 decision of the u.s. supreme court in vermilya - brown co. , inc. , et al . v. connell et al . although at issue was the application of the flsa to employees of american contractors engaged in the construction of a military facility for the united states in bermuda ( part of great britain ) , there were clear implications for guam . the court identified a "possession" covered under the act as including "puerto rico , guam , the guano islands , samoa and the virgin islands. in dissent in vermilya - brown , further , justice jackson suggested that the situation of a u.s. facility in bermuda was of a character different from that of "our possessions" as enumerated by the court's majority . in addition , with adoption of an organic act for guam in 1950 , a commission established to review the application of federal laws to the island found that flsa applicability to guam was "indisputable , particularly in view of the recent decision" in vermilya - brown .