policy toward china . ( 269 ) still other critics pointed out that prc espionage and china's military had and will continueto challenge u.s. interests and the question was not whether the united states needed to remainengaged with china - - as the president said , but how that long - standing policy of engagement wascarried out . that could reach the united states . china has developed a newdf - 31 solid - fuel , mobile icbm , with a range of about 5,000 miles , reportedly with a smallerwarhead ( 700 kg ; 1,500 lb. ) than the df - 5a icbms . in addition , china has pursued programs todevelop a next - generation jl - 2 slbm and a longer - range icbm . congress has voiced long - standing concerns about security at the nuclear weapon labs . someattention focused on the foreign visitor program , which was reportedly not the primary concern inthe public cases involving alleged leaks by u.s. scientists to china . in 1988 , senator john glenn,chairman of the senate governmental affairs committee , held a hearing , and the generalaccounting office ( gao ) presented a report on the extent to which foreign nationals work at thenuclear weapon labs and the effectiveness of security checks there . senator glenn also said that backin october 1979 , his committee began to examine access by foreign visitors to mistakenlydeclassified documents at the public library at the los alamos lab . ( 41 ) later , the house national security committee requested in may 1996 that the gao againstudy controls over foreign visitors at the labs . ( 42 ) in october 1998 , congressman hunter held a hearing on doe'sforeign visitor program . ( 43 ) the national defense authorization act for fy1997 ( p.l . 104-201 ) prohibited doe fromusing funds for cooperative activities with china related to nuclear weapons or nuclear weaponstechnology , including stockpile stewardship , safety , and use control . ( stockpile stewardship relatesto the evaluation of nuclear weapons without testing. ) the national defense authorization act forfy1998 ( p.l . 105-85 ) banned the doe's use of funds for activities with china in cooperativestockpile stewardship , and similar legislation for fy1999 ( p.l . 105-261 ) made the ban permanent . the los alamos controversy led to several reassessments and to consideration ofintelligence - related legislation . ( 255 ) as discussed above , the intelligence community undertookan assessment of potential damage to national security from possible leaks of nuclear weaponssecrets . dci tenet asked a group of outside experts headed by retired admiral david jeremiah,former vice chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , to review the in - house effort , and they concurredwith its judgments . ( 261 ) china's nuclearweapon installations were reorganized as part of changes in the defense industrial sector in 1998 thatincluded the civilianization of the commission of science , technology , and industry for nationaldefense ( costind ) solely under the state council . prc nuclear weapon facilities then becamepartly subordinated to the people's liberation army ( pla ) 's general equipment department thatwas set up in april 1998 to centralize and improve control over research and development,production , and deployment of weapons .