at best , opponents can become supporters . this provision has its origin in the history of the cloture rule . before 1975 , two - thirds of the senators present and voting ( a quorum being present ) was required for cloture on all matters . in early 1975 , at the beginning of the 94 th congress , senators sought to amend the rule to make it somewhat easier to invoke cloture . if the bill is particularly important to the nation and to the majority party's legislative agenda , for example , the majority leader may be willing to invest the days or even weeks that can be necessary to withstand and ultimately end a filibuster . another consideration is the point in the annual session and in the biennial life of a congress at which a filibuster takes place . in the first months of the first session , for example , there may be relatively little business that is ready for senate floor consideration . in that case , the senate may be able to endure an extended filibuster without sacrificing its ability to act in a timely way on other legislation . does the senate meet late into the evening , or all night , or on the weekend , in order to consume both 30-hour periods more quickly than it otherwise would ? can unanimous consent be obtained to run the clock when the senate is not considering the bill or is not in session ? although the actual time consumed varies from case to case , clearly filibusters can create significant delays , even when there are 60-vote majorities to invoke cloture . how much delay the senate experiences depends in part on how much time the senate , and especially its majority party leadership , is prepared to devote to the bill in question . toward the end of each session , however , and especially as the senate approaches sine die adjournment at the end of the second session , time becomes increasingly scarce and precious . every hour and every day of floor time that one bill consumes is time that is not available for the senate to act on other measures that will die if not enacted into law before the end of the congress . therefore , the costs of filibusters increase because their effects on the legislative prospects of other bills become greater and greater . however much effect filibusters have on the operations of the senate , perhaps a more pervasive effect is attributable to filibusters that have not taken place — at least not yet . in many instances , cloture motions may be filed not to overcome filibusters in progress , but to preempt ones that are only anticipated . also , the prospect of a filibuster often affects when or whether the senate will consider a measure on the floor , and how the senate will consider it . a senator who does not want the senate to consider a certain measure , whether temporarily or permanently , could monitor the senate floor and then object if and when the majority leader proposes to call up the question for consideration .