croson and co . this may be due , in part , to the fact that employment preferences are frequently , though not always , linked to settlements of individual or class action lawsuits . depending on the stage of proceedings , a formal record of past discrimination may already have developed when agreement is reached . at the very least , there is usually some allegation of misconduct by the public employer . in addition , there may be underlying judicial findings of discrimination or district court involvement in fashioning or approving the consent decree , both of which are factors traditionally prompting deference by appellate courts when reviewing affirmative action efforts . between 1972 and 1983 , the department of justice sued 106 public employers ; of those , 93 were settled by consent decree . these court - approved agreements typically set goals and timetables for increasing minority and female under - representation in the workforce . of the cases that the justice department still monitors , many stem from litigation dating back to the 1970s , mainly against police and fire departments . under croson and , subsequently , adarand constructors , inc. v. pena , however , these orders and consent decrees have come under "strict scrutiny. for example , a major ruling by the eleventh circuit in 1994 invalidated a consent decree involving the birmingham , alabama fire department for being an "entirely arbitrary" fixed quota that unduly restricted opportunities for whites , and judicial rulings in boston forced abandonment of a 1980 consent decree , which established a race - based policy for promoting sergeants . indeed , a number of cities and states have successfully fought consent decrees and ended federal monitoring of their minority hiring practices . in 1999 , the supreme court declined to review a fifth circuit decision striking down the dallas fire department's affirmative action plan . in city of dallas v. dallas fire fighters association , the appellate panel held that there was insufficient evidence of past discrimination in the dallas fire department to justify the department's policy of promoting some women and minorities over white males who had achieved scores within the same "band" on a civil service examination . evidence of discrimination in the record consisted of a 1976 consent decree between the city and the justice department finding impermissible racial discrimination by the city under title vii , and statistical underrepresentation of minorities in the ranks to which the challenged promotions were made . the court recognized that "out - of - rank promotions do not impose as great a burden on non - minorities as would layoff or discharge. but it found that interference by the city with "legitimate expectations" of promotion based on exam performance was unjustified where alternative remedies were not yet exhausted , and there was no proof of "a history of egregious and pervasive discrimination or resistance to affirmative action that has warranted more serious measures in other cases. but the lower court's threshold determination that the minority retention program violated equal protection was neither appealed to nor addressed by the federal circuit .