sometimes both factors have contributed to the successful passage and ratification of an amendment . another common element in successful amendments has generally been a widespread public awareness of a problem to be addressed and a broad national consensus that reform was necessary and desirable . moreover , such an awareness has usually extended well beyond congress into the nation at large . for instance , the only previous constitutional revision of the electoral college , the 12 th amendment , was spurred by a profound constitutional crisis , the events surrounding the presidential election of 1800 . "many things" versus "one big thing": which is more likely to prevail ? despite various criticisms and controversies , the electoral college system has endured since the first presidential elections in 1789 . over the past two centuries , it has evolved through the ratification of one constitutional amendment , the 12 th , the passage of various federal and state laws , and changing political party practices and traditions . it has delivered the presidency to the popular and electoral vote winners in 46 out of 51 elections since it became operational in 1804 , and even in the case of "misfires," that is , cases in which a candidate was elected with a majority of electoral votes but a minority of popular votes , the results it has delivered have been widely , if not universally , accepted as legitimate . interest in changing or abolishing the electoral college has arguably been dependent , at least in recent decades , on how accurately it has appeared to ratify the voters' choice . during periods when the system seemed to be performing well , there was relatively little impetus for reform , although , as noted earlier , there was nearly always a steady stream of proposals for change . following close elections in 1960 , 1968 , and 1976 , however , proposed constitutional amendments providing for direct election were actively considered in the house of representatives and the senate in the 91 st through 96 th congresses ; during these periods of heightened interest , a direct popular election amendment was approved in the house in 1969 , and debated , but not approved , in the senate in 1979 . in neither of these instances , however , did the proposals achieve the momentum necessary to hurdle the difficult challenge faced by all would - be constitutional amendments: approval by two - thirds of the members of both chambers present and voting , followed by approval in three - fourths of the states . during the ensuing two decades , the electoral college delivered substantial majorities of electoral votes to the popular vote winners in every presidential election . once again , the system functioned as its defenders predicted , notwithstanding occasional concerns over close elections and the potential impact of independent or third party candidates , and there was little impetus for change during this period . curiously , perhaps , the bitterly contested presidential election of 2000 , which many observers characterized as an electoral college "misfire," failed to galvanize support for direct popular election or electoral college reform .