this provision was added in 1953 . the legislative history of this amendment clearly states that is purpose was to "make it an offense against the united states to display the flag of the united nations or any other national or international flag equal to , above , or in a position of superior prominence or honor to , or in place of , the flag of the united states at any place within the united states or any possession or territory thereof,...." the only exception recognized is at the headquarters of the united nations . when a statute contains apparently contradictory provisions , the rules of statutory construction first mandate an attempt to interpret the provisions so both can be given effect . if this proves futile , the usual rule is to give effect to the latest in time . the reasoning is that this represents the most recent statement of the will of the legislature . following this second rule of construction would lead to the conclusion that flying a flag of another nation at the same height as the flag of the united states may not be proper etiquette under the federal flag code , but this creates no right of action in private individuals . when the united states flag is displayed with the flags of states of the union or municipalities and not with the flags of other nations , the federal flag , which represents all states , should be flown above and at the center of the other flags . where there is only one flag pole , the federal flag should be displayed above state or municipal flags . the flag code addresses the impropriety of using the flag as an article of personal adornment , a design on items of temporary use , and item of clothing . the evident purpose of these suggested restraints is to limit the commercial or common usage of the flag and , thus , maintain its dignity . the 1976 amendments to the code recognized the wearing of a flag patch or pin on the left side ( near the heart ) of uniforms of military personnel , firemen , policemen , and members of patriotic organizations . the code also states that the flag should never be used for advertising purposes in any manner whatsoever . while wearing the colors may be in poor taste and offensive to many , it is important to remember that the flag code is intended as a guide to be followed on a purely voluntary basis to insure proper respect for the flag . it is , at least , questionable whether statutes placing civil or criminal penalties on the wearing of clothing bearing or resembling a flag could be constitutionally enforced in light of supreme court decisions in the area of flag desecration . in the past , the supreme court has held that states may restrict use of pictures of the flag on commercial products . there is a federal criminal prohibition on the use of the flag for advertising purposes in the district of columbia .