if the committee has marked up h.r . a clean bill is a new bill that has a new number instead of h.r . 1 and that typically lists as its sponsor the committee chair , not the member who had introduced h.r . this new bill is known as a clean bill because it incorporates all the amendments that the committee adopted during its markup of h.r . for this reason , the committee reports the new bill without amendment ; in this sense , it is clean . the effect of reporting a clean bill is much the same as reporting the marked - up bill with an amendment in the nature of a substitute . in either case , all the committee's proposed changes in the marked up text are incorporated into a single new text . 1 , and so welcomes the committee's decision to report a clean bill instead of reporting h.r . 1 with a committee substitute . in other cases , the chair may prefer a clean bill in order to have his or her name most closely associated with it . technically , the committee must have the clean bill in its possession before it can vote to order the bill reported . this means that , at the conclusion of the markup , the marked - up text must be prepared as a bill , it must be introduced while the house is in session , and the newly introduced , clean bill must be numbered and referred back to the committee before the committee may act on it . in the past , committees sometimes short - circuited this process if no one objected . immediately after the committee completed its markup , it authorized the chair to report the clean bill . so long as the clean bill was introduced on that same calendar day , the official records of the house's proceedings did not indicate whether the clean bill actually was introduced and referred to committee before or after the committee's markup ended . immediately after the committee votes to order the bill reported , the ranking minority member or another minority party member usually claims the right for all committee members to submit their own supplemental , minority , or dissenting views for printing as part of the committee's report on the bill . clause 2 ( l ) of rule xi provides: if at the time of approval of a measure or matter by a committee ( other than the committee on rules ) a member of the committee gives notice of intention to file supplemental , minority , additional , or dissenting views for inclusion in the report to the house thereon , that member shall be entitled to not less than two additional calendar days after the day of such notice ( excluding saturdays , sundays , and legal holidays except when the house is in session on such a day ) to file such views , in writing and signed by that member , with the clerk of the committee .