table 1 . imf purchases by major crisis countries , 1995-99 ( percent of total imf purchases or draws by fiscal year ) source: international monetary fund , annual report , various years . * includes all supplemental reserve fund commitments beginning in 1998 ; does not include prgfconcessional loanfacility data . if the mission of the imf were to be defined by its lending portfolio , table 1 would suggestthat its primary purpose is tolend to countries with major currency crises rather than those with short - term , non - crisis balance of paymentsproblems . among the fundamental questions that have arisen from this global posture of the imf are: is the fund "succeeding"inmeeting its core mission of supporting international financial stability , and does the expectation that crisis lendingwilloccur contribute to the possibility of future runs on currencies ? ( 9 ) the treasury report expresses the need to evaluate imfreform in the context of how it can be done best to ensure that global economic challenges are met that are "criticalto u.s.interests. this perspective is decidedly different from others regarding how to assess benefits and direction of imfreform . although the u.s. treasury makes its own detailed recommendations , they would not result in anysignificantchanges from the way the imf operates today based on continuing reform efforts largely designed with u.s.influence . treasury is sympathetic to the call for developing countries to improve their financial sectors , to become more transparentin reporting financial and economic data , to adopt exchange rate regimes and the related policies that lend credibilityandstability to their economies , and to improve market incentives and avoid undue use of the imf . treasury disagreeswith themeltzer commission's strategy for achieving these goals . treasury's central concern is that the recommendationswouldnot allow the imf to respond to future financial crises adequately , perhaps deepening and protracting their effectsabroadand in the united states , as stated in its summary of the meltzer commission report: the majority report outlines a set of recommendations for reform of the imf that would fundamentally change the nature ofthe institution . the main objective of the commission's proposals is to limit imf lending to very short - term,essentiallyunconditional liquidity support for a limited number of relatively strong emerging market economies that wouldprequalifyfor imf assistance . ( 10 ) the treasury finds fault with this approach suggesting that: 1 ) it would potentially restrict the imf from responding tofinancial emergencies in many large countries that did not prequalify , including the weaker countries that needassistancemost , perhaps aggravating broader systemic problems ; 2 ) prequalification criteria are too narrow , focusing onfinancialsector issues , which alone are not sufficient to "significantly reduce" risk of crisis ; 3 ) prequalified lending couldincreaserather than decrease moral hazard if countries targeted policy reform for the express purpose of meeting only imfguidelines ; 4 ) eliminating conditions for lending would reduce leverage for policy change , as well as increase thepossibility of financial assistance being misused ; 5 ) very short loan maturities and excessive interest penalties wouldforcerepayment prematurely at excessive cost , worsening borrowing countries already tenuous financial position ; and6 ) eliminating poverty assistance lending would remove imf and its macroeconomic expertise from the developmentadjustment process involving the international financial institutions .