icoc . on november 25 , 2002 , icoc wasinaugurated at the hague , the netherlands . the icoc , like the mtcr , is not a treaty but instead aset of "fundamental behavioral norms and a framework for cooperation to address missileproliferation. the icoc focuses on addressing the demand side of proliferation and is viewed ascomplementing the supply side oriented mtcr . it seeks to achieve transparency by usingconfidence building measures , such as information transfer on ballistic missile programs . it alsocalls for pre - launch notification of ballistic missile flight tests . unlike the mtcr , the icoc intendsto establish a formal standing organization to collect information and oversee the development ofits confidence building measures and information control mechanisms . table 1 . missiles by categories of range note: see the missile inventory appendix at the end of this report for a listing of each missileprogram by country . based on reported program progress , it is reasonable to conclude that the development andacquisition of ballistic and cruise missiles continues to remain a central security goal for a numberof countries of concern to the united states . while shorter - range ballistic missiles are of concern,particularly in terms of their use on the battlefield , a number of combat proven and developmentalballistic missile defense systems - - such as the u.s. patriot and the israeli arrow - - provide a meansto counter these systems . china , a country that has had long - range ballistic missiles and nuclearwarheads for a number of decades , appears to be modernizing and upgrading its capability , notnecessarily to directly rival or surpass the united states but , as some suggest , as a means to obtaineven greater strategic "freedom of action. some speculate that iran and north korea - - countrieswith a significant u.s. military presence near their borders - - are attempting to achieve a basicnuclear missile capability in order to deter u.s. military action . some believe that these countriesin various stages of nuclear missile development can be deterred from further progress , eitherthrough diplomacy or some form of coercion . others say that , short of physical destruction of theirprograms , countries like north korea and iran will eventually achieve the capability to delivernuclear weapons to various ranges with ballistic missiles . cruise missile programs are far morewidespread than ballistic missile programs , largely due to their relative affordability and the dual usenature of their technology . while cruise missiles may not be able to deliver significant payloads overgreat distances , their stealth and accuracy afford their possessors a potential asymmetric advantage . in order to address the implications of progressively improving and diversified ballistic andcruise missile threats , the united states has relied on nonproliferation and counterproliferationactivities in various combinations and in varied degrees of application . some analysts contend thatpast administrations relied too heavily on nonproliferation activities ( which are considerably lessexpensive and controversial than many counterproliferation programs ) and blame this imbalance forthe current state of missile proliferation .