exemptions are phased out . theindividual compares amt liability and regular tax liability and pays the higher one . whilethe amt base is broader than the regular tax base , there are many provisions that are notincluded in its base , notably the benefits of lower capital gains tax rates and the exclusion fortax exempt bonds , and the itemized deduction for home mortgage interest . indeed , theelimination of the capital gains exclusion in 1986 caused a significant contraction in thenumber of taxpayers subject to the amt ; the current rate preferences are not part of the amt . credits are automatically included in the base ( i.e. , effectively disallowed ) , although underprovisions adopted as part of h.r . 1836 , this rule does not apply to the mostimportant credit , the child credit . ( 1 ) however , unlike the rest of the income tax , the amt exemptions are not indexed to inflation . the result has been an increase in the number of taxpayers who are covered by theamt . ( 2 ) in 1987 , about 140,000 returns paid the amt , constituting 1 / 10 of one percent of allreturns filed . this number was below the 4 / 10 of a percent of returns that paid the tax in 1984and fell largely because the deduction for capital gains was eliminated by the 1986 tax act andtherefore automatically affected coverage under the amt . inflation , however , took its toll . by 1999 , the amt covered 823,000 returns , constituting 6 / 10 of a percent of all returns filed,an increase in percentage share of 600% between 1987 and 1999 . this effect occurred eventhough the exemptions were increased in 1990 . more growth is ahead , however . in 2009 , the joint tax committee projects that over 9 million taxpayers will pay the amt , constituting 6.3% of all tax returns filed , an increase inpercentage share of over a thousand percent from 1990 to 2009 . the amt would probablyconstitute a larger share of joint returns filed , since incomes are higher for these returns thanfor single returns . the amt would also constitute a larger portion of returns with tax liability ; since typically about a quarter of returns filed pay no tax , taxpayers on the amt wouldconstitute over 8% of returns with tax payments . another 6 million returns would have been subject to limits on tax credits , such as the child credit and education credits enacted in 1997 ; this surge in the amt coverage would have occurred in large part in 2002 , but h.r . 1836 made the most important credit ( the child credit ) permanently availaleunder the amt . while the amt will still be concentrated among higher income individuals , it will gradually reach further down into the income distribution . this shift in the distribution isshown in table 1 . note that this table understates the coverage of the amt and its reach intothe middle income classes , because it does not include those taxpayers whose credits are stilllimited by the amt ( such as education tax credits ) . but it does illustrate how the failure toindex exemptions will substantially expand the amt .