3082 ) became p.l . this law extended safetea - lu authorization of appropriations out of the htf through march 4 , 2011 . extensions in the 112 th congress in the 112 th congress , a series of four short - term extensions of the surface transportation legislation were enacted . these extensions reauthorized the federal government's highway , mass transit , and surface transportation safety programs and levied user taxes . three principal views developed . the first view was that the 4.3 cents increase in federal excise taxes imposed under obra93 should be repealed . proponents of repeal argued that the 4.3 cents repeal could lead to a similar reduction in gasoline pump prices . two camps developed which supported retaining the tax . some supporters of the tax expressed the view that while the 4.3-cent tax should be retained , the tax revenues should be returned to the htf for long - term capital improvements . they argued for increased funding of the nation's highway infrastructure . others expressed the view that the monies should continue to be collected and used for deficit reduction . this camp of supporters argued that the gasoline price increase was temporary and that over the long term prices would trend lower . partially in response to this debate , the chairman of the house ways and means committee , representative bill archer , appointed a bi - partisan group to examine the tax treatment of each of the transportation modes with a goal of rationalizing the current myriad tax rules applying to the transportation sector . included in the taxpayer relief act of 1997 was a provision that returned the general fund portion of the tax back to the htf . this provision , first added by a senate amendment ( and modified in conference ) , provides that the 4.3-cent tax is divided between the highway account ( 3.45 cents ) and the mass transit account ( 0.85 cent ) . the provision was effective on october 1 , 1997 . thus , of the total 18.3 cents dedicated to the htf , 15.44 cents goes to the highway account and 2.86 cents to the mass transit account . as a consequence , the disposition of revenues was altered by the act so that all revenues now accrue to the htf and none are applied to deficit reduction . consumers experienced no price change due to enactment of this provision since the federal tax rate on gasoline remained the same . in addition , the taxpayer relief act of 1997 reinstated the lust trust fund excise tax , which had expired january 1 , 1996 . the tax was reinstated at its prior tax rate of 0.1 cent per gallon on all types of motor fuels . the tax rate change was effective from october 1 , 1997 , through march 31 , 2005 . the lust excise tax was then extended for an additional seven months ( through september 30 , 2005 ) . under a provision contained in the energy policy act of 2005 the lust tax was extended through september 30 , 2011 . the imposition of the gasoline tax is codified under irc section 4081 .