, reliability ) . one of the charges of e.o . 13078 recognized the data shortcomings related to the labor force status of persons with disabilities . it required the presidential task force on employment of adults with disabilities to design and implement a statistically reliable and accurate method to measure the employment rate of adults with disabilities as soon as possible , but no later than the date of termination of the task force [30 days after submitting its final report on july 26 , 2002 , the 10 th anniversary of initial implementation of the ada's employment provisions] . data derived from this methodology shall be published on as frequent a basis as possible . the bureau of labor statistics and census bureau , in cooperation with the departments of education and health and human services , the national council on disability , and the president's committee on employment of people with disabilities , have been among the numerous organizations working toward this end . the accomplishment of this charge has been complicated by the fact that: ( 1 ) a universally agreed - upon definition of disability does not exist , and ( 2 ) a data source is lacking that incorporates both labor force and disability questions which have undergone testing to determine whether people understand what is being asked ( i.e. , validity ) and to which people respond in a consistent manner over time ( i.e. at the present time , the u.s. bureau of the census collects self - reported information from individuals on the disability and labor force status of household members through the decennial census , american community survey , current population survey , survey of income and program participation , and national health interview survey . disability typically is not the primary focus of these surveys . as just discussed , all of the available federal surveys that collect data both on persons with disabilities and on labor force status suffer from various shortcomings . in an effort to mitigate the data limitations , researchers sometimes have taken the approach of utilizing multiple surveys to determine whether they are telling the same story . generally speaking , they are . as shown in table 1 , the proportion of the population with disabilities that was in the labor force ( i.e. , employed or unemployed ) dropped by 4.5% during the recession of the early 1980s . at the same time , the labor force participation rate of the population without disabilities declined by a lesser degree ( 1.0% ) . similarly , during the recession of the early 1990s , the labor force participation rate of the working - age population with disabilities fell to a greater degree relative to the rate among people without disabilities ( 4.1% and 0.8% , respectively ) . conversely , over the 1983-1990 period when the economy was expanding , the labor force activity of individuals with disabilities rose much more than activity among individuals without disabilities ( 14.0% and 8.8% , respectively ) . one might conclude , based upon these data , that the labor force status of persons with disabilities is more sensitive to the business cycle than that of persons without disabilities .