701 et seq . and 3511 et seq . numerous other statutory provisions affect the powers and duties of both gao and the cg . the office was designed to be "independent of the executive departments," which were placed under its audit and review powers ( 31 u.s.c . sometimes characterized as "congress's watchdog" and the "investigative arm of congress," the gao provides a variety of services to congress , largely connected to the oversight , investigation , and evaluation of executive operations , activities , and programs . the evolution of the office's authority , functions , and mandates over time , along with new pay and personnel powers for the comptroller general , prompted him to request a change in its name: from the general accounting office to the government accountability office ( p.l . gao's current activities and services include: auditing and evaluating federal programs and operations ; conducting special investigations ( through a small office ) of alleged violations of federal criminal law , particularly conflict of interest or procurement and contract fraud ; providing various legal services to congress , including advice on legal issues involving government programs and activities ; resolving bid protests that challenge government contract awards ; prescribing accounting principles and standards for the executive branch , advising federal agencies on fiscal and other policies and procedures , and setting standards for auditing government programs ; assisting the professional audit / evaluation community in improving and keeping abreast of ongoing developments in such matters as audit methodology and approaches ; and detailing gao staff to work directly for congressional committees ( in these temporary transfers , the assigned staffs represent the committees and not gao itself ) . since 1994 , gao has been the subject of congressional hearings , studies , and proposals for change connected with its mission , roles , capabilities , and personnel system . after a lengthy period of growth — in its powers , duties , and resources — the office experienced reductions in these areas in the mid - 1990s . in 1996 , for instance , certain of the "executive powers" of the comptroller general were abolished or transferred to executive branch agencies . in addition , gao's budget was cut by 25% over a two - year period ( fy1996 and fy1997 ) , representing the largest reduction in a seven - year downsizing ( 1992-1999 ) . since then , however , its budget authority has increased , from a low of $358 million in fy1998 to a high of $507.2 million for fy2008 . since 1995 , however , full - time - equivalent employees are fewer than in each previous year , with 3,100 currently compared to 4,324 in fy1995 . in fact , in the midst of the cutbacks during the 1990s , gao experienced an overall staff reduction of 39% from fy1992 to fy1998 . a number of proposals in the 110 th congress would affect gao's organization , structure , and authority . gao's budget and staffing levels have varied since the mid - 1990s , experiencing both downs and ups , with a current leveling off as continuing resolutions have tended to stabilize both figures .