source . the trade agreement consists of four parts: market access , trade in services , intellectual propertyrights , and investment . though the u.s. and vietnam reached an agreement in principle on the bta in july 1999 , fornearly a year vietnam delayed signing the deal . what were the reasons for vietnam's hesitancy ? furthermore , the weakness of thecountry's current top leaders - vcp general secretary le kha phieu , prime minister phan vankhai , and president tran duc luong - made it difficult for them to forge a consensus on such acontroversial issue . ( 28 ) questions from vietnamese conservatives . ever since the vietnamese communist party's ( vcp ) 8th party congress in 1996 , disagreements betweenreformers and conservatives in vietnam's 19-member politburo - the country's supreme ruling body - have paralyzed economic decision - making . as the bilateral trade agreement with the u.s. requiresvietnam to jump - start its reforms and deepen its integration into the global economy , it is notsurprising that the politburo also has been divided over whether to finalize the deal . the conservatives fear that economic reform will undermine the "socialist foundations" of the country's economic and political systems , and thereby erode the vcp's legitimacy and monopolyon power . they also fear that vietnam's sovereignty will be eroded by increasing vietnam'seconomic dependence on the west and by increasing vietnam's vulnerability to regional economicdownturns such as the 1997-99 asian financial crisis . among their specific concerns , conservativesworry that shifting to a more market - oriented economy will force the politburo to curtail subsidiesto the country's state - owned enterprises , the backbone of the socialist economic system . manyconservatives are understandably worried that further rationalization will raise unemployment rates,which already exceed 10% , according to some estimates . social and political pressures on the partyhave already been heightened in recent years by peasant uprisings and widespread accusations ofgovernment corruption . high level u.s. pressure on vietnam for its human rights record , appliedduring secretary of state madeleine albright's september 1999 trip to vietnam , is said to havefurther rankled conservative forces opposed to the trade agreement . in january 2000 , a group of reform - minded leaders were transferred to key economic and political posts . these moves , combined with the bta signing , the unveiling of a new enterpriselaw , the passage of new amendments to the foreign investment law , and the opening of vietnam'sfirst stock market on july 20 , 2000 , may be signs that hanoi's policy logjam is breaking up in thereformers' favor . opposition from vested interests . parochial interests also may have played a role in vietnam's deliberations . according to many sources,vietnam's military leaders have been among the staunchest opponents of the bta . many argue thatthe military - known as the people's army of vietnam - is worried that the trade deal will threatenits vast commercial interests . according to one estimate , the business enterprises of the people'sarmy of vietnam generated over $600 million in revenue in 1998 , a figure equivalent to nearly 60%of the entire military budget . ( 29 ) evidence of themilitary's influence can be seen in vietnam'sbargaining position on telecommunications liberalization during the bta negotiations .