guam. in november 2009 , assistant secretary of state andrew j. shapiro met in washington , d.c. with azerbaijani deputy foreign minister araz azimov for the 11 th u.s. - azerbaijan security dialogue . according to azimov , the sides discussed bilateral defense cooperation , nagorno - karabakh negotiations , azerbaijan - nato cooperation , contributing to afghan stabilization efforts , caspian sea security , and the future of russia's gabala radar site in azerbaijan . he stated that azerbaijan had proposed a long list of cooperative initiatives , and that working groups would convene to discuss the initiatives . georgia became eligible for security - related international military education and training ( imet ) and foreign military financing ( fmf ) programs in fy1997 . in 1999 , the united states provided grant aid of ten uh - 1h unarmed combat helicopters , six of which were operational , while the others were for spare parts . in fy1999 , useucom launched a u.s. - georgian peacetime military engagement program after the south caucasus states were included in useucom's area of responsibility . the georgia train and equip program ( gtep ) grew out of a request made by former georgian president eduard shevardnadze during his u.s. meeting with then - president bush in october 2001 for help to resist russia's request that it be allowed to pursue or attack chechen rebels in georgia , to combat terrorists who were hiding in georgia's pankisi gorge area , and otherwise to keep terrorists from entering georgia . some of these terrorists allegedly had fled u.s. - led coalition operations in afghanistan , so the u.s. administration initially linked gtep to oef . other reported u.s. aims included enhancing military reform by helping georgia set up a national command center and bolstering georgia's ability to guard its energy pipelines and ensure internal stability . the $64 million georgia train and equip program ( gtep ) began in april - may 2002 . useucom coordinated training in light infantry airmobile , mechanized , and mountain tactics , and medical and logistical methods by personnel from u.s. special operations command europe and from u.s. marine forces europe , which took over training in late 2002 . four battalions of over 2,000 troops , a 270-member mechanized armor company , about 200 military , security , and border officers , and a small number of interior ( police ) ministry troops and border guards were trained . equipment provided included small arms , communications and medical gear , uniforms , and construction materials for base refurbishment . the program formally ended in april 2004 . u.s. officials deemed gtep a model for programs planned for other countries and praised its contribution to georgia's deployment of a 550-member infantry battalion to iraq in march 2005 , which boosted the number of its troops there from about 300 to about 850 . other gtep - trained troops have been deployed to afghanistan and kosovo . in 2004 , useucom developed a follow - on program to gtep termed the georgian sustainment and stability operations program ( ssop ) , for reasons that included helping georgia sustain increased troop deployments to iraq .