who benefitted from the expansion of iras ? iras have effects on the federal budget . the benefits of iras for high - income individuals are limited , however , compared to many other savings incentives because of the dollar and income limits . nevertheless , the benefits of iras when universally allowed tended to go to higher - income individuals . in 1986 , 82% of ira deductions were taken by the upper third of individuals filing tax returns ( based on adjusted gross income ) ; since these higher - income individuals had higher marginal tax rates , their share of the tax savings would also be larger . in addition , when universal iras were available from 1981-1986 , they were nevertheless not that popular . in 1986 , only 15% of tax returns reported contributions to iras . participation rates were lower in the bottom and middle of the income distribution: only 2% of taxpayers in the bottom third of tax returns and only 9% of individuals in the middle third contributed to iras . participation rose with income: 33% of the upper third contributed , 54% of taxpayers in the top 10% contributed , and 70% of taxpayers in the top 1% contributed . ownership of iras has increased substantially since 1986 , however . in 2004 , the investment company institute estimates that 40% of u.s. households owned an ira . not surprisingly , households that own iras have higher income and more wealth than households not owning iras . although there are income limits on the deductibility of ira contributions , a disproportionate share of the tax benefits accrue to upper - income taxpayers . in 2003 , tax returns reporting $75,000 or more in adjusted gross income accounted for 23.5% of all taxable returns . while only 4.5% of these higher - income returns reported a tax - deductible ira contribution , they accounted for 40% of all reported deductible ira contributions . overall , as one might expect , the expansion of iras tends to benefit higher - income individuals , although the benefits are constrained for very - high - income individuals because of the contribution and income limits . an expansion in contribution limits ( as occurred in 2003 ) would be more focused , however , on higher - income individuals who are more likely to be contributing at the limit and more likely to take full advantage of higher limits . the more types of iras that are available , the larger the administrative costs associated with them . with the introduction of back - loaded roth accounts in 1997 , three types of iras now exist: the front - loaded that have been available since 1974 ( and universally available in 1981-1986 ) , the non - deductible tax - deferred accounts , and the back - loaded roth accounts . treatment on withdrawal will also be more complex , since some are fully taxable , some partially taxable , and some not taxable at all . another administrative complexity that arises is the possibility of penalty - free withdrawals prior to retirement for special purposes .