unanimously. s. 358 , which , like h.r . 493 , contains provisions prohibiting genetic discrimination in health insurance ( title i ) and in employment ( title ii ) , was reported out of the senate health , education , labor , and pensions committee on march 29 , 2007 . 493 , as passed originally by the house and most recently by the senate , prohibits health insurance plans from denying enrollment or charging higher premiums to individuals or groups based on an individual's or family member's genetic information . it also prohibits health insurance plans from requesting or requiring that any individual , or family member of an individual , undergo a genetic test . in addition , it contains privacy provisions amending the hipaa statute to require revisions in the hippa privacy rule prohibiting certain uses and disclosures of genetic information . 493 , as passed originally by the house and most recently by the senate , provides that references to genetic information include genetic information on a fetus carried by a pregnant woman and , with respect to an individual utilizing assisted reproductive technology , includes genetic information of any embryo legally held by the individual or family member . 493 allows group health plans to obtain genetic information for purposes of payment , and allows a plan to request that an individual undergo a genetic test for the purposes of research , but the plan must make clear that this would be entirely voluntary on the part of the individual and would not be used for underwriting purposes . 493 , as passed originally by the house and most recently by the senate , also prohibits discrimination in employment because of genetic information and , with certain exceptions , prohibits an employer from requesting , requiring , or purchasing genetic information . if such information is obtained , the bill requires that it be treated as part of a confidential medical record and provides that an employer is considered to be in compliance with the maintenance of information requirements if the genetic information is treated as a confidential record under ยง 102 ( d ) ( 3 ) ( b ) of the americans with disabilities act . in addition , the bill does not prohibit an entity covered by regulations promulgated pursuant to part c of title xi of the social security act or section 264 of the health insurance portability and accountability act from any use or disclosure of health information that is authorized by those regulations . 493 adds a provision in title ii , like that in title i , relating to the genetic information of a fetus or embryo . there are detailed provisions on enforcement that generally apply the remedies available in existing civil rights laws such as title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 , 42 u.s.c . ยง 2000e - 4 et seq . on january 17 , 2007 , the white house issued a statement calling upon congress to pass genetic nondiscrimination legislation .