- mexicoborder. ( 6 ) mexico continues to be a majormoney - laundering center and in recent years international money launderershave turned increasingly to mexico for initial placement of drug proceeds into the global financial system , accordingto therecent inscr . table 1 shows estimates of mexican drug control efforts in three areas - - seizures , arrests , and eradication - - from 1994to 2000 . table 1 . mexican counter - drug activities , 1994-2000 sources: except where indicated by asterisk , data is from the u.s. department of state , international narcotics controlstrategy report , march 2001 , pp . v - 26-v - 36 , using the more up to date data in the text when in conflict withthe statisticschart . caution should be exercised in considering the changes in the various areas as an indication of mexico's seriousness incontrolling drug trafficking . the trends may also be affected by the demand for the drugs , the amount of drugsproduced oravailable , the sophistication of the drug traffickers , the intelligence and capabilities of mexican counter - drugagencies , theeffectiveness of reporting and monitoring methods , the effect of weather conditions on eradication efforts , andcompetitionfrom alternative drug suppliers . u.s. - mexico counter - narcotics cooperation increased substantially during the administration of presidentzedillo ( 1994-2000 ) , with the full range of law enforcement , military , and border and drug control agencies being involved . whilethe flow of drugs from mexico remains high and incidences of corruption persist , the clinton administrationseemed to beconfident that president zedillo was committed to rooting out corruption and establishing a close workingrelationship withthe united states in this area . at the highest diplomatic level , there is the binational commission , established in1977,which brings cabinet - level officials together once a year to discuss the full range of u.s. - mexico relations,including legaland anti - narcotics affairs . with a specific focus on counter - narcotics issues , the high level contact group ( hlcg ) ,established in 1996 , provides for cabinet - level coordination twice a year . subordinate hlcg working groups onmoneylaundering , demand reduction , arms trafficking , and interdiction meet several times per year to coordinate policies,exchange information , and promote conferences , such as the binational conferences on reduction of drug demand,heldin 1998 , 1999 , and 2000 . the mexico - u.s. senior law enforcement plenary , coordinated by the two attorneysgeneral,also meets four or five times a year on law enforcement issues . ( 15 ) acting through these groups , the two countries agreed in may 1997 upon an anti - drug alliance during a visit to mexico bypresident clinton . the leaders developed a draft joint strategy in november 1997 , when president zedillo visitedwashington , and the two presidents signed a protocol to permit temporary extradition of cross - border criminalsfor trial,and a hemispheric convention against illegal firearms trafficking . more recently , the two leaders issued the jointanti - drugstrategy in early february 1998 , and they agreed on methods for coordinating activities in june 1998 despitemexicandispleasure with operation casablanca , a u.s. undercover operation aimed at money laundering operations .