what are the baselines ? these issues came to a head in the late 1980s when epa decided to enforce nsr against facilities undergoing life extension efforts . in 1988 , the epa ruled that a life extension project by wisconsin electric power company ( wepco ) met the trigger for nsr because of the potential for increased emissions from the facilities after the project compared with actual emissions from the facilities before the project . after considerable litigation and congressional debate , epa modified this "actual to potential" emissions trigger with respect to electric utilities in 1992 . the new "test" to determine the applicability of nsr compares a facility's actual emissions before the modification with its projected actual emissions after the modification ( "actual to future actual" ) . specifically , "actual emissions" equal the facility's average emission rate during a 2-year period out of the preceding 5 years before the proposed change . "future actual" is the product of the facility's projected emission rate after the change and its projected actual utilization based on historical and other data . these are the current nsr regulations for utility plants . utilities also responded to epa's interest in their life extension activities . in defining a modification under nsr , epa excludes maintenance , repair , and replacement that it considers "routine. in addition , increases in production rates that do not involve capital expenditures do not constitute a modification . responding to this situation , utilities began to spread out their life extension efforts in an attempt to make them fit into their routine maintenance schedules . indeed , the term "life extension" has fallen out of the professional literature , replaced with terms like capital improvement , performance improvement and unit integrity , condition assessment , life operation management , review of continued operating requirements , and asset management . the commonly used term currently is rehabilitation program . by spreading out the life extension efforts and integrating them into facilities' operation and maintenance schedules , the distinction between "modification" and "routine maintenance" is effectively blurred , and arguably , eliminated .

" we expect no early resolution. the justice department's lawsuits ( on behalf of epa ) represent an attempt to enforce the new source review requirements of the clean air act with respect to ( 1 ) instances of "new construction" of coal - fired capacity by investor - owned utilities and ( 2 ) instances in which changing investor - owned utility strategies for managing existing coal - fired facilities become "modifications" that in epa's view trigger the applicability of the wepco rules . in addition , epa has issued a "compliance order" concerning instances of modifications by the tennessee valley authority of its coal - fired power plants that epa believes should have triggered new source reviews . tables 3 , 4 and 5 identify the facilities the justice department / epa have cited as violating nsr requirements and briefly note some of the kinds of rehabilitations that epa views as triggering the "modification" criterion for nsr . these tables are based on the original complaints ( see footnotes 1 and 4 ) .