all the accounts are funded from agency receipts . average annual budget authority for the 17 accounts for fy2005-fy2009 totaled $335 million , accounting for 12% of nps funding . the fs has 23 trust funds or special funds with mandatory spending authority . of these , 13 had average annual budget authority exceeding $5 million for fy2005-fy2009 . most are funded from agency receipts for the sale or use of lands and resources . congress is responsible for enacting all appropriations for agency programs . for many trust funds and special funds , congress has provided mandatory spending , which requires no annual enactments by the appropriations committees . the constitution ( article i , § 9 ) prohibits withdrawing funds from the treasury unless they are appropriated by law , but there is no constitutional limit on the duration of an appropriation . most programs receive their funds through appropriations bills enacted each year ( called discretionary funds ) . a number of issues arise for congress in providing mandatory spending . two terms — trust fund and special fund — commonly used in federal budget documents are often misunderstood , because the "federal budget meaning of the word 'trust,' as applied to trust fund accounts , differs significantly from the private sector usage. in a glossary of federal budget terms , one distinction between trust funds and special funds is that trust funds are designated as trust funds in their authorizing legislation . confusion over the operation of federal trust funds and special funds is typically greatest where there is a disparity between the receipts supplying the account and the amount obligated annually ; generally , the greater the disparity between receipts and obligations , the greater the confusion over "special" funding that is not immediately available for spending . the authorizing legislation for many , but not all , trust funds and special funds includes mandatory spending authority . mandatory spending can generally be identified in the authorization by the phrase "available without further appropriation" ( or similar language ) , meaning the funds in these accounts can be spent by the relevant agency without any additional action by congress . the money in any trust fund or special fund created without such language generally can be spent only when congress enacts an appropriation from that account . some general issues are relevant for all such spending , while other issues are relevant only for one of the purposes for which such spending is generally provided — grant programs that provide benefits to particular groups who pay the fees ; agency activities for federal land management ; and compensation programs to state and local governments for the tax - exempt status of federal lands . some , however , are established with mandatory spending ( also called direct spending or permanent appropriations ) in the law that created them . these funds depend on current or discretionary appropriations , and are not included in this report . the descriptions include the enabling legislation , the source and uses of the funds , and the fy2005-fy2009 budget authority . the accounts are listed in decreasing amount of total budget authority over the five fiscal years .