the court based its decision on two determinations . first , the court concluded that the nebraska statute lacked any exception for the preservation of the health of the mother . second , the court found that the statute imposed an undue burden on the right to choose abortion because its language covered more than the d & x procedure . d & x is one of several abortion methods . the principal methods of abortion are suction curettage , induction , and standard dilation and evacuation ( "d & e" ) . induction may be performed either early in the pregnancy or in the second trimester . in this procedure , the fetus is forced from the uterus by inducing preterm labor . d & e is the most common method of abortion in the second trimester . suction curettage is no longer viable because the fetus is too large in the second trimester to remove by suction alone . d & e involves the dilation of the cervix and the dismemberment of the fetus inside the uterus . fetal parts are later removed from the uterus either with forceps or by suction . d & x is typically performed late in the second trimester between the twentieth and twenty - fourth weeks of pregnancy . although the medical advantages of d & x have been asserted , the nature of the procedure has prompted pro - life advocates to characterize d & x as something akin to infanticide . in women ' s medical professional corporation v. voinovich , the u.s. court of appeals for the sixth circuit discussed the differences between the d & e and d & x procedures in reference to an ohio act that banned partial - birth abortions: the primary distinction between the two procedures is that the d & e procedure results in a dismembered fetus while the d & x procedure results in a relatively intact fetus . more specifically , the d & e procedure involves dismembering the fetus in utero before compressing the skull by means of suction , while the d & x procedure involves removing intact all but the head of the fetus from the uterus and then compressing the skull by means of suction . in both procedures , the fetal head must be compressed , because it is usually too large to pass through a woman's dilated cervix . in the d & e procedure , this is typically accomplished by either suctioning the intracranial matter or by crushing the skull , while in the d & x procedure it is always accomplished by suctioning the intracranial matter . the procedural similarities between the d & e and d & x procedures have contributed to the concern that the language of partial - birth abortion bans may prohibit both methods of abortion . plaintiffs challenging partial - birth abortion statutes have generally sought the invalidation of such statutes on the basis of two arguments: first , that the statutes are unconstitutionally vague , and second , that the statutes are unconstitutional because they impose an undue burden on a woman's ability to obtain an abortion . the supreme court has held that an enactment is void for vagueness if its prohibitions are not clearly defined .