both houses approved h.r . 3079 on october 12 , 2011 ( the house by a vote of 300-129 and the senate by a vote of 77-22 ) , and the president signed the measure into law on october 21 as p.l . panama's colón free zone ( cfz ) , located at the atlantic gateway to the panama canal , is the world's second - largest free trade zone after hong kong . the vast trade volume that traverses the panama canal as well as panama's modern financial sector and central location in the americas make colón a logical , if not ideal , place for a duty free zone . it serves as a "one stop shop" for both latin american buyers and sellers from the rest of the world , including asia and the united states . sellers operate showrooms targeted at small - and medium - sized buyers , who make wholesale purchases of goods for retail sale in their respective countries . cfz imports include a broad array of luxury goods , electronic products , clothing , and other consumer products , with hong kong the largest supplier and colombia and ecuador the largest destinations for cfz exports . the u.s. department of commerce maintains that the cfz offers a significant opportunity for u.s. retail companies to export to latin america . according to the agency , u.s. companies can save time , grow sales , reduce complexity , and reduce financial risk by using the cfz to export to the region . the cfz has its limitations , however , including that it only covers consumer retail products ( with no perishables and very little capital equipment ) ; it is not suitable for exporting to larger countries such as brazil and mexico , which have their own internal buying structures ; and some cfz merchants should be avoided because of their poor reputation related to involvement in illicit activities . on this last point , the department of state maintains that the cfz is vulnerable to abuse by criminal groups through illicit financial activities , largely because of panama's insufficient enforcement of existing controls . it maintains that a new electronic transaction recording information system for the cfz will improve the capacity to trace transactions when the system is fully implemented . ( also see " cooperation to combat drug trafficking and money laundering " above. ) when panama proclaimed its independence from colombia in 1903 , it concluded a treaty with the united states for u.s. rights to build , administer , and defend a canal cutting across the country and linking the pacific and atlantic oceans . ( see figure 1 , "map of panama." the treaty gave the united states rights in the so - called canal zone ( about 10 miles wide and 50 miles long ) "as if it were sovereign" and "in perpetuity. construction of the canal was completed in 1914 . in the 1960s , growing resentment in panama over the extent of u.s. rights in the country led to pressure to negotiate a new treaty arrangement for the operation of the canal . draft treaties were completed in 1967 but ultimately rejected by panama in 1970 .