table 3 . dates of enactment of last regular appropriationslegislation , fy1996-fy2002 source: calendars of the house of representatives . one consistent source of support for biennial budgeting has been the presidency . theadministrations of the past four presidents have all supported the idea of biennial budgeting . ( 71 ) one of the most visibleexamples of this occurred during the clinton administration . the 1993 report of the nationalperformance review ( the gore report ) noted , "considerable time could be saved - - and used moreeffectively - - in both the executive and legislative branches of government if budgets andappropriations were moved to a biennial cycle. because budgeting for the federal government encompasses a number of processes , biennialbudgeting can have several meanings . biennial budgeting can involve 2-year budget resolutions,2-year appropriations , and multiyear authorizations . in addition , biennial budget proposals typicallyrequire that executive branch planning and performance reviews be revised so that they be based ona 2-year cycle . typically , biennial budgeting proposals , such as h.r . 981 ( 107th congress , thebudget responsibility and efficiency act of 2001 ) , include all three aspects of congressionalbudgeting , although proposals embracing only one or two are possible options . for example , thebiennial budgeting component of a reform proposal reported by the senate rules and administrationcommittee in 1994 ( s. 1824 , 103rd congress , the legislative reorganization act of1994 ) included 2-year budget resolutions and multiyear authorizations , but not 2-year appropriations . another significant option concerns the period for which money will be appropriated . one optionwould be to retain the current system of fiscal years , and enact budgetary legislation allocatedbetween two one - year periods . alternately , biennial appropriations could provide funding for theentire 2-year fiscal period , increasing flexibility for apportioning money over the course of thebiennium . advocates of biennial budgeting feel that reducing the number of times that congress hasto consider budget questions will likewise reduce the amount of time consumed by the process . supporters project that the benefits of a 2-year cycle would include more time for congress toconduct agency and program oversight , and more time for budget planning within congress , as wellas better long - range planning by federal agencies and by state and local governments . proposals to convert the federal budget process to a 2-year cycle are also favored by somewho believe that a 2-year cycle provides greater flexibility with regard to deadlines . without thepressure to enact budgetary legislation every year , there would be greater time available for makingdecisions within the budget cycle , and more efficient coordination of budgetary decisions . this , theyassert , would result in fewer delays and more timely enactment of necessary legislation . supporters also point to the multiyear nature of the summit agreements between congressand the president that have been a part of the budget process for more than a decade as evidence ofthe efficacy of multiyear budgeting , and as a major factor in recent years for promoting moreefficient consideration of budgetary legislation . critics of biennial budgeting have countered by arguing that some of the projected benefitscould prove to be illusory .