reg . the final rule is composed of three parts: a new licensing requirement for certain products for military end - use in china , a validated end - user ( veu ) program , and a requirement to obtain an end - user statement for certain licensed products . the proposed rule has been driven by the concern that the export of commercial technology to certain end - users is undermining the arms embargo that the united states and others maintain against china . others , including industry , have questioned the scope and efficacy of these new controls . the new licensing policy has two distinct components: the establishment of new military end - use controls for the prc and a revised license review policy for national security controlled items destined for the prc . the aspect that has received the most attention is the establishment of new military end - use controls on 20 product categories consisting of 31 export control classification numbers ( eccn ) . currently , these items are controlled primarily for anti - terrorism reasons , thus a license is required only for exports to countries determined to be state sponsors of terrorism ( cuba , iran , north korea , sudan , syria ) . under the new rule , bis will require a license for the export , reexport , or in country transfer of these items if the exporter knows , has reason to know , or is informed by bis that the item is or may be intended for military end - uses in the prc . the final rule also revises the long - standing licensing policy for national security controlled items destined for the prc contained in the ear , part 742.4 ( b ) ( 7 ) . it clarifies that there is a presumption of denial for license applications to export , reexport , or transfer items that would make a direct and significant contribution to the prc's military capabilities in certain key weapons systems . the second component of the final rule also increases the exemption threshold for obtaining end - use statements ( eus ) from the ministry of foreign commerce ( mofcom ) of the prc . the prc requires that mofcom issue an eus before bis can conduct a pre - license check or post - shipment verification for an export . a u.s. exporter must request that the importer obtain the eus for a license application because the bis inspection is often a statutory or regulatory pre - requisite for approving some applications . the rule increases the amount of the value of the license exempted from the eus requirement from $5,000 to $50,000 for most goods to the prc . however , it expands the eus requirement to cover all license applications to the prc reaching this threshold . previously , eus were required only for items under national security controls . the veu is the third component of the china rule . the veu establishes a method by which trusted prc civilian end - users can be nominated for the program , and , if approved by bis , the eligible end - users may receive items eligible under the program without a license .