government. neither the clinton nor the bush administrations accepted proposals for a single , high - level program coordinator , arguing that interagency coordination already occurs . according to an official from the bush administration , "u.s. policy implementation and oversight of nonproliferation assistance to the states of the former soviet union is coordinated at senior levels by the proliferation strategy policy coordinating committee , or pcc , chaired by a national security council senior director , with assistant secretary - level representatives from state , defense , energy and other concerned agencies. others have argued that a new interagency committee would complicate the existing interagency coordinating process . congress , however , continued to support a high - level coordinator , or czar , for the threat reduction and nonproliferation programs . in late 2006 , representative ellen tauscher and senator hillary rodham clinton introduced legislation , known as the nuclear terrorism prevention act of 2006 ( h.r . 6419 , s. 4103 ) , that would have created a senior advisor to the president for the prevention of nuclear terrorism . this advisor would have , among other things , been responsible for "overseeing the development , by the relevant federal departments and agencies , of accelerated and strengthened program implementation strategies and diplomatic strategies ... and overseeing the development of budget requests for these programs and ensuring that they adequately reflect the priority of the problem. the first piece of legislation introduced in the 110 th congress , the implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations act of 2007 ( h.r . 1 , s. 4 ) took up the same theme . it established an office of the united states coordinator for the prevention of weapons of mass destruction proliferation and terrorism within the executive office of the president . this advisor would , among other things , lead inter - agency coordination of u.s. efforts to implement its wmd nonproliferation strategy and would oversee "the development of a comprehensive and coordinated budget for programs and initiatives to prevent wmd proliferation and terrorism , ensuring that such budget adequately reflects the priority of the challenges and is effectively executed , and carrying out other appropriate budgetary authorities. the bush administration never filled this position with a designated director on the nsc staff , and indicated that the existing nsc staff could achieve the goals outlined in the legislation . the obama administration , in contrast , has created and filled a new nsc position for the coordinator of the prevention of wmd proliferation and terrorism . this nsc director reportedly has a deputy director who will focus specifically on threat reduction efforts , and will seek to coordinate the threat reduction and nonproliferation programs in doe , dod , and the state department . most analysts agree that the budget responsibility addressed in this legislation would be critical to the success of this new policy position . a white house - based nonproliferation "czar" may be able to communicate high - level interest and political commitment to the programs .