87-510 ) , as amended . authorization is found in the department of state authorization bill , which is determined by the senate committee on foreign relations and the house committee on international relations . appropriations for unhcr programs are provided in the foreign operations appropriations bill to the migration and refugee assistance ( mra ) account and to the emergency refugee and migration assistance ( erma ) fund , which are overseen by the state department . how much of unhcr's expenses should the united states cover ? the house committee on international relations has emphasized protecting afghan refugees , east timorese refugees , and refugees in africa . the u.s. government influences the activities of the unhcr in many ways . first , since it contributes a substantial proportion of the total unhcr budget and earmarks these funds , the u.s. government supports certain programs and certain geographical areas , and allows u.s. policy priorities to influence unhcr priorities . second , through the very act of contributing money and protecting refugees according to certain standards , the u.s. government also encourages other countries to contribute at appropriate levels and treat refugees at a certain standard . third , the united states is an active member of unhcr's executive committee and , therefore , has a voice in the administration of unhcr . fourth , u.s. nationals work for unhcr and bring u.s. interests , values , and perspectives with them . however , individual european governments also provide money directly to unhcr . according to unhcr , echo and the european union member governments have collectively provided about $70 million more than the united states to unhcr in fy2002 . the main issue appears to be whether echo and the member governments should redirect more funds from their own bilateral programs into multilateral programs like unhcr . the u.s. government has reduced the number of refugees admitted into the united states . until 1995 , the ceiling for admissions was over 100,000 . this ceiling has fallen to 70,000 for 2003 . these reductions should be considered within the context of the broader international asylum crisis . in addition , u.s. response to asylum seekers and protection of refugees will likely impact its ability to influence other countries' behavior with regard to the protection of asylum seekers . congress has sought to make certain that specific programs and geographical areas receive adequate resources . congress may address two related questions . what kind of influence should the united states have ? how can the united states balance its priorities with the fact that unhcr is a global , multilateral agency with a universal mandate ? it looks at the challenges facing the organization and issues of concern for congress . unhcr provides legal protection , implements long - term solutions , and coordinates emergency humanitarian relief for refugees and other displaced persons . an understanding of unhcr and its challenges is particularly relevant today with the possibility of war in iraq , which might create new populations of refugees and other displaced persons , and the continuing refugee situations in afghanistan and other parts of the world . issues of particular concern to congress are funding shortages at unhcr , burdensharing , and avenues for u.s. influence within unhcr .