therewas no further action . two bills passed the house in the first session of the 109th congress : h.r . 29 ( bono ) and h.r . 744 ( goodlatte ) . two bills specific to spyware were introduced in thesenate: s. 687 ( burns - wyden ) , and s. 1004 ( allen ) . a senate commercecommittee hearing on s. 687 was held on may 11 , 2005 . on november 17 , 2005 , thecommittee ordered reported s. 687 , and defeated s. 1004 , with committeechairman stevens reportedly saying that he hoped a compromise could be reached before the issuewas debated on the floor . ( 29 ) meanwhile , the ftc endorsed a different bill , s. 1608 , at a hearing before a senate commerce subcommittee on october 5 , 2005 . that bill deals notonly with spyware , but with other internet - related fraud , including spam . its focus is enhancing theftc's ability to investigate and prosecute perpetrators who are located abroad or who use foreignintermediaries . for more information , see crs report rl32706 , spyware: background and policyissues for congress , by marcia smith . identity theft is not an internet privacy issue , but the perception that the internet makesidentity theft easier means that it is often discussed in the internet privacy context . the concern isthat the widespread use of computers for storing and transmitting information is contributing to therising rate of identity theft over the past several years , where one individual assumes the identity ofanother using personal information such as credit card and social security numbers ( ssns ) . theftc has a toll free number ( 877-id - theft ) to help victims . ( 30 ) the extent to which the internet is responsible for the increase in cases is debatable . someattribute the rise instead to carelessness by businesses in handling personally identifiableinformation , and by credit issuers that grant credit without proper checks . more traditional methodsof acquiring someone's personal information - - from lost or stolen wallets , or "dumpster diving" - - also are used by identity thieves . three high profile incidents that became public in early 2005where the security of consumer pii was compromised reinforced existing fears about identity theft . the companies involved are choicepoint , bank of america , and lexisnexis . these incidents aredescribed in crs report rs22082 , identity theft: the internet connection , by marcia smith . the following table provides summary information on internet privacy - related legislationintroduced in the first session of the 109th congress . it should be noted that although some bills havesimilar titles or intents , the details may vary . for example , some bills seek to protect "personalinformation," while others protect "personally identifiable information" ( pii ) . some concern "data,"while others concern "electronic data. definitions may vary , or , in some cases , the ftc is directedto determine a definition . table 1 . bills introduced in the 109th congress , 1stsession source: prepared by crs . note: pii = personally identifiable information ; ssn = social security number . * although h.r . 1069 , s. 115 , and s. 751 have the same title,each is different .