,alpine ) . spring 2002 . table h. ( amounts in millions of barrels / day. ) there are five phases of oil development on federal lands: the leasing process,exploration , development , production , and reclamation . if economic quantities of oilare not found , only three phases - - leasing , exploration and reclamation - - wouldoccur . in a large area with numerous tracts , all of these phases could be occurringsimultaneously: exploration in some fields , development in others and production instill other fields . exploration specialists might move from prospect to prospect forseveral years , followed by construction and other workers carrying out developmentwhere discoveries occurred , and so on . the following section describes these fivephases . ( 27 ) where newer technologies are used , they may reduce not only environmental damage or risk , but also costs . cost - effective technologies would likely be usedwhether specified in legislation or not . where savings are less likely , legislationcould be required to ensure use of advanced technologies or to ensure environmentalstandards ( with the latter perhaps driving development of still newer technologies ) . however , any federal requirements to use advanced or environmentally friendlytechnology may not necessarily apply to native lands unless congress explicitlyapplies them . ( see crs report rl31115 , legal issues related to proposed drillingfor oil and gas in the arctic national wildlife refuge . ) while much is still unknown regarding both the biological and geologicalresources of the 1002 area , much has also been learned during 40 years of debateover the refuge . among the areas with improved information are estimates of theoil and gas potential of the area and the ecology of several of the species that frequentthe area . some of the specific resources are discussed below . ( 43 ) this report will firstgive background information , and then discuss potential effects of development onalaska natives , the economy , and the refuge . the anwr debate has continued for such a long time that most issues have along history of debate . some of the issues that have been raised most frequently aredescribed briefly below . ( for specific legislative provisions of current bills , see crs issue brief ib10111. ) key features , terms , acronyms , and abbreviations 1002 area - - a portion of the coastal plain of anwr north of the brooks range alongthe beaufort sea . section 1002 of anilca defined the area with respectto a "map dated august 1980" but the area was later defined by a publisheddescription . 1002 report - - see fleis . adec - - alaska department of environmental conservation ; regulatesnonhazardous and rcra - exempt solid wastes and underground injectionwells . adf&g - - alaska department of fish and game . adnr - - alaska department of natural resources . afn - - alaska federation of natives ; the major statewide alaska nativeorganization . alaska natives - - eskimos ( inuit and yupik ) , aleuts , and american indians in alaska , whotogether make up over 15% of alaska's population . included by the federalgovernment in the terms indians and indian tribe .