both sides of the atlantic tend to emphasize different interests . they questionthe bush administration's commitment to partnership with europe in light of disagreements overthe middle east and other trade and foreign policy issues . europeans assert that washingtonimported disagreements over iraq into nato with little concern for the consequences of suchactions for the alliance , which has been the cornerstone of european security for the last half - century . europe largely views the israeli - palestinian conflict as the preeminent concern , believing it to be thekey source of regional instability that fuels terrorism , islamic extremism , and domestic politicalunrest at home . in contrast , the bush administration stresses that terrorism and weaponsproliferation must be confronted to ensure u.s. national security , and that the conditions for peaceand stability in the middle east will not be possible until these twin threats are removed . thesedifferent perspectives often result in the employment of disparate tactics by the two sides of theatlantic as they pursue their foreign policy agendas in the region . a combination of factors lie at the root of u.s. - european tensions on the middle east . theyinclude different histories , geography , and demographics ; the nature of economic ties with theregion ; somewhat divergent threat perceptions ; and different views on the appropriate role of the useof force . many analysts also suggest that current u.s. - european frictions over many middle eastissues are heightened on the one hand by european views of a unilateralist bush administration , andon the other by growing eu ambitions to play a larger role on the world stage . the combination of underlying factors mentioned above help account for many of thedifferences in u.s. and european policies on a range of challenges in the middle east . key policygaps exist in u.s. and european efforts to deal with iraq , address the israeli - palestinian conflict,manage iran and syria , and counter terrorism . historically , u.s. - european relations have experienced numerous ups and downs . pro - atlanticists have always stressed in times of tension the underlying solidity of the transatlanticrelationship given its basis in common values and shared interests . even without the soviet threatto bind the two sides of the atlantic together , many observers note that the united states and itseuropean allies and friends face a common set of challenges in the middle east and elsewhere , andhave few other prospective partners . conventional wisdom has dictated that whatever frictions existin the relationship merely represent disagreements among friends characteristic of u.s. - european"business as usual. however , many analysts worry that the transatlantic relationship is fraying . meanwhile , u.s. critics see little value in trying to bridge u.s. - european policy gaps given thelimited military capabilities of most european countries to contribute to u.s. operations aimed atreducing the threats posed by terrorism and wmd proliferation . some european officials also resent that u.s. policies toward iraq exposed divisions amongeu members at a time when the eu has been seeking to shape its future structure and forge a morecommon foreign and security policy . a number of observers suggest that this is a key reason whythe transatlantic quarrel over iraq was divisive .