see figure 7 . regional programs focus upon economic growth , combating terrorism , and fighting international crime . the south asia regional fund ( $5 million in fy2007 ) promotes economic growth through addressing energy needs in south asia , such as assisting countries to find energy resources and facilitating trade in energy . the south and central asia regional fund ( $1.5 million in fy2007 ) supports programs related to border control and education . the aim of assistance for education is to help reduce religious and ideological extremism and regional instability . in addition to problems related to development , corruption remains a key obstacle to social , economic , and political advancement in bangladesh . the largest elements of the u.s. aid presence involve public health , including hiv / aids programs , and basic education . in other areas , the u.s. government provides support for anti - corruption reforms and democratic institutions . u.s. assistance also aims to expand economic opportunities and equitable growth in the country . security and military assistance help to strengthen the police and military forces to counter terrorist activity , enhance border security , and fight international financial and drug crimes . in march 2006 , the peace corps suspended its programs in bangladesh due to concerns that volunteers might become targets of terrorists . in 2000 , the united states signed an agreement with bangladesh reducing the country's debt payments to the united states by $10 million over 18 years . in return , bangladesh is to set aside $8.5 million to endow a tropical forest fund to protect and conserve its mangrove forests . the united states significantly increased bilateral aid to india in fy2002 and fy2003 , largely as part of its counterterrorism efforts in the region . the current aid program aims to further indian economic development in order to enhance the country's rise as "an influential u.s. partner in the international system. furthermore , u.s. assistance serves the poorest segments of the population in order to mitigate economic and social conditions that may give rise to political extremism . for fy2008 , the largest portion of u.s. assistance to india funds public health and hiv / aids care , treatment , and prevention . security and military assistance supports programs related to military professionalism , counterterrorism , counternarcotics , and border security . economic support funds are to promote the private agricultural sector . u.s. assistance to nepal aims to further the peace process between the government of nepal and maoist insurgents , establish stability , and promote development . imet , incle , and nadr programs help the nepal military and police to restore law and order . the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 allows for only expanded international military education and training ( e - imet ) for nepal . e - imet emphasizes and teaches the military about human rights , military codes of conduct , and civilian control of the military . other major components of united states aid programs in nepal include building the capacity of local and national governments to provide social services and improving public health .