statutes of limitation are creatures of statute . limitations are recognized today only to the extent that a statute or due process dictates their recognition . congress and most state legislatures have enacted statutes of limitation , but declare that prosecution for some crimes may be brought at any time . federal statutes of limitation are as old as federal crimes . when the founders assembled in the first congress , they passed not only the first federal criminal laws but made prosecution under those laws subject to specific statutes of limitation . similar provisions continue to this day . federal capital offenses may be prosecuted at any time , but unless some more specific arrangement has been made a general five - year statute of limitations covers all other federal crimes . some of the exceptions to the general rule identify longer periods for particular crimes . others suspend or extend the applicable period under certain circumstances such as the flight of the accused , or during time of war . aside from capital offenses , crimes which congress associated with terrorism may be prosecuted at any time if they result in a death or serious injury or create a foreseeable risk of death or serious injury . although the crimes were selected because they are often implicated in acts of terrorism , a terrorist defendant is not a prerequisite to an unlimited period for prosecution . a third category of crimes that may be prosecuted at any time consists of various designated federal child abduction and sex offenses . although the majority of federal crimes are governed by the general five - year statute of limitations , congress has chosen longer periods for specific types of crimes — 20 years for the theft of art work ; 10 years for arson , for certain crimes against financial institutions , and for immigration offenses ; and 8 years for the nonviolent terrorist offenses that may be prosecuted at any time if committed under violent circumstances . investigative difficulties or the seriousness of the crime seem to have provided the rationale for enlargement of the time limit for prosecuting these offenses beyond the five - year standard . the five - year rule may yield to circumstances other than the type of crime to be prosecuted . for example , an otherwise applicable limitation period may be suspended or extended in cases involving child abuse , the concealment of the assets of an estate in bankruptcy , wartime fraud against the government , dismissal of original charges , fugitives , foreign evidence , or dna evidence . statutes of limitation "normally begin to run when the crime is complete," which occurs when the last element of the crime has been satisfied . the rule for conspiracy is a bit different . the general conspiracy statute consists of two elements: ( 1 ) an agreement to commit a federal crime or to defraud the united states and ( 2 ) an overt act committed in furtherance of the agreement . conspirators left uninterrupted will frequently continue on through several overt acts to the ultimate commission of the underlying substantive offenses which are the objectives of their plots .