b . the ftc is fully funded by the collection of pre - merger filing fees . c. the sec is fully funded by transaction fees and securities registrationfees . d. under the terms of its enabling legislation , the state justiceinstitute ( sji ) is authorized to present itsbudget request directly to congress . while the president's fy2004 budget proposed nothing forsji , the institute requested $8.0 million for itself . e. "other" includes agencies receiving appropriations of $2.0 millionor less in fy2002 . these agenciesinclude commission for the preservation of american heritage abroad ; commission on securityand cooperation in europe ; commission on electronic commerce ; the marine mammalcommission , the commission on ocean policy , the congressional / executive commission on china,the national veterans business development corp , and the pacific charter commission , and theu.s . canada alaska rail commission . source: u.s. house of representatives , committee on appropriations . notes: a the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l . 107-396 ) transferred functions of the justice department's immigrationand naturalization service ( ins ) to the department of homeland security . b the patent and trademark office ( pto ) is fully funded by user fees . the fees collected , butnot obligated during the current year , are available for obligation in the following fiscal year , and do not count toward theappropriationtotals . only newly appropriated funds count toward the annual appropriation totals . c an fy2002 appropriation of $8.6 million for a cost - of - living increase in judicial salaries wasapportioned amongvarious judiciary accounts . d in addition to appropriations , state has authority to spend certain collected fees from machinereadable visas,expedited export fees , etc . fy2003 funding . the president's budget request of $323.5 million for the eeoc for fy2003 included $14.7 millionto fund the agency's full share of federal employee retirement costs as part of theadministration's government - wide proposal . without this expense , the fy2003budget request was $308.8 million . the 108th congress approved the smaller figure in p.l . after taking into account the across - the - board rescission , the fy2003 appropriation was $306.8million . this is $3.4 million less than the fy2002 appropriation of $310.2 million ( including that year's rescission ) and $16.7 million less than the administration'sfy2003 budget request . as a reflection of the importance congress places on the work of fepas , it directed that $33.0 million of the commission's fy2003 appropriation ( rather thanthe $30.0 million in the administration's proposal ) be directed toward their funding . the higher allocation allowed for a contract rate of $500 per charge . the conferees to the fy2003 cjs appropriations bill expressed concern about the lack of sound managerial and fiscal practices that led to the possibility of a budgetshortfall for the year and instructed the commission to prevent this eventualitythrough savings in salary expenses and other operational costs . they further requiredthe eeoc to submit to the appropriations committees , within 60 days of the bill'senactment in february 2003 , a financial plan including steps the commission wouldtake to stay within its fy2003 appropriation level . as noted above , however,congress approved an additional $15 million for the eeoc to avoid furloughs duringthe fiscal year .