other infectious diseases . congress reserves a total of $120 million for tuberculosis assistance in the fy2003 omnibus appropriations bill . of thisamount , $65 million is funded through the csh account , $15 from other bilateral accounts and $40million through the global fund contribution . a total of $115 million is appropriated for malariaassistance , with $65 million directed to the csh account , $7.5 million designated to other bilateralaccounts and $42.5 million through the global fund contribution . family planning / reproductive health . the additional $200 million for hiv / aids was part of a $5.1 billion contingency emergency package that was attached to the supplemental bill . as provided by p.l . 107-206 , the president haduntil september 1 , 2002 , to decide whether to obligate all of the funds or spend none of it . ( 26 ) at aneconomic forum held in waco , texas on august , 13 , 2002 , the president announced that he wouldnot obligate the contingency funding because he felt that the government needed to practice fiscaldiscipline . some democrats reportedly said that they perceived the action as "a white house effortto portray the withholding of the funds as a struggle between the president and democrats , eventhough the appropriations had broad republican support. ( 27 ) critics also accused the president ofblocking funding to his own programs . the president acknowledged that he supported some of theinitiatives in the contingency package , however he said that he would request support for hispriorities , including hiv / aids from the fy2003 appropriations . on september 3 , 2002 , the president proposed changes to the fy2003 department of health and human services ( hhs ) appropriations and the foreign operations appropriations to request$200 million for his new initiative , the international mother and child hiv prevention initiative . the president requested that the money be shared equally between hhs and the usaid . congressfunded this initiative in fy2003 . 108-7 includes $140 million for the new initiative . $100million comes from usaid funds and the remaining $40 million is drawn from hhs funds . how do congressional directives affect the united states' ability to adjust health assistance programs to match the conditions in the field quickly ? in an attempt to demonstrate the impact ofthe directives , representatives from usaid stated that only $207 million , the portion of the fy2002global health budget designated to reduce the main causes of child mortality and morbidity , does notcontain specific directives as to the allocation of funds . they reported that it is not the largedirectives that significantly impact the global health programs , rather it is the small ones that becomesubstantial when totaled . ( 28 ) legislative directives have become more specific as congress has become increasingly concerned about global health issues . when global health programs first began congress offeredfew directives . as criticisms about the effectiveness of foreign aid mounted , congress began toclearly earmark areas of high priority , ultimately leading to the creation of the child survival andhealth programs fund .