for additional information. ) the house version of h.r . 2419 would have authorized $50 million in appropriations over five years for a separate program providing technical assistance and cost - sharing grants for organic conversion . 110-246 extends the authority for the organic research and extension initiative that was established in the 1990 farm bill . the bill provides a total of $78 million in mandatory funds for the initiative in fy2009-fy2012 , and also authorizes $25 million annually in appropriations . both the house and senate versions of h.r . 2419 contained provisions expressing the sense of congress that the level of funding for organic research conducted by usda's intramural science agency , the agricultural research service ( ars ) , should be at least commensurate with the percentage that organic products represent of the u.s. food market—at least 2% . the enacted bill does not contain this provision . the 2008 farm bill contains a provision to help usda fulfill a requirement in the 2002 farm bill to collect segregated data on organic production and marketing and provide timely market information . the bill provides a one - time transfer of $5 million in mandatory funds for this purpose , and requires usda to report to congress on the progress it is making on organic data collection six months after passage of the farm bill . organic producers have long expressed dissatisfaction with coverage for their crops under the federal crop insurance program . organic farmers generally must pay higher premiums to participate because the private companies that offer the insurance are not as familiar with the risks of organic production as they are with those of conventional production . in addition , the insurance companies generally pay out organic farmers' claims based on the value of conventionally grown crops , not on the higher value that organic crops carry . section 12023 in the crop insurance and disaster assistance title of the 2008 farm bill calls for a review of the underwriting , risk and loss experience of organic versus conventional crops . based on the review , the federal crop insurance corporation will work to reduce or eliminate premium surcharges on policies for organic producers "unless the review ... documents the existence of significant , consistent , and systemic variations in loss history between organic and nonorganic crops , with collectively or on an individual crop basis...." in addition , organic producers will have an option in their policies to choose if they want to be reimbursed for losses based on the actual prices they receive . congress has appropriated roughly $2 million annually in recent years to administer the national organic program . critics argue that this level of funding has led to insufficient attention to oversight and compliance activities . the 2008 farm bill sets the annual authorization level for the nop at $6.5 million for fy2009 , rising to $11 million in fy2012 . house and senate appropriators will determine the actual funding available . the conservation , credit , and trade titles of the house and senate farm bills also contain various provisions increasing the organic sector's access to programs in those areas .