appendix a . judgments against terrorist states appendix b . assets of terrorist state . however , the court of appeals for the d.c . customary international law historically afforded sovereign states complete immunity from being sued in the courts of other states . in the words of chief justice marshall , this immunity was rooted in the "perfect equality and absolute independence of sovereigns" and the need to maintain friendly relations . although each nation has "full and absolute" jurisdiction within its own territory , the chief justice stated , that jurisdiction , by common consent , does not extend to other sovereign states: one sovereign being in no respect amenable to another ; and being bound by obligations of the highest character not to degrade the dignity of his nation , by placing himself or its sovereign rights within the jurisdiction of another , can be supposed to enter a foreign territory only under an express license , or in the confidence that the immunities belonging to this independent sovereign station , though not expressly stipulated , are reserved by implication , and will be extended to him . this perfect equality and absolute independence of sovereigns , and this common interest impelling them to mutual intercourse , and an interchange of good offices with each other , have given rise to a class of cases in which every sovereign is understood to waive the exercise of a part of that complete exclusive territorial jurisdiction , which has been stated to be the attribute of every nation . during the last century , however , this principle of absolute sovereign immunity gradually came to be limited after a number of states began engaging directly in commercial activities . to allow states to maintain their immunity in the courts of other states even while engaged in ordinary commerce , it was said , "gave states an unfair advantage in competition with private commercial enterprise" and denied the private parties in other nations with whom they dealt their normal recourse to the courts to settle disputes . as a consequence , numerous states immediately before and after world war ii adopted the "restrictive principle" of state immunity , which preserves sovereign immunity for most cases but allows domestic courts to exercise jurisdiction over suits against foreign states for claims arising out of their commercial activities . the united states adopted the restrictive principle of sovereign immunity by administrative action in 1952 , and the state department began advising courts on a case - by - case basis whether a foreign sovereign should be entitled to immunity from a u.s. court's jurisdiction based on the nature of the claim . in 1978 congress codified the principle in the foreign sovereign immunities act ( fsia ) , so that the decision no longer depended on a determination by the state department . the fsia states the general principle that "a foreign state shall be immune from the jurisdiction of the courts of the united states and of the states" and then sets forth several exceptions .