but few countries meet this criterion . whether the countries of the euro zone become interdependent enough to make the euro sustainable remains to be seen . at the time the euro was introduced , growth between the "core" ( countries like germany and italy ) and the "periphery" ( countries like ireland and finland ) were widely divergent , although they seem to have narrowed since the euro was introduced . but many developing countries that have adopted ( or have considered adopting ) fixed exchange rates are not well integrated with the economy to which they are linked ( see appendix ) . that is because these countries are looking to link to the world's major "hard" currencies , the u.s. dollar , the euro , the japanese yen , the british pound , or the swiss franc . the costs that society bears are threefold . first , to the extent that a country faces unique shocks to its economy , it gives up the ability to protect its economy against these shocks . those involved in international trade and investment do not compensate society at large for the fact that the volatility of aggregate unemployment and inflation has been increased . second , the fixed exchange rate regime is more prone to crisis , which further increases the probability of high unemployment episodes . even if floating exchange rates were to lead to lower growth because they dampen the growth of trade and foreign investment , risk averse individuals may prefer that outcome if it leads to fewer crises . third , in some historical instances , fixed exchange rates have weakened the banking system through their incentives to take on debt that cannot be repaid in the event of devaluation . of the three factors , the last is the only one that could theoretically be rectified through regulation , although implementing such regulation in practice could be difficult , particularly in the developing world . this is not to argue that fixed exchange rate regimes are never superior to floating regimes . the united states would not be better off with 50 separate currencies for each state even though it would ameliorate regional recessions . when countries economies are interdependent enough , the benefits of fixed exchange rates outweigh the costs: regions experience fewer unique shocks , labor mobility improves , product markets may benefit from greater competition and economies of scale , and capital market integration increases . because they are often choosing to fix their exchange rate to gain credibility ( eg , after an episode of high inflation ) , only a hard currency would provide that credibility . but because the economies of most developing countries are not closely tied to these hard currency economies , they are likely to face very different economic shocks from the hard currency economy . therefore , they will not be able to adjust policy in response to the shock because of the fixed exchange , nor will they receive any policy adjustment from the country they are fixed to , because the hard currency country , facing no shock , has no need to adjust its policy .