this bill was not reported . several local government and water associations , including the american water works association ( awwa ) , have opposed legislation that would require water utilities to comply with inherently safer technology ( ist ) requirements ( for example , by switching from the use of chlorine gas to liquid chlorine ) without considering specific utility circumstances . pursuant to p.l . 109-295 , the cfats regulations were scheduled to expire in october 2009 . in both the dhs fy2010 and fy2011 budget justifications , the administration requested that the cfats regulations be extended for one year without change . congress extended cfats authority through october 4 , 2010 , in the dhs appropriations bill for fy2010 ( p.l . after several short term continuing resolutions for fy2011 , congress extended dhs authority to regulate chemical facilities through march 4 , 2011 , under the continuing appropriations act , 2011 ( p.l . also in the 111 th congress , the house passed h.r . 2868 , to revise and codify security requirements for chemical facilities and impose new security requirements on drinking water and wastewater utilities . the bill would have given epa regulatory authority for administering water and wastewater utility security provisions . the drinking water and wastewater facilities titles in h.r . 2868 essentially incorporated h.r . 3258 , the drinking water system security act of 2009 , which was reported by the house committee on energy and commerce . in the senate , the committee on homeland security and governmental affairs reported h.r . 2868 , amended in the nature of a substitute , in december 2010 . the senate bill would have extended the current dhs cfats program for three years and established voluntary security training programs , but did not address water utilities . no further action occurred on these proposals . ( the bills are discussed in more detail under the " the 111 th congress " section below. ) water sector interests generally have argued that water utilities should remain exempt from dhs regulation of chemical facilities , as they already have been subject to several epa requirements under the bioterrorism act ( i.e. , vulnerability assessments and emergency response planning ) , and also to the risk management planning requirements of the clean air act . ( the risk management planning provisions apply to more than 2,800 of the largest water systems. ) these stakeholders note that epa has been designated the lead agency for water infrastructure security and already has an established water security program . nonetheless , there is continued congressional interest in expanding security requirements for the chemical facility sector , and in including certain water utilities within the scope of such requirements . moreover , epa and dhs officials have testified before subcommittees of the house energy and commerce committee , the house homeland security committee , the senate homeland security and governmental affairs committee , and before the senate environment and public works committee in support of closing "the existing security gap" for drinking water and wastewater utilities by addressing their statutory exemption from cfats .