the end . after that there is a revolving loan fund to sustain the program. but , federal financial involvement didn't end . by 1991 , the beginnings of a policy shift were evident . senators max baucus ( d - mt ) and john chafee ( r - ri ) introduced legislation ( s. 1081 ) that became , in effect , a vehicle for oversight . senator chafee asserted that the "states have actually lost ground as the construction grants program is [being] phased out," and affirmed that "the states are starved for resources to carry out the act. among other things , the baucus / chafee proposal would have set back the target date for termination of the federal role in the srfs from 1995 to 1998 and , it appears , would have extended through that period applicability of the existing specific requirements under section 602 ( b ) ( 6 ) — including davis - bacon coverage ( section 513 ) . hearings commenced on the baucus / chafee legislation in the spring of 1991 . but , by that point , a number of things had changed . concern with wetlands and combined sewer overflows ( csos ) and non - point source pollution had become the key issues , especially the former . the reagan administration had given way to the bush administration and epa administrator william reilly now acknowledged a municipal pollution abatement need "into the indefinite future. he stated that the costs of abatement were rising and that the states and municipalities "are very often not in a position to meet the many federal requirements we are imposing. these problems may have overshadowed concern about prevailing wage standards except , perhaps , from the standpoint of keeping costs down . though specific proposals were avoided for the moment , it became increasingly clear that the federal government would not be able to make a clean break from federal funding and to independent and self - sustaining srfs . interest groups , associated with pollution abatement , began to call for more federal funding . such calls for federal dollars were accompanied with appeals for enhanced flexibility: fewer strings , less federal control . states , it was argued , "should be allowed to maintain the flexibility to establish priorities ... and to deploy available funds for the most pressing problem on a timely basis. continued capitalization by the federal government "through fy1994 and beyond ," it was asserted , "is essential. appeals for "increased federal funding" were coupled with pleas for relief from the "administrative burdens and regulatory roadblocks" of the l987 legislation , including the section 602 ( b ) ( 6 ) specific requirements . in early 1992 , senator chafee reminded his colleagues that "[u]nder current law , there is to be no federal role , no additional federal dollars , after 1994. . "that date is now in sight," he pointed out , and "... it is time to reconsider that decision . i have come to the floor of the senate today to urge that federal support for the state revolving loan funds be continued at current levels for the foreseeable future . ( italics added. ) the nature of a continuing federal presence was now at issue .