also not included in p.l . 109-58 was section 1612 of the senate bill ( h.r . 6 , as amended by s.amdt . 866 ) , which expressed the sense of the senate that human activities are a substantial cause of greenhouse gas accumulation in the atmosphere , causing average temperatures to rise . further , the resolution called for a mandatory , market - based program to limit greenhouse gas emissions . also , a bill to establish a mandatory , market - based greenhouse gas reduction program ( s. 1151 ) was debated on the senate floor as s.amdt . 826 and defeated by a 38-60 vote . on december 19 , 2007 , president bush signed the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa , p.l . eisa contains many energy provisions that could lead to reductions in greenhouse gas emissions . in addition to these indirect reductions , eisa also directly addresses climate change issues in several ways . first , eisa expands the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) established in p.l . the rfs requires that a minimum amount of renewable fuels be blended into transportation fuels each year . the eisa amendments to the rfs significantly expand the mandated level . further , they require that an increasing share of the rfs be met with "advanced biofuels" defined as having 50% lower lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions than petroleum fuels . this is the first time that congress has enacted national policy addressing the carbon content of motor fuels . second , title vii of the new law focuses on research , development , and demonstration of technologies to capture and store carbon dioxide . doe research and development is expanded and will include large - scale demonstration projects . the department of the interior must develop a methodology to assess the national potential for geologic and ecosystem storage of carbon dioxide , and must recommended a regulatory framework for managing geologic carbon sequestration on public lands . in addition to the above programs , eisa also requires the establishment of an office of climate change and environment in the department of transportation . this office will plan , coordinate , and implement research at dot on reducing transportation - related energy use , mitigating the causes of climate change , and addressing the impacts of climate change on transportation . energy provisions not directly addressing climate change , but that could lead to lower greenhouse gas emissions , include more stringent fuel economy ( cafe ) standards for passenger cars and light trucks ; higher - efficiency standards for appliances and lighting ; higher - efficiency requirements for government buildings ; and research and development on renewable energy . most federal policies and regulations that have resulted in greenhouse gas reductions were , in fact , promulgated as energy policy initiatives . however , these policies have not reversed growth in overall u.s. emissions .