below is a summary of state laws concerning breastfeeding . each law is cited and is followed by a brief summary of its provisions . it has been reported that breastfeeding may be economically beneficial . because of the growing incidence of women in the workforce , certain issues have arisen concerning working mothers and breastfeeding . it may be necessary for a working mother to express milk during working hours , and / or to breastfeed her child during working hours . other issues concern nursing and / or the expression of milk in public or semi - public places such as restaurants , public transportation facilities , and other locations where the public is present . various states have enacted legislation and / or adopted court rules relating to nursing mothers and jury duty . over the years congress has also considered legislation concerning the rights of breastfeeding mothers . in the 111 th congress , h.r . 2819 and s. 1244 , the proposed breastfeeding promotion acts of 2009 , were introduced on june 11 , 2009 . as breastfeeding has become more common , legal concerns have arisen on applying state decency laws and other laws concerning public nudity and exposure to nursing mothers . because of these concerns , a wide range of state laws have been enacted to deal with issues involving various aspects of breastfeeding . twelve states and puerto rico have laws related to breastfeeding in the workplace: arkansas , california , connecticut , georgia , hawaii , illinois , minnesota , mississippi , rhode island , tennessee , texas , and washington . eleven states exempt breastfeeding mothers from jury duty: california , idaho , iowa , kansas , kentucky , minnesota , mississippi , nebraska , oregon , oregon , and virginia . the first state to enact comprehensive breastfeeding legislation was florida in 1993 . breastfeeding is generally considered to be beneficial to both mother and child . research has indicated that the special composition of human milk enhances cognitive and visual development and lowers the risk and severity of a variety of acute childhood illnesses and chronic diseases , including diarrhea , lower respiratory infection , otitis media , bacteremia , bacterial meningitis , urinary tract infection , necrotizing enterocolitis , lymphoma , and digestive diseases . research has also demonstrated health benefits to mothers who breastfeed , such as reduced risk of breast and ovarian cancer and osteoporosis . in 1994 , florida enacted the first state legislation on breastfeeding mothers having the support and cooperation of their employers . while this law did not require all employers to accommodate nursing mothers ( such as providing for a location to lactate ) , it set out the reasons why breastfeeding was very important . the law also established a study to look at the feasibility of breastfeeding guidelines for employers . most of the state breastfeeding laws permit mothers to breastfeed in any public or private location and / or provide that breastfeeding does not constitute indecent exposure or other criminal behavior . some states have vested nursing mothers with certain rights , including rights in the workplace . for example , hawaii prohibits employers from discriminating against a mother who breastfeeds or expresses milk at the workplace .