the wto is an instrument . mfn is to be unconditional . in practical terms , this means that in most cases a country cannot apply a higher import tariff to a good from one member country than it applies to like goods from any other member country . national treatment : imports of goods and services are treated no less favorably than like goods and services produced domestically . in practical terms this means that governments cannot discriminate against imports in the application of laws and regulations , such as regulations to protect consumer safety or the environment . transparency: government laws and regulations that affect foreign trade and investment are to be published and available for anyone to see . procedures to implement the laws and regulations are to be open . lowering trade barriers through negotiations: since the gatt's creation , its members have conducted eights rounds of negotiations to lower trade barriers . at first these negotiations focused on lowering tariffs . but over time , the rounds have broadened gatt / wto coverage to include nontariff barriers , such as discriminatory government procurement practices , discriminatory standards , and trade - distorting government subsidies . the last completed round , the uruguay round ( 1986-94 ) , resulted in the most ambitious expansion of rules to cover , for the first time , trade in agricultural products and services and government policies and practices pertaining to intellectual property rights protection and foreign investment regulations that affect trade . reliance on tariffs: in order to promote predictability and openness in commerce , the wto requires member countries to use tariffs and avoid using quotas or other nontariff measures when restricting imports for legitimate purposes , such as on injurious imports . as part of its function to administer the rules established under the agreements , the wto provides a mechanism for the settlement of disputes between members where the dispute involves alleged violations of wto agreements . moreover , each member's trade regime is reviewed by the wto secretariat from time - to - time to ensure that it conforms to wto rules . trade among wto members accounts for about 90% of total world trade . the collapse of the soviet union and its east european bloc and the movement of many developing countries toward liberal trade policies have spurred interest in joining the wto . article xii of the agreement that established the wto sets out the requirements and procedures for countries to "accede. "any state or customs territory having full autonomy in the conduct of its trade policies is eligible to accede to the wto on terms agreed between it and wto members. the accession process begins with a letter from the applicant to the wto requesting membership . the wto general council , the governing body of the wto when the ministerial conference is not meeting , forms a working party ( wp ) to consider the application . membership in the wp is open to any interested member - country . more than 60 member countries , including the united states , are part of the wp on russia's accession . the u.s. delegation is led by the assistant u.s. trade representative for wto and multilateral affairs and includes representatives from the u.s .