forces. secretary aldridge approved the flight test program under the condition that the production rate be slowed to the minimum sustaining level , that it be comprehensive and rigorous , and that the restructured program is fully funded in accordance with current estimates . under secretary aldridge estimated that the v - 22 would require at least two years of flight testing before dod could conclude that the aircraft is safe , effective , and "worth the cost. mechanical adjustments slowed the v - 22 test schedule , and the mv - 22 took its first test flight on may 29 , 2002 . the air force cv - 22 resumed flight tests on september 11 , 2002 . flight tests were designed to explore both technical and operational concerns . technical concerns include flight control software and the reliability and robustness of hydraulic lines . operational concerns explored included whether the osprey is too prone to vortex ring state to make it a safe or effective aircraft , whether this potential problem is further exacerbated by multiple osprey's flying in formation , and how well the v - 22 handles at sea . the principal differences between the aircraft that were grounded in 2000 and the aircraft that began testing 17 months later ( called "block a" aircraft ) are re - routed hydraulic lines and an improved caution and warning system . technical glitches were experienced during tests . hydraulic failures , for example , continued during the reinstated flight test program , once on august 4 , 2003 , ( due to a mis - installed clamp ) and again on september 5 , 2003 . in june 2004 a v - 22 was forced twice to make an emergency landing . during one landing , the aircraft suffered a "class b" mishap ( one causing between $200,000 and $1 million in damage ) . an investigation revealed that the v - 22 suffered from widespread problems with an engine component that required replacement every 100 flight hours . in conjunction with resuming flight testing , the navy department modified certain v - 22 requirements . for instance , the v - 22 is no longer required to land in helicopter mode without power ( also known as "autorotation" ) , and protection from nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons has been eliminated . the v - 22 is no longer required to have an "air combat maneuvering" capability ; instead it must demonstrate "defensive maneuvering. also , the requirement that troops be able to use a rope or rope ladder to exit the cabin at low altitudes has been eliminated . also concurrent with the resumption of v - 22 flight testing , dod began an in - depth study of alternatives to pursue in case the aircraft does not pass muster . options reportedly include purchasing the s - 92 , or upgrading ch - 53 , or eh101 helicopters . after one calendar year and 466 hours of flight testing , dod reviewed the osprey's progress . on may 15 , 2003 , thomas christie , dod's director of operational test and evaluation ( dot&e ) , graded bell - boeing's improvements to the osprey's hydraulics as "reasonable and appropriate" and "effective.