the other believes that it is too important not to do so . while monetary policy is important , one must keep in mind how it is important . the short - run effects of monetary policy differ substantially from its long - run effects . whatever argument is advanced to support or attack independence , it should not be predicated on the belief that the fed's job is to control interest rates . the fed's influence over the economy is short - term only . in the long run the fed does not control real interest rates , and efforts aimed at controlling interest rates based on its short - run influence generally result in accelerating inflation or deflation . an argument against independence cannot be predicated on the belief that interest rates can be fixed or that inflation and recession could always be avoided if interest rates were never raised . instead , an economically valid argument against independence can be made as long as it recognizes that the positive effects interest rate reductions have on output and employment come sooner than the negative effects interest rate reductions have on inflation . congressional oversight suffers from having the fed's goals as vaguely defined as they are at present . an inflation target would tighten those goals and increase accountability if persistently egregious policy errors were made . it would not , however , significantly reduce the fed's independence as it attempted to devise discretionary monetary policy for a highly complex and changing economy . the economic arguments for and against fed independence evaluated in this report apply only to the fed's monetary policy responsibilities . arguments for and against reassigning the fed's other duties , such as bank regulation , to a less independent entity are beyond the scope of this report . similarly , anti - inflation policies bring short - term pain and only long - term rewards . in such circumstances , independence , or partially insulating the fed from short - term political pressures through institutional arrangements , is a way to make painful but necessary policies more likely to occur . there are also some possible economic drawbacks to independence that merit consideration . first , oversight is difficult in the current system , and this makes it difficult to prevent or reverse poor policy decisions by the fed . second , potential benefits of coordinating monetary and fiscal policy cannot be secured . while disallowing coordination means that the benefits of good policy cannot be maximized , it also means that the effects of bad policy can potentially be minimized . if reducing or eliminating fed independence were deemed too economically costly , are there alternative reforms that could be considered to address the issues that critics have raised ? monetary policy rules are another way to make policy immune from detrimental short term pressures , and they do not suffer from some of the drawbacks of independence . rules would also boost accountability and some might view them as more democratic in the sense that they reduce the discretionary power of unelected officials . the economic tradeoff between rules and discretion is of a different nature .