plans may be combined . tax benefits are also provided for acquiring employer stock that is not restricted to retirement plans . these benefits include benefits for stock options and stock purchase plans: the former aregenerally directed to high ranking employees and managers , while the latter are generally availableto all employees . why should firms pay employee compensation in the form of pension or profit sharing plans ( or other fringe benefits ) rather than in cash ? the previous section has suggested private motives even in the absence of tax benefits fordefined benefit pension plans and for stock ownership plans , but there does not appear to be a strongprivate rationale for defined contribution plans not held in the form of employer stock . clearlyanother reason for pension and profit sharing plans that may play a crucial role in encouraging theseplans , particularly defined contribution plans not invested in employer stock , is the tax benefitsassociated with them . amounts contributed to a pension plan and their earnings are not subject totax until received as pensions , usually many years into the future . the combination of deferral of taxon the initial contribution and deferral of tax on earnings is the equivalent of an exemption ofearnings from tax , and is thus a valuable tax benefit . why should the government intervene with tax subsidies ( and regulations ) to shape the compensation package ? and why should it intervene with mixed signals , including both benefitsfor and restrictions on ownership of employer stock in pension plans ? the first set of rationales for supporting pension plans are also are among the reasons for establishing social security: adverse selection in annuity markets and failure of individualoptimization ( failure to save a desirable amount ) . ( 3 ) adverse selection in annuity markets occursbecause individuals expecting to have a shorter life span will avoid the annuities market , therebymaking the annuities unattractive for the average individual . this rationale would justify taxsubsidies to pension plans that provide retirement annuities , early vesting , and mandates for broadcoverage of employees . ( the latter rule is probably necessary in any case to prevent the tax benefitsfrom becoming a tax shelter for highly compensated employees. ) of course , it is not clear thatindividuals do not save enough , and it is not clear why using resources ( in the form of reduced taxes ) to encourage a private pension system that covers about half of workers should be preferred todevoting those resources to an expansion of social security . the entire pension system has been shifting away from plans that address these goals: many defined contribution plans have a lump - sum payoff option , and defined benefit plans have beenincreasingly displaced by defined contribution plans . 401 ( k ) plans , which have become verypopular , allow voluntary , not mandatory , contributions . outside of certain defined benefit plans,the current systems have simply become primarily ways to obtain tax benefits . of course , arguments are made that these tax benefits have encouraged saving , but neither economic theory nor empirical evidence has confirmed that view . ( 4 ) in any case , this rationalesuggests that prudence in investment is important to encourage .