the problem here is cost . storing oil and natural gas is expensive , making this strategy unattractive if cheaper alternatives are available . long term contracting at fixed prices might also reduce the firm's exposure to price volatility . in practice , very few futures contracts traded on markets like the nymex are ever settled through physical delivery of the product . the nymex contracts allow for cash settlement . physical purchases can then be made on the spot market at then current market prices . while cash settlement expands the spectrum of participants in the market and is more efficient than physical delivery for most contract holders , it can create the perception that the motivation and focus of the contracts are a purely financial bet on the future price of oil rather than a business strategy designed to reduce risk . an important distinction between derivatives is whether they are traded on an organized exchange like the nymex or whether they are traded on the otc market . energy derivatives traded on the nymex are standardized contracts for a fixed amount of underlying product , delivered at a specified date , with a specified price , at a particular location . for example , the light , sweet crude oil futures contract discussed above is for 1000 barrels of west texas intermediate , on one of a set of pre - specified dates , for delivery at cushing , ok . the "same" oil delivered at a different location at a different time might well have a different value . the specificity of traded nymex contracts stimulates the need for otc derivatives by creating basis risk . basis risk arises from the fact that a physical good's location , delivery time , quality , and other product characteristics might cause its price to differ from a similar good with different characteristics . the implication of basis risk is that it is not generally possible to establish a perfect hedge using only exchange traded futures . in contrast to nymex traded contracts , otc contracts are custom designed to reflect the specific needs of the contracting parties . these contracts are typically one - on - one arrangements , traditionally with a financial institution acting as a fee - earning middleman , broker and manager . during the 1990s , a number of energy trading companies , of which enron was perhaps the best known , became active participants in the otc derivative market . not only did these trading firms broker contracts , they also expanded their role to become the counterparty to the contracts . since the terms and specifications of the contracts can literally be anything the parties agree upon , the degree and scope of risk faced by the counterparty trading firms is increased substantially . the ability to customize contracts to provide a unique risk management profile brings distinct advantages which must be balanced against the disadvantages of otc contracts . derivatives traded on the nymex have a high degree of liquidity , while otc contracts generally are less liquid . a party on either side of a nymex contract can cancel its position at any time by buying , or selling , a contract that is opposite its original contract .