privilege . 663 would haveprotected patient safety work product from discovery in connection with a civil and administrativeproceeding , and from admission as evidence or disclosure in any such proceeding . patient safetywork product would not be protected from use in criminal proceedings . by comparison , s. 544 would prohibit lawyers from obtaining or using patient safety data in civil,administrative , and criminal proceedings , unless a judge determined that the information containedevidence of "a wanton and criminal act to directly harm the patient. that language was includedis an effort to ensure that the legislation does not unduly compromise the rights of injured patientsto obtain compensation . in its 1999 report , the iom focused on protecting voluntarily reported patient safetyinformation from discovery and admission as evidence in civil and administrative proceeding , notingthat "instances of criminal prosecution for medical errors are exceptionally rare. the intent was toencourage the voluntary reporting of information about near misses and other problems that wouldotherwise go unreported were it not for legal protection . analysis of such information would thenbe used to identify vulnerabilities in health care systems . voluntary reporting systems , as envisionedby the iom , would not interfere with the mandatory reporting of more serious errors , as requiredunder state law and other accountability systems . confidentiality . s. 544 designatespatient safety data as confidential and not subject to disclosure , except in certain specifiedcircumstances ( eg , disclosure by a provider to a pso ) . negligent or intentional disclosure of patientsafety data in violation of the bill's confidentiality provisions is subject to civil fines of up to $10,000per violation . 663 also specified the circumstances under which disclosure of patientsafety work product ( identifiable and nonidentifiable ) was permitted and provided for penalties ofup to $10,000 per violation for disclosures other than those permitted . unlike s. 544 ,the house bill did not expressly state that work product is confidential , though this was implied inthe bill's language . 663 said that disclosures in violation of the bill's provisionsare unlawful and subject to fines , provided such disclosures constitute "a negligent or knowingbreach of confidentiality. 663 and s. 554 state that if the disclosure is in violationof the hipaa privacy rule , then the hipaa penalties apply instead . for details of the civil andcriminal penalties under hipaa , see crs report rs20500 , medical records privacy: questionsand answers on the hipaa rule . pso certification and listing . under the patientsafety legislation , providers would voluntarily submit information on medical errors to public orprivate entities designated as psos . the psos would analyze the data and develop and disseminateevidence - based information to providers to help them implement changes that would improve patientsafety . 663 would have required ahrq to establish a process for certifying psos . as noted above , both billsprovide for civil monetary penalties of up to $10,000 for each negligent or intentional disclosure ofpatient safety information in violation of the provisions in the legislation . the bills also prohibit ahealth care provider from taking any adverse employment action against an employee who in goodfaith reports information to the provider with the intention of having it reported to a pso , or whoreports the information directly to a pso . but whereas h.r .