these mainly involve the u.s. marines stationed there . military operations in the event of a regional conflict . although thejapanese government has rarely issued objections to the u.s. military's joint operations with japanin the past , prior to the recent response to the u.s. - led anti - terrorist campaign in afghanistan , suchactivities have been carefully restricted to training exercises having limited objectives such assea - lane defense , air defense , or peacekeeping support . current rules of engagement governing theoperations of the japanese navy rule out activities that could be construed as combat support of u.s.forces for any missions not involving the defense of japanese territory . if a missile defense capability were deployed on japan's aegis destroyers and a conflicterupted on the korean peninsula on between china and taiwan , the united states might put pressureon japan to deploy some missile defense capability outside its own territory . under prevailingjapanese rules of engagement and constitutional interpretations , a favorable japanese response wouldappear all but impossible . less clear is whether in a crisis situation the exchange of real - time data between japaneseaegis ships equipped with a bmd capability could pass political or constitutional muster . forinstance , could japanese ships equipped with the sea - based midcourse system back up moreforward - deployed u.s. units with supplementary target information ? presumably they could , so longas japanese territory or u.s. bases in japan were possible targets of a missile attack . under currentjapanese constitutional constraints , however , the u.s. military would likely find it prudent not tocount on japanese participation in anything short of a clear and present threat to japanese territory . the example of prime minister koizumi reversing his decision to send an aegis - equipped destroyerto the indian ocean is a case in point . in summary , an integrated binational bmd capability could be highly useful in situations thatalso threatened japanese territory , but might be of little utility to u.s. forces in situations outsidejapanese territorial waters or not involving an attack on japanese territory . in these cases , u.s.forces presumably would have to operate independently . since bmd capable ships are beingdesigned to be self - supporting , if necessary , these limitations are not critical , but they raise questionsabout the ultimate value to u.s. security of a japanese bmd capability . japanese perspectives on the limits of the collective security ban are in flux , and primeminister koizumi has speculated in public that japan might have to have a more open mind abouta situation involving an attack on u.s. military forces in the region . ( 67 ) while campaigning forthe ldp presidency , koizumi said that he would give high priority to constitutional revision , butsince taking office he has given first priority to his call for the direct election of the prime minister,and appears to have downgraded the urgency of revising article 9 , while calling for continueddiscussion of the issue . the prime minister's caution may reflect repeated polls consistently showingthat 70% or more of the respondents oppose revising article 9 . ( 68 ) 3 ) impact of japan's active involvement in regional deploymentof a bmd system on u.s. operational flexibility .