the term "conflict of interest" may have a broad meaning in general usage . however , under federal law and regulation a "conflict of interest," for the most part , deals with a conflict between a federal employee's official , governmental duties and responsibilities on the one hand , and the personal , financial , or economic interests of the employee on the other . when the official duties of a government employee may impact upon the outside , private business or economic interests of that employee , or the economic interests of those closely associated with the employee , a conflict of interest situation presents itself . the disqualification requirement for those who are part of formal adjudications was "never intended ... to apply in a rulemaking procedure," even a formal rulemaking procedure . while there could be concerns raised about general notions of "bias" or partiality in a governmental function based on alleged associations , past or present , of particular employees involved in a particular matter , issues involving the ethics and conflict provisions in internal governmental standards of conduct regulations are generally not amenable to legal resolution by private litigants . that is , those regulations do not raise an actionable standard for litigation by outside private parties , but rather are generally considered internal , discretionary or disciplinary matters within the agency . federal conflict of interest law and regulation focuses primarily on current economic and financial interests of a government official and those closely associated with the official . however , there are some limited conflict of interest regulations and ethics standards which look also to previous employment and past associations of those becoming federal officers and employees . the overall scheme of the conflict of interest laws adopted by congress generally embodies the principle "that a public servant owes undivided loyalty to the government," and that advice and recommendations given to the government by its employees and officials be made in the public interest and not be tainted , even unintentionally , with influence from private or personal financial interests . the "general principles" in the oge regulations regarding financial interests and connections , outside employment or activities , and "impartiality," are fleshed out and covered in the more specific regulations promulgated by oge . although the basic impartiality language is fairly broad on its face , the "impartiality" actually required of a federal employee in a governmental matter by the specific conflict of interest and federal ethics standards , is a disinterestedness in the matter from the point of view of any financial impact that such a matter may have upon the employee personally , or upon certain entities , persons , or organizations which are closely associated with the employee , such that the financial interests of such entities or persons may be fairly "imputed" to the employee . as noted by the office of government ethics , questions regarding impartiality necessarily arise when an employee's official duties impact upon the employee's own financial interests or those of certain other persons , such as the employee's spouse or minor child .