1588 on may 16 ( h.rept . 108-106 ) ; the house committee on government reformreported h.r . 1836 on may 8 ( ordered to reported ( amended ) by voice vote ) . this report summarizes and lists all of the proposal's sections along side the relevant provisions in current law , if they exist , that would have been impacted by the proposal . the idea is to providethe reader with a type of roadmap that would help relate each aspect of the proposal to existing law . provisions from the homeland security act ( hsa ) of 2002 specific to personnel management in thedepartment of homeland security are listed separately from the rest of the current law primarilybecause they are the most recent legislative actions impacting title 5 . hsa provisions that appliedgovernment - wide are covered under "current law" ( column 2 ) of the report . hsa provisions alsorepresent the broadest changes in title 5 in a number of years . the dod proposal , if it had beenenacted in its entirety , would have resulted in significantly greater changes in title 5 than the hsachanges . because the dod proposal covered such a wide spectrum of current law , a number of congressional research service ( crs ) analysts and attorneys contributed to this report . most arelisted with their subject coverage in a separate table in this report . crs made every effort to becomprehensive in identifying statutes currently in effect which would relate to the proposed changein the law . however , there may be some provision in law which has been inadvertently omitted . this report will not be updated unless additional clarification of dod's proposal or relevant currentlaw is warranted . defense department original transformation proposal: compared to existing law key policy staf . a number of congressional committees have begun actionon various parts of this proposal . the senate armed services committee reported s. 1050 on may 9 ( s.rept . 108-46 ) , and the house armed services committee reported h.r . the changes would have occurred ina number of titles in the u.s. code ; but , primarily in title 5 ( government organization andemployees ) and title 10 ( armed forces ) . in april 2003 , the department of defense ( dod ) sent congress a proposal entitled , "defensetransformation for the 21st century act of 2003. . ( 1 ) the 207-page proposal would have made manychanges , in some cases major changes , in the military personnel and acquisition systems , and in thestatutory basis for much of dod's civilian personnel system .