there are a few exceptions . tax policy may address energy price directly to the extent that excise taxes on fuel products can be raised or lowered ( recognizing that these tax boosts or cuts may not be reflected penny - for - penny in the "pump" price for fuels ) . short - term policies to affect supply , such as potential use of strategic reserves , have been sometimes very controversial because , in the absence of a very clear - cut and widely acknowledged physical shortage , such initiatives are perceived to be thinly disguised efforts to grant price relief . some suggest at times that high prices — left uninterfered with — are the best policy of all , encouraging markets to provide more supply in due course , and that federal policy should address only those most adversely affected by sharply higher prices . the low income home energy assistance program ( liheap ) is one such effort to provide direct assistance to families whose quality of life is especially burdened by high energy prices . liheap is a short - term policy for addressing the impact of high prices for energy . how to boost energy supply without exacting an unacceptable toll on the environment ? how , then , to reduce gasoline consumption , a commodity central to the nation's economy and lifestyle , when raising its price to achieve a meaningful reduction in demand could be economically disruptive and politically unappealing ? should federal policy encourage the use of more expensive alternative fuels and technologies that heighten efficiency , when opec has generally demonstrated a capability to adjust the price of oil to keep it far cheaper than its substitutes ? debate over energy policy has produced an enormous range of proposals , many of which have been adopted at one point or another over the years . in general , it is helpful to recognize the broad categories into which most proposals fall: most energy policies are designed to affect either the supply of or the demand for energy products , and they are , at the same time , designed to have an effect either in the near term or the longer term . traditionally , the energy debate has been the most vigorous over the balance to be struck between increasing supply and encouraging conservation . however , energy policy turns on the additional axis of short - and long - term policies . in the midst of high prices during the spring of 2001 , policymakers were pressed to come up with immediate policy responses that would afford consumers price relief . however , at that time president bush was advising congress and americans that the administration's energy policy plan would focus on long - term remedies for the nation's energy problems and that there would be no immediate relief for consumers paying higher prices for gasoline , electricity , and other fuels . the president and his supporters suggested that by setting out an action - oriented and actionable comprehensive policy , markets and consumers should feel some short - term reassurance . this did not quell all the demands for more immediate action to reduce energy prices .