argentina ) . its largest export market is the european union , which accountedfor 23% of exports in 2002 , followed by the united states with 20% , and latin america with 19% . japan accounted for 11% of chilean exports and the rest of asia 17% . these figures reflect somerelative change over the past decade , as seen in the growth patterns in figure 1 . figure 1 . growth in chilean trade with majorpartners , 1993-2001 trade data reflect chile's open and independent trade policy . its exports to the worldexpanded by 89% over the eight years 1993-2001 ( see figure 1 ) and imports grew by 56% . u.s. - chile merchandise trade,1985-200 . table 3 . major u.s. - chile product trade and tariff rates,2002 / 2003 ( % of total dollar value ) data source: u.s. department of commerce . * by hts number = harmonized tariff schedule of the united states . note , hts numbers are notprovided on u.s. exports , which are subject to chile's 6% nominal uniform import tariff rate . ** ntr is the general or normal tariff rates ( also known as most favored nation rates ) applied toproducts not given preferential tariff treatment . # gsp = generalized system of preferences or preferential tariff treatment given to selectdeveloping country imports by developed countries . some imports receive gsp treatmentonly if the exporting country is considered a "least developed country. because chile doesnot qualify under this designation , most of its exports to the united states are not eligible forgsp treatment . # limited trade agreement negotiated under guidelines see forth by the latin american integrationassociation ( laia ) , known in spanish as the asociaci達続n latinoamericana de integraci達続n ( aladi ) . * guatemala , honduras , nicaragua , el salvador , and costa rica ( ratified january 2002 ) . data source: organization of american states . foreign trade information system . this may befound at: http: / / www.sice.oas.org and embassy of chile . although chile is not part of the andean community or a full partner of mercosur , its fastest exportgrowth has been intra - regional , a testament to chile's trade strategy that combines unilateralreductions in tariff and nontariff barriers with an aggressive effort to enter into bilateralarrangements . from 1993 to 2001 , chilean exports expanded by 126% to latin america , comparedto 100% to the united states , 43% to japan , 70% to the rest of asia , and 71% to the europeanunion . chile's trade with canada points to another interesting trend . although the dollar value ofexports is very small , it grew by some 380% , an issue that was not lost on many u.s. businessadvocates of a u.s. - chile fta , who argued that the chile - canada fta put u.s. firms at acompetitive disadvantage until a similar or better agreement could be reached with the united states . figure 2 . chile direction of trade , 2002 as seen in figure 2 , chile has diversified export markets , which not only increasesopportunities for trade , but also reduces dependence on a few markets and thereby softens exposureto foreign shocks ( e.g .