— were completed . nearly a half - million police and military security forces were trained and equipped . health facilities were rehabilitated and equipped , health care providers trained , and medical services such as immunizations provided . the deepwater port at umm qasr was restored , as were 96 of 98 railway stations , two international airports , and three regional ones . local governance was strengthened through establishment of councils and community associations . more than 6,000 grassroots projects were conducted through usaid grants provided to more than 1,450 community action groups . voter education , training of election monitors , and related activities contributed to three successful elections in 2005 . technical experts provided advice to government agencies regarding adoption of budgetary and management reforms . about 6,716 schools were rehabilitated and 60,000 teachers trained . irrigation systems were rehabilitated , 68 veterinary clinics reconstructed , and 83,500 date palm offshoots planted . agricultural extension agents were trained and agribusiness supported . credit was provided to micro and small business . u.s. - funded projects added 2,500 megawatts ( mw ) to iraq's generating capacity . water and sanitation sector assistance provided clean water to 6.7 million people and sanitation to 5.1 million . oil production , largely stagnant in the first years , by 2008 had risen to near pre - war levels . yet , along with the accomplishments have come less than satisfactory outcomes . in the critical sectors of electric power and oil production , outputs were less than originally envisioned . many health - related construction projects experienced considerable delays , and contracts won by u.s. firms had to be revoked and re - awarded to iraqis , including 12 of 20 refurbished hospitals . only 91 of a planned 142 new clinics will be completed with u.s. funding . further , the basrah children's hospital had significant cost overruns . although the airports and seaport showed considerable activity , only a tiny percentage of iraqi trains ran because of security concerns , although numbers have been improving since 2008 . despite democratization efforts , halting progress has been made on achieving national reconciliation . moreover , the impact of u.s. projects on iraq is hard to estimate , and the extent to which they and other - donor contributions meet the total needs of iraq has not been fully assessed . while the u.s. water and sanitation contribution has been significant , the international committee of the red cross estimated in 2008 that more than 40% of iraqis do not have access to clean water . despite u.s. efforts in the health sector , oxfam reported in 2007 that 90% of iraq's 180 hospitals lacked basic medical and surgical supplies . u.s. transport assistance is said to have repaired only 8 bridges of 1,156 in poor condition or destroyed . although mismanagement and corruption play a large role in diminishing returns from reconstruction efforts , it has been the lack of stability and the effects of the insurgency that have most affected the course of reconstruction . a more peaceful environment since 2007 has set the stage for noteworthy improvements in the electric , oil , and other sectors .