sec . special measures . sec . 311 authorizes the secretary of the treasury ( the secretary ) to impose certain regulatory restrictions , known as "specialmeasures," upon finding that a jurisdiction outside the u.s. , a financial institution outside the u.s.,a class of transactions involving a jurisdiction outside the u.s. , or a type of account , is "of primarymoney laundering concern. sec . 325 authorizes thesecretary of the treasury to prescribe regulations governing maintenance of concentration accountsby financial institutions . if issued , such regulations must prohibit financial institutions fromallowing clients to direct transactions through those accounts , prohibit financial institutions frominforming customers of the means of identifying such accounts , and require each financial institutionto establish written procedures to document all transactions involving a concentration account insuch a way that amounts belonging to each customer may be identified . verification of identification . sec . 326 requires the secretary of the treasury , jointly with appropriate regulators of financial institutions , within ayear of enactment , to prescribe minimum standards for identifying customers opening accounts atfinancial institutions . these are to include procedures to verify customer identity and compare withgovernment lists of terrorists and terrorist organizations . under this section , the secretary is requiredto submit a report to congress within six months of enactment , recommending a means of insuringsimilarly accurate identification of foreign nationals , requiring an identification number similar toa social security number or a tax identification number for foreign nationals opening accounts atfinancial institutions , and setting up a system for financial institutions to review information heldby government agencies to verify identities of foreign nationals opening accounts . consideration of anti - money laundering record . sec . 327 amends the bank holding company act and the federal deposit insurance act , to requirethat , before approving certain acquisition or merger applications under the bank holding companyact or the federal deposit insurance act , the board of governors of the federal reserve system andthe federal deposit insurance corporation must consider the institution's effectiveness in combatingmoney laundering . international cooperation on identification of originators of wiretransfers . sec . 328 requires the secretary of the treasury to encourage foreigngovernments to require the name of the originator in wire transfer instructions and include it fromorigination to disbursement . the secretary is to report annually on progress toward this end to thehouse financial services committee and senate banking , housing , and urban affairs committee . criminal penalties . sec . 329 criminalizes the soliciting or acceptance of a bribe by anyone acting on behalf of an entity of the federal governmentin connection with the administration of the international money laundering abatement andanti - terrorist financing act of 2001 , subject to a fine of up to three times the value of the thingconstituting the bribe , 15 years imprisonment , or both . international cooperation in money laundering investigations . sec . 330 states the sense of congress that international negotiationsshould be pursued for further cooperative efforts to insure that foreign financial institutions maintainadequate records relating to foreign terrorist organizations and money launderers and make suchrecords available to u.s. law enforcement officials and domestic financial institution supervisors . amendments relating to reporting of suspicious activities . sec .