some pledged contributions are also late . these problems create a general cash availability crisis . in february 2002 , unhcr froze its administrative budgets . as of june 30 , 2002 , only $678 million had been received as income , which led to an 11% decrease in planned programs . the unhcr annual budget was cut in calendar year ( cy ) 2002 from just over $800 million to $710 million . for example , in response to the need to help kurdish refugees displaced after the persian gulf war in 1991 , congress transferred interest on money from the persian gulf regional defense fund and defense cooperation account , two funds established to channel contributions from other countries to counterbalance u.s. iraqi war expenses . a supplemental appropriation in fy1994 provided assistance for the rwanda emergencies . supplemental legislation enacted in the spring of 1999 ( p.l . 106-31 ) reimbursed the agencies and provided new funding for aid both in central america and the caribbean , for natural disaster response , and to pay for humanitarian assistance to kosovo . the administration requested an fy2000 supplemental to meet the continuing needs in kosovo and most recently in the fy2002 supplemental request for afghanistan . the cost of responding to refugee and humanitarian emergencies has risen . pressure on the foreign affairs budget , the 150 account , caused by rising emergency costs , has led to concerns about the bilateral development assistance programs . in the last few years , many of the private voluntary agencies working in the development field , as well as u.n. and u.s. development specialists have expressed concern that the rising costs of emergency assistance are reducing the amount of money available for development assistance . several approaches have been used to address the growing need for refugee assistance and the anticipated growth in refugee repatriation needs without further draining the development aid accounts . meeting the growing need for humanitarian assistance to refugees in other countries within a constrained budget can also be helped by improving the effectiveness and efficiency of international refugee organizations . the clinton administration emphasized the need for efficiency in the u.n. refugee agencies . according to unhcr , these funding shortfalls have most seriously affected programs in africa , as well as in thailand , papua new guinea , and the caucasus . while unhcr continues to encourage contributions from additional governments , the small number of donors , in addition to earmarking contributions for particular refugee situations or programs , has led to problems funding refugee emergencies . the unpredictability of global conflicts also contribute to unhcr's financial difficulties . unhcr cannot fully anticipate the extent and costs of new refugee emergencies . during cy2002 , unhcr had to make a supplemental appeal to fund new emergency needs in afghanistan , macedonia , east timor , liberia , angola , and zambia , as well as the new programs to protect u.n. personnel . for cy2003 , unhcr has made another supplemental appeal .