charter schools . special education . the district's special education program has long been characterized as ineffective and inefficient . the system has been plagued by problems in transporting students to specialeducation facilities and in the timely evaluation of students who may have specialneeds . delays in the period between the time a student is referred and assessedincreases the number of students placed in private educational institutions , whichadds to the cost of special education . concern about the cost of these delaysprompted congress to include a provision in the district of columbia appropriationsact for fy1999 that extends the time period between referral and assessment of astudent with special education needs , as defined by the individuals with disabilitieseducation act ( idea ) ( 17 ) or the rehabilitationeducation act , ( 18 ) from 50 days to 120days . 108-7 does not include the 120-dayspecial education evaluation andplacement time period included in previous appropriations acts . in addition , the 1999 appropriations act for the district of columbia limited the amount of compensation payable to attorneys representing disabled students whoprevailed in an action brought against the district of columbia public schools ( dcps ) under the idea . subsequent appropriations acts for fy2000 and fy2001,also limited the amount of funds payable to attorneys successfully representingstudents seeking special education services . the fy1999 act limited attorneys' feesto an hourly rate of $50 and a case ceiling of $1,300 ; the fy2000 limit was $60 perhour and a case ceiling of $1,560 ; and the fy2001 rate was $125 per hour with a caseceiling of $2,500 . the district's fy2002 appropriations act lifted the ceiling , in part , in response to the argument that the ceiling placed a hardship on households with limitedfinancial resources . he signed p.l . 101-168 after insisting that congress include language prohibiting the use of district revenuesto pay for abortion services except in cases where the mother's life was endangered . ( 14 ) the district successfully fought for the removal of the provision limiting district funding of abortion services when congress considered and passed thedistrict of columbia appropriations act for fy1994 , p.l . the fy1994 actalso reinstated rape and incest as qualifying circumstances allowing for the publicfunding of abortion services . the district's success was short lived . the district ofcolumbia appropriations act for fy1996 , p.l . 104-134 , and subsequent district ofcolumbia appropriations acts , limited the use of district and federal funds forabortion services to cases where the mother's life is endangered or cases where thepregnancy was the result of rape or incest . 108-7 , continues the restrict on the use of district and federal funds for abortion services except in cases of rape or incest , or the life of the mother isendangered . this is consistent with provisions included in the house and senate versions of the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2003 . 107-96 includes a provision lifting the congressional prohibition on the use of district funds to implement its health care benefits expansion act . ( 15 ) theprovision permits unmarried heterosexual and homosexual couples to register asdomestic partners .