dev . navyprograms . ( 92 ) key navyship - acquisition programs for fy2004 include the virginia ( ssn - 774 ) classsubmarine program , the littoral combat ship ( lcs ) program , the arleigh burke ( ddg - 51 ) class aegis destroyer , the dd ( x ) next - generation destroyer program , thesan antonio ( lpd - 17 ) class amphibius ship program , the lewis and clark ( take - 1 ) auxiliary ship program , the trident cruise - missile submarine ( ssgn ) conversionprogram , and the aegis cruiser ( cg - 47 class ) conversion program . the fy2004budget also includes , among other things , continued advanced procurement fundingfor cvn - 21 , an aircraft carrier to be procured in fy2007 . one issue in congressional hearings on the fy2004 navy program concernsthe planned size and structure of the navy . the 2001 quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) revalidated the plan for a 310-ship navy established by the 1997 qdr , butalso stated that force - structure goals in the 2001 qdr , including the 310-ship goal,were subject to change pending the maturation of dod's transformation efforts . in february 2003 , in submitting its proposed fy2004 defense budget , dodofficials stated that they had launched studies on future requirements for underseawarfare and future options for forcibly entering overseas military theaters . thesestudies have the potential for changing , among other things , the planned number ofattack submarines and the planned size and structure of the amphibious fleet . sinceattack submarines and amphibious ships are two of the four major building blocksof the navy ( the others being aircraft carriers and surface combatants ) , dod , bylaunching these two studies , appears to have taken steps to back away from the310-ship plan . at the same time , the secretary of defense has explicitly declined toendorse a plan for a 375-ship fleet that has been put forward in recent months bynavy leaders . as a result of these events , there is now uncertainty concerning the plannedsize and structure of the navy: dod may no longer support the 310-ship plan , butneither has it endorsed the 375-ship plan or any other replacement plan . thisuncertainty over the planned size and structure of the navy affects surfacecombatants as well as submarines and amphibious ships , because the biggest singledifference between the 310-ship and 375-ship plans is in the area of surfacecombatants . the 310-ship plan includes 116 surface combatants , all of which arecruisers , destroyers , and frigates , while the 375-ship plan includes 160 surfacecombatants , including not only cruisers , destroyers , and frigates , but as many as 60smaller littoral combat ships as well . congressional action: senate and housemarkup . table 9a shows action on major navy programsin the house and senate defense authorization bills , and table 9b shows houseaction in the committee - reported version of the defense appropriations bill . in actionon key issues: carrier replacement program: a major budget decision in thefy2004-fy2009 defense plan was to accelerate the transition to the next generationof carriers by incorporating more advanced technology into the next carrier to befully funded in fy2007 or fy2008 .