98-181 , title xi ) . policies that drive ecosystem restoration efforts are complex . guidelines for participation in meetings and committees are expected to create equitable stakeholder input into the decision - making process and lower delays . application of adaptive management to deal with uncertainty in scientific and other factors in the restoration effort . the use of adaptive management is expected to allow restoration activities to be implemented with fewer delays and provide flexibility for improving activities once they have been implemented . use of interim goals to set targets for restoration activities . interim goals are expected to help restoration efforts focus on pre - determined objectives . further , interim goals can create a basis for evaluating the progress of restoration ( i.e. , whether or not restoration activities meet their goals ) . use of monitoring and assessment to measure progress in restoration activities . monitoring and evaluation restoration efforts are expected to answer the basic question of whether restoration is working . in addition , deficiencies or opportunities for improvement in the restoration effort uncovered by monitoring can be used by adaptive management to improve restoration . everglades national park authorization act of 1936 ( 16 u.s.c . set aside 1.3 million acres as wilderness to create everglades national park . the park was dedicated by president truman in 1947 . river basin monetary authorization and miscellaneous civil works amendments act of 1970 ( p.l . set minimum water flow of 315,000 acre / feet per year from the central and southern florida project to everglades national park . supplemental appropriations act of 1984 ( p.l . authorized corps to modify water delivery to everglades national park , thereby increasing water flowing into the park . the everglades national park protection and expansion act of 1989 ( p.l . 410 ( r ) ( 8 ) ) . expanded everglades national park and authorizes restoration projects ( eg , modified water deliveries project ) to increase the natural water deliveries to the park . water resources development act of 1992 ( p.l . authorized the restoration of the kissimmee river projects ( ยง101 ( 8 ) ) and creation of the central and southern florida project restudy ( ยง301 ( l ) ) . 1994 amendment to everglades national park protection and expansion act of 1989 ( p.l . authorized federal funds to assist the state of florida to acquire land adjacent to the park to improve water flows for restoration . water resources development act of 1996 ( wrda 1996 , p.l . 104-303 ; title v , ยง528 ) . expanded the task force to include tribal , state and local governments and authorized the task force to address the entire scope of the restoration process . directed the us army corps of engineers to devise a comprehensive plan for restoration . water resources development act of 2000 ( wrda 2000 , p.l . 106-541 ; title vi , ยง601 ) . approved comprehensive everglades restoration plan ( cerp ) , which outlines 68 infrastructure projects to modify water delivery systems to improve water quality , distribution , quantity and timing to the natural system without sacrificing urban and agricultural needs .