susan rice , then the u.s . the next presidential election is scheduled for 2015 and the next parliamentary election is to be held by 2016 . given the upfa's large majority in parliament , it is likely that it will serve out its full term . the current government is accused of a number of serious human rights violations that have persisted since the civil war ended . they include the targeting , surveillance , and limitation of free speech by the media and individuals . president rajapaksa has also appointed family members to high ranking government positions . human rights groups say the government has also killed , threatened , or detained human rights defenders , and remains non - trasparent . sri lanka's economy mainly relies on the services sector , and has a thriving tourism market . it additionally relies on agriculture and , to a lesser extent , industry , with the largest exports being garments , tea , spices , rubber , gems and jewelry , refined petroleum , fish , and coconuts / coconut products . nearly 20% of the nation's exports reach the united states , though other large trading partners include neighboring india and several european union nations . rajapaksa has identified improving the investment climate in sri lanka as a priority . large trade and balance of payments deficits remain a concern . other presidential economic priorities reportedly include rural and infrastructure development . sri lanka and the united states have an important bilateral economic relation . the u.s. department of state notes: the united states is sri lanka's second - biggest market for garments , taking almost 40% of total garment exports . united states exports to sri lanka were estimated at $302 million for 2011 , consisting primarily of wheat , aircraft and parts , machinery and mechanical appliances , plastics , and medical and scientific equipment . india remains the largest source of foreign investment in sri lanka , with direct investments of over $1 billion in the last ten years . other large investors include taiwan , canada , the virgin islands , netherlands , singapore , the united kingdom , the united states , and australia . colombo has faced criticism for the way it has addressed alleged domestic human rights violations . the government has been accused by the international community of favoring the sinhalese people , and doing little to promote equal political voice and economic opportunities for its tamil population . the human rights abuses that the sri lankan government has been accused of include control over the media and harassment of journalists , sudden "disappearances" in the forms of arrests or abductions of tamil sympathizers , the military's monitoring and control of tamil populations in the north and eastern provinces , and insufficient government interest in investigating the location and status of former tamil militants , despite family requests . abuses against women have also increased in recent years . the political divisions between the sinhalese and tamil populations remain serious .