encourage more privatization of media . under the auspices of the state department's middle east partnership initiative ( mepi ) , there have been plans to fund media reformprograms in some arab states . as mepi is just starting to take shape , the initiative could fund mediatraining for aspiring journalists , as well as programs that promote freedom of thepress . ( 44 ) one argument , which is widely circulated in arab intellectual circles , is that the best way to combat the coverage of channels such as al - jazeera would be to focus u.s. foreign policy on solvingthe arab - israeli conflict . others argue that biased coverage will continue no matter what directionthe united states takes its policy in the middle east . with the united states heavily engaged in iraq,afghanistan , and elsewhere , al - jazeera will continue to play a role in reporting and interpreting u.s.foreign policy to the arab world . a range of possible actions has been proposed . in one category are actions that activelypromote u.s. policy . they include: create an alternative arabic language television network . in the emergency supplemental appropriations bill of april 16 , 2003 ( p.l . 108-11 ) , congress designated $30.5 millionfor the middle east television network ( metn ) . ( 41 ) according to norman pattiz , the founder andchairman of westwood one radio network and a member of the u.s. broadcasting board ofgovernors ( bbg ) , "as most people in the region get their news and information from tv , we needto be on tv so we can explain america and its policies , its people , and its culture from our own lipsrather than have it described by the indigenous media. ( 42 ) the exact scope and style of metn hasyet to be determined . the bbg already sponsors radio sawa , an arabic radio station , whichcombines popular music with news headlines . tie foreign aid to media reform . some analysts contend that this technique , which has worked for some human rights cases , might be applied to the media as well . buy commercial air time on arab networks . during the last two years , the state department office of public diplomacy has been implementing the "shared values program," a $15million effort to promote positive images of muslim life in america . tv advertisements depictingamerican muslims ran for 5 weeks in late 2003 in pakistan , kuwait , malaysia , and on somepan - arab channels , but not al - jazeera . ( 43 ) althoughthe overall campaign continues , the statedepartment stopped running the commercials after the governments of jordan , egypt , and lebanonrefused to carry them on state - run television . other policy experts have suggested more indirect ways of influencing the arab media , including the following actions: have u.s. officials engage the arab media more actively . as previously mentioned , top united states cabinet officials have appeared on al - jazeera television for interviews.proponents of this strategy believe that more appearances by u.s. officials , particularly those fluentin arabic , would convey confidence in u.s. foreign policy .