two initiatives , h.r . up to $3.227 million in prior year "militaryassistance program" funds available for guatemala may be used for non - lethal defense items if thesecretary of state certifies that certain military reforms have been enacted . these would include thelimitation both "in doctrine and practice" of military activities to those permitted by the 1996 peaceaccords and cooperation with civilian authorities in the investigation and prosecution of militarypersonnel implicated in human rights violations and other criminal activities . the guatemalangovernment would have to carry out other prerequisites for the release of military assistance funds,including working with the u.n. to establish ciciacs ; continuing to make the military budgetprocess transparent and accessible to civilian authorities and the public ; facilitating the promptestablishment of a u.n. high commissioner for human rights office in guatemala ; and increasingefforts to combat narcotics trafficking and organized crime . the act also earmarks for guatemala$6 million in economic support funds and $1 million in andean counternarcotics initiative funds . the bill also stipulates that child survival and health , and development assistance funding levelsshould not be less than that provided in fy2004 , earmarking $22.5 million for guatemala . themanagers' statement commended the guatemalan ( and nicaraguan ) anti - corruption office andrecommended $250,000 for the office . long - term political conflict in haiti escalated until armed rebellions around the country led to the departure of president jean - bertrand aristide on february 29 , 2004 . an interim government,headed by prime minister gerard latortue , has taken over , but ongoing violent protests by bothsides continue . security conditions are so tenuous that some observers are expressing concerns thata civil war will break out or that haiti will become a "criminal state. aristide went into exile insouth africa on may 31 , 2004 . some supporters maintain that he is still the democratically electedpresident and that the united states forced him from office , a charge the bush administration denies . former soldiers have demanded restoration of the haitian army , which had a long history of human rights abuses and was disbanded by aristide in 1995 . a 36-year civil war ended in 1996 with the signing of the peace accords between the governmentand the left - wing guerrilla movement . the accords not only ended the civil conflict but alsoconstituted a blueprint for profound political , economic , and social change to address the conflict'sroot causes . they outline a profound restructuring of state institutions , with the goal of endinggovernment security forces' impunity from prosecution , and consolidating the rule of law ; a majorshift of government funding away from the military and into health , education , and other basicservices to reach the rural and indigenous poor ; and the full participation of the indigenouspopulation in local and national decision making processes . the bush administrationcondemned the violent "systematic campaign to destabilize the interim government and disrupt theefforts of the international community to assist the haitian people" it says is being carried out bypro - aristide armed gangs . ( 13 ) both sides areheavily armed . the haitian national police areunderstaffed and under - equipped to maintain order .