secretary. ( 27 ) on march 1 , 2000 , representative gilman introduced h.r . to the west . looking toward its reconstruction , iraq has great potential as an oil producer . its current amount of proven reserves could support further oilfield development - - given the availability of investmentand technology - - to greatly expand output . and , since there has been little exploration in iraq formany years , it is believed that greater oil resources are potentially discoverable . were these resourcesto prove out , iraq could potentially rival saudi arabia and russia as the world's largest oil producer,upsetting the balance of power in the petroleum geopolitical arena and potentially having a profoundimpact on pricing . but this might not happen quickly: it could take up to two years of rehabilitationto boost iraq's output to its historic high levels ( 2 ) to offer protection in the event that world oil supply had been more seriously impacted for a longer period , the united states has a range of policy options that are available for a timelyresponse . chief among these tools is the strategic petroleum reserve ( spr ) , which has an initialdrawdown rate of 4.3 million barrels per day ( mbd ) . a northeast heating oil reserve ( nhor ) could provide temporary relief should there be shortages of home heating oil in new england . thepresident can also release funds from liheap , the low income home energy assistance program . these and other short - term options are discussed in greater detail below . because disruption andprice spikes often spur discussion about energy conservation , and diversification of energyproduction and sources for imported oil , longer - term policies , such as raising corporate averagefuel economy ( cafe ) standards , are also discussed in this report . the organization of petroleum exporting countries consists of 11 members - - algeria,indonesia , iran , iraq , kuwait , libya , nigeria , qatar , saudi arabia , the united arab emirates ( uae ) ,and venezuela . these nations own two - thirds of the world's proven crude oil reserves and controlabout one - third of the world's current production . with world oil market stakes this big , opec actsas a cartel , attempting to balance supply with demand to achieve certain price levels . opecadministers a set of crude oil production quotas for its members , attempting to maintain prices in arange of $22 to $28 per barrel established in march 2000 . the opec quotas nominally restrict production . however , the june 2003 quota - - set at opec's april 24 meeting - - was 25.4 mbd ( minus iraq ) , while doe estimated that the 10 membersproduced 26.4 mbd in april , having ramped up production throughout the winter to compensate forthe expected loss of iraqi crude and a venezuelan output shortfall . ( 3 ) as shown in table 1 , most ofopec's surplus capacity is located in saudi arabia , which has 10.0 mbd of capacity , which couldincrease to 10.5 mbd with 90 days' lead time , according to doe's energy informationadministration . table 1 . opec quotas , production , capacity , and surplus output capability ( mbd ) *estimates are uncertain .