this has consequences for the economy in the long run . in the long run , economic growth is dependent on increases in private investment , productivity , and the labor force . by identity , private investment equals national saving less the budget deficit ( foreign saving will be considered below ) . thus , by reducing national saving , budget deficits lead to less private investment . this reduces the size of the economy in the long run , and future standards of living . if the deficit lasts for one year , there would be a one - time reduction in growth . if the deficit lasted for several years , it would reduce growth for the duration of that time . for this reason , economists often describe deficits as placing a burden on future generations . deficits allow individuals to enjoy more consumption today . but since this higher consumption comes at the expense of lower saving , and hence lower investment , it reduces the size of the economy in the future . thus , individuals would enjoy lower consumption in the future . thus far , the mainstream model described has used the assumption that the united states is a closed economy , in which trade and capital does not flow between it and the rest of the world . relaxing this assumption has very important ramifications for interest rates . this mismatch between aggregate demand and aggregate supply must be resolved through market adjustment . market adjustment takes place in four distinct ways , each of which has consequences for interest rates . the greater demand for goods and services pushes up prices , leading to a temporary increase in inflation . because nominal interest rates are equal to real ( inflation - adjusted ) interest rates and the expected inflation rate , an increase in inflation ( if anticipated ) would push up nominal interest rates . if the federal reserve's objective is to maintain a stable inflation rate , as most observers believe , it will offset the rise in demand through a contraction in monetary policy . it will increase short - term real interest rates directly , and this will reduce interest - sensitive spending ( i.e. , private investment and consumer durables ) . in the market for savings , the demand for savings has increased for two reasons . first , because the government is now competing with private firms for the same pool of national saving to finance its deficit , the government has increased the demand for savings directly , and interest rates rise as a result . higher interest rates make investment spending less profitable for private firms , and the budget deficit is thus said to have "crowded out" private investment . second , in response to the greater demand for their goods , firms wish to increase their investment spending in order to increase their supply of goods . investment demand increases in response to the desire for higher production , and interest rates rise as a result . in the money market , the increase in aggregate spending leads to an increase in money demand .