who is a victim . just and timely claims torestitution from the offender this appears to be a fairly dramatic withdrawal from the position taken in the proposals of other congresses . what does it say ? whatis its purpose ? what does its history tell us ? the questions are most perplexing when an apparent conflict exists between state and federal law or among the rights and prerogatives of victims , defendants and prosecutors . the interpretativeprinciples of preemption triggered by an apparent conflict between state and federal law are fairlywell developed . "[p]reemption of state law [may occur] either by express provision , by implication,or by a conflict between federal and state law . and yet , despite the variety of these opportunities forfederal preeminence , [the court has] never assumed lightly that congress has derogated stateregulation , but instead [has] addressed claims of preemption with the starting presumption thatcongress does not intend to supplant state law . indeed , in cases . where federal law is said to barstate action in fields of traditional state regulation , [the court has] worked on the assumption thatthe historic police powers of the states were not to be superseded by the federal act unless that wasthe clear and manifest purpose of congress. ( 30 ) conversely , by virtue of the supremacy clause,where the subject matter is one which the constitution relegates to the federal domain , the vitalityof state law is dependent upon the largess of congress and the constitution . ( 31 ) a victims' rights amendment to the united states constitution that relegates the area to the federal domain , confines state authority to that which the amendment permits or allows congressto permit . few advocates have explicitly called for a "king - of - the - hill" victims' rights amendment,but the thought seems imbedded in the complaint that existing law lacks uniformity . how else canuniversal symmetry be accomplished but by implementation of a single standard that fills in wherepre - existing law comes up short and shaves off where its generosity exceeds the standard ? yet therecent history of the amendment and proposals indicate that advocates intended to establish aminimum rather than a uniform standard . ( 32 ) questions of the amendment's impact on the rights afforded the accused may be even more difficult to discern . the principles of construction called into play in the case of a conflict betweena victims' rights amendment and rights established elsewhere in the constitution are similar to thoseused to resolve federal - state conflicts . intent of the drafters is considered paramount , but the courts will make every effort to reconcile apparent conflicts between constitutional provisions . ( 33 ) in the case of unavoidable conflict betweenprovisions of equal dignity , the latest in time prevails . ( 34 ) if there is an unavoidable conflict betweena right granted by an adopted victims' rights amendment and some other portion of the constitution,the most recently adopted provision will prevail . as discussed below , proposals in the 106th congresscame to naught over the issue of defendants' versus victims' rights . defendants' rights and prosecutors' prerogatives have been the twin achilles' heels ( 36 ) of pastvictims' rights proposals .