agricultural exports . there is mounting concern from u.s. producer groups , administration officials , and other trading partners that chinahas been slow to implement , only partially implemented , or in some instances has failed to complywith agricultural trade commitments made under recent international trade agreements . the speedand manner with which china implements its trade commitments are critical to the development ofu.s. food for progress ( ffp ) provides commodities to developing countries and emerging markets that aredeveloping their private sectors . another food aid program , section 416 ( b ) , permanentlyauthorized in the agricultural act of 1949 , provides surplus commodities for donationoverseas . although u.s. officials say more trade disputes are resolvedfavorably than unfavorably ( often through negotiation at lower levels rather than formal disputeresolution ) , there is a perception among some farmers that established international trading ruleshave not always worked to their benefit . moreover , some u.s. producer groups ( particularly those representing import - sensitive commodities ) have pressed for continued protection of their own commodities , and for morerestrictions on foreign farm and food imports into the united states . the u.s. average tariff onagricultural imports ( 12% ) is much lower than the global average tariff ( 62% ) imposed on similarimports . however , the united states along with other developed countries restricts the entry of"import - sensitive" agricultural products to protect certain domestic producers from foreigncompetition and the economic adjustments that such imports might entail . u.s. tariff - rate quotasallow zero or low duty access for specified amounts of foreign beef , sugar , peanuts , cotton , tobacco,and dairy products . imports above the quota may enter , but face prohibitively high tariffs . thisusually makes such imports uncompetitive in the u.s. market . safeguards ( involving the temporaryuse of higher tariffs and / or quotas ) allow producers of an affected commodity or product sectoradditional time to adjust to increased import competition . such adjustments will be more severe inareas whose production must compete with imported products . in recent years , the united states hasimposed safeguards on imports of lamb meat and wheat gluten to allow u.s. producers of thoseproducts time to adjust to foreign competition . ( 2 ) foreign trading partners argue that such efforts are ill - advised because free trade must flow in all directions , including into the united states . in some cases , other countries are using tradenegotiations and , sometimes , dispute settlement procedures in the wto , to enhance their access tothe u.s. market for agricultural products , or to reduce competition in third - country markets fromsubsidized u.s. production . for example , both the lamb and wheat gluten safeguard actions weresuccessfully challenged by other wto member countries in wto dispute settlement and were notrenewed by the united states . more recently , in september 2002 , brazil initiated a case at the wtoagainst certain aspects of the u.s. cotton program . many developing countries are particularly concerned about what they see as limited access tothe u.s. market for the above import - sensitive and other commodities .