each of these categories is briefly discussed below . although schoolwide programs offer a great deal of flexibility to use funds under not only title i - a but also most other federal programs in ways that might not ordinarily be allowed , it has been questioned whether schools with relatively low percentages of their pupils from low - income families should be granted this authority . if schools with relatively low poverty rates receive permission to operate schoolwide programs , the scope of these programs might be limited ( since the size of a school's title i - a grant is based on its number of children from low - income families ) , and it would be difficult for such a modest program to have a significant schoolwide impact . further , no systematic evidence is available that schoolwide programs are more effective than more traditional "targeted assistance" title i - a programs in improving the education of disadvantaged pupils . the use of waivers to maintain or expand the number of schools participating in title i - a would tend to disperse title i - a funds among an increased number of relatively low - poverty schools , reducing the concentration of funds on high - poverty schools . as noted above , ed - flex places restrictions on , but does not prohibit , waivers regarding esea title i - a school selection . the use of waivers to delay meeting deadlines for implementing esea title i - a standard and assessment requirements arguably undercut the most substantial pre - nclb outcome accountability requirement . this increasingly important aspect of federal requirements is discussed further below . with respect to the former csr and eisenhower programs , leas and states frequently requested the waiver of requirements intended to: focus teacher hiring on the early elementary grades ; require small leas to form consortia if their csr grants were too small to pay the salary of a new teacher ; ensure that minimum shares of teacher training funds would be used to support instruction in the subject areas of mathematics and science ; or to limit the share of csr funds used for professional development ( as opposed to hiring new teachers ) . such waivers appear generally to have been requested to accommodate relatively strict and specific limitations on the use of funds to varying local conditions . following enactment of the nclb , some of these formerly common uses of ed - flex and other pre - nclb flexibility authorities are no longer as relevant as in the past . as noted earlier , the nclb lowered the schoolwide program eligibility threshold to 40% of pupils from low - income families nationwide ( although some may still seek ed - flex or secretarial waivers for schools below 40% to conduct schoolwide programs ) . the csr and eisenhower programs were consolidated into a broader and more flexible esea title ii program supporting teacher and principal recruitment and training . as noted earlier , relatively few substantive waivers have been grated under the esea title ix - d during the post - nclb era . regarding the impact of special forms of flexibility on pupil achievement or other outcomes , only limited information has been available .