their workresulted in p.l . 108-25 , the united states leadership against hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malariaact of 2003 . legislators may want to increase access to existing vaccines , spur the development ofaffordable new vaccines for which the technology already exists - - an issue of both availability andaccess , and consider increased long - term investment in vaccine development for these diseases . reasonsgiven are mostly economic . individual states and assorted federal programs work toward increasing childhood immunizationrates . it canalso mean assessing effectiveness in terms of value - for - cost . safety is assessed by the nature and frequency of adverse reactions attributable to vaccineuse . a vaccine need not be side - effect free for fda licensure ; the licensed smallpox vaccine carriesan estimate , based on data from its routine use 30 years ago , of one or two deaths per millionrecipients . similarly , effectiveness does not mean that a vaccine must protect permanently orcompletely . researchers attempt to assess efficacy , generally , with expensive and lengthy clinicaltrials that compare infection or illness rates in two groups , both exposed to the disease - causing agent,but with only one provided with the hypothesized vaccine protection . effectiveness describes howthe product works in a real - world situation . for drugs , effectiveness is often lower than efficacybecause of interactions with other medications or health conditions of the patient , sufficient dose orduration of use not prescribed by the physician or followed by the patient , or use for a off - labelcondition that had not been tested . because vaccines are administered by the clinician , some of theseconditions are not relevant . effectiveness may , however , still be diminished by the health of thevaccinee and whether circumstances permit all shots in a required series to be given according toschedule . fda and cdc monitor safety , in part , with their vaccine adverse event report system ( vaers ) , which assembles reports from parents , clinicians , and manufacturers of problems that maybe related to vaccination . another fda program , medwatch , informs the public with clinicalinformation about safety issues involving vaccines and other medical products . these so - called passive surveillance systems rely on consumers and physicians to both recognize adverse events aspossibly vaccine - related and to follow through with reporting their concern to fda . such reportsare valuable aids to researchers looking for potential risks . the picture painted by the data , however,is incomplete . successful development and production of a safe and effective vaccine does not ensure thateveryone who needs a vaccine gets it . people have to ( 1 ) know about it and believe it will benefitthem ; ( 2 ) live near a health care provider willing to administer it ; and ( 3 ) be able to afford the costof vaccination and follow - up care , if necessary . vaccines fare better than prescription drugs in health benefits coverage in the united states . in 2002 , 75% of u.s. children between 19 and 35 months old had completed the recommended seriesof vaccinations , not yet reaching the hhs healthy people 2000 and 2010 objectives of 80% .