ii . legal framework and judicial system 1 ) the following legal framework shall be applicable on an interim basis until the adoption of the new constitution referred to above: i ) the constitution of 1964 , a / to the extent that its provisions are not inconsistent with those contained in this agreement , and b / with the exception of those provisions relatingto the monarchy and to the executive and legislative bodies provided in the constitution ; and ii ) existing laws and regulations , to the extent that they are not inconsistent with this agreement or with international legal obligations to which afghanistan is a party , or withthose applicable provisions contained in the constitution of 1964 , provided that theinterim authority shall have the power to repeal or amend those laws and regulations . 2 ) the judicial power of afghanistan shall be independent and shall be vested in a supreme court of afghanistan , and such other courts as may be established by the interim administration.the interim administration shall establish , with the assistance of the united nations , a judicialcommission to rebuild the domestic justice system in accordance with islamic principles,international standards , the rule of law and afghan legal traditions . iii . 2 ) the participants in the un talks on afghanistan have invited his majesty mohammed zaher [sic] , the former king of afghanistan , to chair the interim administration . his majesty has indicatedthat he would prefer that a suitable candidate acceptable to the participants be selected as the chairof the interim administration . 3 ) the chairman , the vice chairmen and other members of the interim administration have been selected by the participants in the un talks on afghanistan , as listed in annex iv to thisagreement . 2 ) the chairman of the interim administration or , in his / her absence , one of the vice chairmen , shall represent the interim administration as appropriate . 3 ) those members responsible for the administration of individual departments shall also be responsible for implementing the policies of the interim administration within their areas ofresponsibility . 4 ) upon the official transfer of power , the interim administration shall have full jurisdiction over the printing and delivery of the national currency and special drawing rights from internationalfinancial institutions . the interim administration shall establish , with the assistance of the unitednations , a central bank of afghanistan that will regulate the money supply of the country throughtransparent and accountable procedures . 5 ) the interim administration shall establish , with the assistance of the united nations , an independent civil service commission to provide the interim authority and the future transitionalauthority with shortlists of candidates for key posts in the administrative departments , as well asthose of governors and uluswals , in order to ensure their competence and integrity . 6 ) the interim administration shall , with the assistance of the united nations , establish an independent human rights commission , whose responsibilities will include human rightsmonitoring , investigation of violations of human rights , and development of domestic human rightsinstitutions . the interim administration may , with the assistance of the united nations , alsoestablish any other commissions to review matters not covered in this agreement .