referral . under the icc statute , the icc is authorized , but not required , to take such a case . resolution or because of arrangements with the host government . the bush administration has pursued efforts in the u.n. security council and with individual states to prevent the possibility that american citizens could be prosecuted before the icc . this effort has met with some success but also some resistance . on july 12 , 2002 , in response to the u.s. veto of the extension of peacekeeping operations in bosnia , the u.n. security council adopted a resolution requesting a blanket deferral of prosecutions by the icc of peacekeepers from states not parties to the rome statute for a period of one year . resolution 1422 provides , in pertinent part: acting under chapter vii of the charter of the united nations , 1 . requests , consistent with the provisions of article 16 of the rome statute , that the icc , if a case arises involving current or former officials or personnel from a contributing state not a party to the rome statute over acts or omissions relating to a united nations established or authorized operation , shall for a twelve - month period starting 1 july 2002 not commence or proceed with investigation or prosecution of any such case , unless the security council decides otherwise ; 2 . expresses the intention to renew the request in paragraph 1 under the same conditions each 1 july for further 12-month periods for as long as may be necessary ; 3 . decides that member states shall take no action inconsistent with paragraph 1 and with their international obligations ; 4 . decides to remain seized of the matter . the resolution , which was renewed for another year under security council resolution 1487 , appeared to fall short of the president's original proposal , which would have provided permanent immunity for u.s. troops and officials from the jurisdiction of the icc . opponents of the original proposal objected that the u.n. security council does not have the authority to "rewrite" international treaties . the compromise invoked article 16 of the rome statute , which provides: no investigation or prosecution may be commenced or proceeded with under this statute for a period of 12 months after the security council , in a resolution adopted under chapter vii of the charter of the united nations , has requested the court to that effect ; that request may be renewed by the council under the same conditions . the court may not proceed with a request for surrender or assistance which would require the requested state to act inconsistently with its obligations under international law with respect to the state or diplomatic immunity of a person or property of a third state , unless the court can first obtain the cooperation of that third state for the waiver of the immunity .