internal , congressional discipline of a member may take several forms . in the house of representatives , a "letter of reproval" is an administrative action of the house committee on ethics , authorized under the rules of the house of representatives "to establish or enforce standards of official conduct for members , officers , and employees of the house. the issuance of a letter of reproval by the committee is made public , as it is issued as part of a public report from the committee to the house on an "investigation" that the house committee on ethics has undertaken . a letter of reproval may be sent by the committee on ethics on its own accord by majority vote of the committee , without any approval or action by the full house of representatives . as such , a letter of reproval is clearly distinguishable from legislative "discipline," "punishment," or "sanctions" that the full house may invoke against a member , such as censure , reprimand , fine , or expulsion . it appears that a letter of reproval is intended to be an action by the committee which is an alternative to the recommendation of sanctions to the house , and is an action which is used for infractions of rules or standards which , because of the nature of the infractions or because of mitigating circumstances , do not rise to the level of requiring action by the full house of representatives . the rules of the committee on ethics provide , after setting out procedures when "a majority of the committee does not vote in favor of the recommendation that the house of representatives take action," that "[t]he committee may also , by majority vote , adopt a motion to issue a letter of reproval or take other appropriate committee action. the committee may issue such letter "[i]f the committee determines a letter of reproval constitutes sufficient action.... " the committee procedural rules appear to indicate that such a "letter of reproval" may be sent only after an investigatory subcommittee has issued a statement of alleged violations , at least one count of which has been proved by an adjudicatory subcommittee , and upon completion of a sanction hearing . a letter of reproval was characterized by the ethics committee in the house — then known as the house committee on standards of official conduct — as a "rebuke of a member's conduct issued by a body of that member's peers acting , as the committee on standards of official conduct , on behalf of the house of representatives. the house ethics committee has issued letters of reproval for the improper use of campaign accounts for personal loans ; for a member's borrowing of campaign funds for personal use , and a subsequent "inadequate" disclosure of such transaction ; and concerning allegations of sexual harassment of a female employee , and the use of one's office for political campaign activity .