these provisions are outlined below . the 1996 amendments added two state - administered programs aimed at improving public water system compliance with drinking water regulations: the operator certification program and the capacity development program . section 1419 required states to adopt programs for training and certifying operators of community and non - transient non - community systems ( eg , schools and workplaces that have their own wells ) . epa is required to withhold 20% of a state's annual dwsrf grant unless the state adopts and implements an operator certification program . relatedly , section 1420 required states to establish capacity development programs , also based on epa guidance . congress specified that the programs must include ( 1 ) legal authority to ensure that new systems have the technical , financial , and managerial capacity to meet sdwa requirements ; and ( 2 ) a strategy to assist existing systems that are experiencing difficulties to come into compliance . epa is required to withhold a portion of srf grants from states that do not have capacity development strategies . the agency has not had to withhold funds under either of these programs . the 1996 amendments expanded the act's pollution prevention focus to embrace protection of surface water as well as ground water . section 1453 required epa to publish guidance for states to implement source water assessment programs that delineate boundaries of the areas from which systems receive water and identify the origins of regulated contaminants ( and also any contaminants selected by the state ) in those areas to determine systems' susceptibility to contamination . states with approved assessment programs may adopt alternative monitoring requirements for water systems as provided for in section 1418 . section 1452 ( k ) ( 1 ) ( c ) authorized states to use up to 10% of their dwsrf capitalization grant for fy1996 and fy1997 to delineate and assess source water protection areas . section 1454 authorized a source water petition program based on voluntary partnerships between state and local governments . states may establish a program under which a community water system or local government may submit a petition to the state requesting assistance in developing a voluntary source water quality protection partnership to ( 1 ) reduce the presence of contaminants in drinking water , ( 2 ) receive financial or technical assistance , and ( 3 ) develop a long - term source water protection strategy . this section authorized $5 million each year for grants to states to support petition programs . all federal regulations apply to these systems . most community water systems ( 82% ) are relatively small , serving 3,300 or fewer individuals . despite this large percentage , these systems provide water to just 9% of the total population served by community water systems . fully 92% of cwss serve populations of 10,000 or fewer , and 55% serve populations of 500 or fewer . in contrast , 8% of cwss serve populations of 10,000 or more but provide water to 82% of the population served ( more than 246 million individuals ) . among the community water systems , 71% rely on ground water , and 29% rely on surface water .