variants . mq - 9 predator b . the mq - 9 predator,or "predator b" , is general atomic's follow on to mq - 1 , or "predator a" . is this true today ? how do uav costs compare to manned aircraft costs ? uavs have traditionally been used for reconnaissance and surveillance , but today they arebeing employed in roles and applications that their designers never envisioned . the unanticipatedflexibility and capability of uavs has led some analysts to suggest that more , if not most , of themissions currently undertaken by manned aircraft could be turned over to unmanned aerial platforms,and that manned and unmanned aircraft could operate together . congress may have to contemplatethe replacement of a significant portion of the manned aircraft fleet with unmanned aircraft that haveyet to be designed . the defining characteristic of uavs is that they are "unmanned. if uavs are introducedinto the force in large numbers , might personnel issues arise ? recruitment and retention is aperennial congressional issue , that may be receiving increased attention due to the operationalstresses associated with the global war on terrorism . what impact might wide spread deploymentof uavs have on military personnel ? industrial base issues also need to be considered . if defense companies devote more of theirtime and expenses to develop unmanned aircraft , will the skills and technologies needed for mannedaircraft design erode ? those who argue that uavs will replace manned aircraft in the future are notas concerned with the industrial base issue as those who feel manned aircraft will still be needed tocombat future threats . as u.s. companies compete for business in a growing international uav marketplace,concerns about the proliferation of these systems may grow . are steps required - - and if so , whatmight they be - - to control the spread of uavs ? as part of its defense and foreign policy oversight,congress may examine whether a balance must be struck between supporting legitimate u.s. exportsand curbing the spread of uav technologies to dangerous groups or countries . this section addresses the program status and funding of some of the most prominent uavprograms being pursued by dod , and most likely to compete for congressional attention . thissection does not attempt to provide a comprehensive survey of all uav programs , nor to developa classification system for different types of uavs ( e.g . operational vs developmental , singlemission vs multi mission , long range vs short range ) . one exception is a short subsection belowtitled "small uavs. the uavs described in this section are distinguished from the proceedinguavs by being man - portable and of short range and loiter time . these smaller uavs are notcurrently , and are unlikely to be , weaponized . the services do not provide as detailed cost andbudget documentation for these uavs as they do for major uav programs . individually , theseuavs appear very popular with ground forces , yet do not necessarily demand as much congressionalattention as larger uav programs like predator or global hawk . as a whole , however , these small,man - portable uavs appear likely to increasingly compete with major uav programs forcongressional attention and funding .