it would instead have to be considered under the general procedures of each house . this treatmentpermits emphasis on possible relations between actions in each chamber . the only exception is the floorconsideration stage , where the procedures prescribed bystatute for house and senate are adapted to the divergent general rules of the two chambers . ( 42 ) on this basis , it might be argued that only incontext of the act does "approval" have specific meaning in relation to establishment of the repository . the preceding discussion identifies a number of difficulties that might arise in the course of consideration ofa resolution of repository siting approval under theexpedited procedure of the nwpa . in particular , the senate might amend its approval resolution in such a way thatits text no longer met the statutoryrequirements for a resolution of repository siting approval . the amended measure might accordingly be heldineligible for further consideration under theexpedited procedure . also , because of such amendment or for other reasons , the texts of the approval resolutionsoriginating in the house and the senate mightdiffer . this situation might make the automatic procedure to clear an approval resolution for the presidentunavailable in either chamber . a contrary interpretation of the language of the statute might hold that congressional "approval" of a site designation entails authorization to proceed with therepository , even independently of the statutory mechanism of the nwpa . to preclude such contentions altogether,however , any approval resolution passed eitherin amended form , or outside the statutory time frame ( or both ) , might have to be amended also to contain languageexplicitly authorizing construction ( orapplication for authorization to construct ) , and perhaps explicitly superseding the statutory process of the nwpaas well . these questions of the potential force and effect of an approval resolution under the nwpa are separate from those that might be raised about the eligibility of theresolution for consideration under the expedited procedure of the act . the nwpa attempts to require that anapproval resolution must be passed in a specifiedform , and within specified time constraints , in order to permit establishment of the repository to go forward . it doesnot require that the approval resolution beenacted in accordance with the expedited procedure itself . the provisions of section 10135 quoted earlier requireaction in accordance with subsections ( b ) and ( c ) , but not with subsections ( d ) and ( e ) , which set forth the expedited procedure . it accordingly appears that , for example , the senate might amend its approval resolution , then continue considering the measure without regard to the constraintsof the expedited procedure on debate and other procedural actions , and ultimately pass in lieu thereof an unamendedcompanion previously received from thehouse . this process would result in an approval resolution becoming law in the form prescribed by statute , but notin accordance with the expedited procedure . the language of the act would not seem to cast any doubt on the force and effect of a resolution of siting approvalenacted under those conditions .