some of these potential consequences are highlighted below . one immediate effect of the court's ruling in lawrence was to invalidate all thirteen of theexisting state anti - sodomy laws , regardless of whether they applied to homosexual couples only orto all couples both heterosexual and homosexual . had the court issued its ruling on the more narrowequal protection grounds favored by o'connor , the effect of the decision would have been toinvalidate only those state statutes that discriminated against gays by prohibiting homosexualsodomy exclusively . since the court issued a broader ruling that the government cannot criminalizeprivate , consensual , adult sexual behavior , the lawrence case appears to create a more expansiveright to sexual privacy that prohibits the states from making sodomy a crime for anyone , homosexualor heterosexual . in another development , the court also vacated the kansas court of appeals' ruling in limonv . kansas , a similar case involving an equal protection challenge to a state law that treatshomosexuals and heterosexuals differently . ( 49 ) under kansas law , sodomy with a child between the ages of 14and 16 is punishable with probation if the partner is an older teenager of the opposite sex , but thesame act is punishable with a prison sentence if the partner is an older teenager of the same sex . asa result of the kansas statute , 18-year old matthew limon received a 17-year sentence for engagingin consensual gay sex with a 14-year old boy , despite the fact that he would have received a farlighter sentence for engaging in similar conduct with a youth of the opposite sex . the supreme courtordered the kansas court to reconsider the case in light of the lawrence ruling , ( 50 ) but the court of appealsof kansas distinguished the lawrence case and upheld the sentence , ruling that the state's interestin protecting children provided a rational basis for criminalizing homosexual sodomy more severelythan heterosexual sodomy . ( 51 ) the kansas supreme court subsequently issued a petition toreview the lower court's decision , but has not yet ruled in the case . the court's broad decision in lawrence is likely to prompt a series of challenges to an arrayof governmental policies involving privacy interests and / or gay rights . indeed , the case , whichappears to greatly expand constitutional protection for sexual privacy , may give rise to challengesagainst statutes that prohibit same - sex marriage , gay adoption , gays in the military , or similar issues.how the courts will resolve these controversies , however , remains unclear . on the one hand , the court's ruling emphasized that "our laws and tradition affordconstitutional protection to personal decisions relating to marriage , procreation , contraception,family relationships , child rearing , and education" and that "persons in a homosexual relationshipmay seek autonomy for these purposes. ( 53 ) if lawrence is viewed as establishing a broad constitutional rightto sexual privacy , then the court's decision may be interpreted as supporting challenges to laws thatprohibit activities such as same - sex marriage or gay adoption .