anilca . the 1980 anilca contained manyprovisions that followed up on ancsa . section 1002 of anilca designated the "coastal plain"of the refuge as "the area identified as such in the map entitled 'arctic national wildlife refuge,'dated august , 1980. . the map that is believed to be the original map referenced in the act is a largefoam - board panel that shows the three ancsa - authorized kic townships marked in the samemanner as is the exterior boundary of the refuge , but without any explanation of the intendedmeaning of the delineation . the boundaries of the pool of lands from which kic selections couldbe made also is depicted , so the delineation could have been informational only , or could have beenintended to connote something more . the kic lands are not differentiated by color from the rest ofthe coastal plain or refuge . the map depicted the large part of the refuge designated as"wilderness," and by default the remainder of the refuge is the coastal plain . this map has nowdisappeared . an agency map dated 1980 shows the boundaries of the kic lands with those boundariescrossed out by hand , but without explanation of when and by what authority these marks appearedor what their intended significance was with respect to whether the kic lands , and whether theywere regarded as being within the coastal plain . other maps also show the refuge as a whole withthe wilderness area so marked , again arguably showing the coastal plain as the remainder . section 103 ( b ) of anilca authorized the publication of a map and legal description of eachchange in land management status effected by this act and "each such description shall have the sameforce and effect as if included in this act ..." however , only minor boundary adjustments - - statedas an increase or decrease of not more than 23,000 acres - - were authorized , and only after notice inwriting to the congress . ( 49 ) the map published with the notice of the legal description ofthe boundaries of national wildlife refuges in alaska ( 50 ) shows the arctic national wildlife refuge as a whole , thewilderness area within it , and the coastal plain as the remainder . it does not show the native lands . the legal description of the boundaries of the coastal plain published on april 19 , 1983 as appendixi to the final rule on exploration of the coastal plain ( 50 c.f.r . part 37 ) , excludes the threeancsa - authorized townships of kic lands . the introductory material to the legal descriptionstates: "by virtue of the map referred to in section 1002 ( b ) ( 1 ) , [which as discussed above does notclearly exclude the native lands from the coastal plain] lands in which the surface estate has alreadybeen conveyed to kaktovik inupiat corporation ... are excluded from the coastal plain , and therefore,a permit issued pursuant to â§1002 ( b ) ( 1 ) cannot authorize exploration of those lands. ( 51 ) however , at this time , thesubsurface was still federal and its development was subject to federal regulation .