representative waxman introduced h.r . 865 , the smallpox vaccinecompensation and safety act of 2003 , on february 13 , 2003 . subsequently , senator greggintroduced the administration's proposal , which went on to form the basis of the new legislation . the new law addresses injuries incurred from activities of an immunization plan declared bythe hhs secretary as a national response to threat of biologic agent attack on the united states . itcovers injuries that the secretary finds to be vaccine - related that occur in people who volunteer forvaccination under that plan or people who are infected after contact with those volunteers . regardless of the size of the program , the hhs secretary may need to clarify details that the law does not explicitly cover in order to implement the law . examples include definitions,regulatory treatment of standards of medical evidence , and federal tax law . the law describes a contact case as "... ( iii ) the individual has been in contact with an individual who is ( or who was accidentally inoculated by ) a covered individual. ( 34 ) what evidence of contactwill the secretary require ? how would an unvaccinated person who nevertheless appears withvaccinia infection demonstrate that , for example , a particular , anonymous subway rider was thesource of infection ? because vaccinia infection would come only from a vaccinia vaccine source,it may not be necessary - - for compensation determination - - to show that the person had contactwith someone who had received the vaccine . ( knowing the chain of contact would be important,however , for public health reasons. ) the law gives the hhs secretary authority to create the table of injuries to list injuries presumed by law to be vaccine - related . because the rules - - and art - - of causal inference thatepidemiologists use do not easily line up with legislative needs to assign responsibility , drafters oflegislation turn to phrases such as "preponderance of the evidence standard" ; "taking intoconsideration of relevant medical and scientific evidence" ; ( 35 ) or "credible evidence for the associationis equal to or outweighs the credible evidence against the association. ( 36 ) the scientist's languageincludes an uncertainty that the law's presumptions override . whether the new legislation providessufficient guidance to the secretary remains to be seen . one could anticipate that individualclaimants will question whatever list the hhs secretary promulgates . questions are also likely to arise regarding the tax status of the various benefit categories for various groups of recipients . whether clarification responsibility rests with the hhs secretary orwith the internal revenue service , the issues may involve input from both or require congressionalclarification . finally , some members of congress may want to consider what lessons they could learn from the nation's unprecedented foray into civilians' taking health risks to prepare to protect the u.s.homeland from risks of uncertain likelihood but certain ( and terrible ) potential consequence . thepublic may have somewhat relaxed its concern , but , for public health and intelligence experts , therisks to the public remain real . 108-20 addresses compensation of health care and emergency workers who volunteer and receive smallpox vaccine - related injuries resulting from an hhs secretary's declaration of the needto prepare for bioterrorist actions .