the majority have proved justifiable . these suits are the indirect result of the deterioration of the traditional physician - patient relationship . the publicity given to the higher malpractice judgments and settlements , based frequently on new legal precedents , is likely to trigger increased litigation in other states . the situation threatens to become a national crisis . already higher judgments and settlements are having the following direct results: ( a ) companies providing malpractice insurance are increasing the cost of coverage . ( b ) these costs — in the form of higher charges — are being passed on to patients , their health care insurance companies , and federal health care programs . the rising number of malpractice suits is forcing physicians to practice what they call defensive medicine , viewing each patient as a potential malpractice claimant . physicians often order excessive diagnostic procedures for patients , thereby increasing the cost of care . beyond asking what can be done to stabilize premiums for medical malpractice , congress may decide to ask what changes to the medical malpractice system might do for overall health reform ? in terms of direct costs , medical malpractice insurance adds relatively little to the cost of health care . medical malpractice premiums written in 2008 totaled approximately $11.2 billion , whereas health expenditures are estimated by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) to total $2.6 trillion . indirect costs , particularly increased utilization of tests and procedures by physicians to protect against future lawsuits or "defensive medicine," have been estimated to be much higher than direct premiums . in the 107 th ( h.r . 4600 ) , the 108 th ( h.r . 4279 ) , and 109 th ( h.r . 5 ) congresses , the house passed bills whose central thrust was to limit damages for medical malpractice tort claims . the senate , however , did not act on any of these house bills and failed to invoke cloture on the senate bills addressing medical malpractice ( s. 11 , s. 2061 , and s. 2207 in the 108 th congress ; s. 22 and s. 23 in the 109 th congress ) . the 110 th congress did not consider any bills on the floor to address directly medical malpractice insurance . the medical liability insurance market is not currently exhibiting widespread crisis symptoms . with enough historical and other data , however , insurance can operate effectively even in such uncertain environments . insuring against medical malpractice liability offers some particular difficulties as compared to other lines of insurance and it has proven challenging for companies to operate in this field over time . among the difficulties are the longer time frames inherent in malpractice claims , high and uncertain claim amounts , and uncertainty in recognizing and segmenting high - risk from low - risk healthcare providers . particular problems in medical malpractice insurance have been observed for many years . as far back as 1969 , a report of a senate subcommittee concluded the following: 1 . the number of malpractice suits and claims is rising sharply in certain regions of the country . the size of judgments and settlements is increasing rapidly .