i hope the department will rethink this situation. doe apparently did rethink its approach , issuing a supplemental notice of proposed rule - making in january 2005 , in lieu of secretary abraham's april 2003 preliminary proposal . doe deputy secretary mcslarrow foreshadowed the department's revamped policy when he earlier testified to congress on september 4 , 2003 , that he had recommended to secretary abraham that doe sharply curtail polygraph screening . mr. mcslarrow said doe should retain mandatory polygraph screening only for employees having regular access to doe's most sensitive information . adopting such an approach , according to mr. mcslarrow , would reduce "the number of individuals affected from well in excess of potentially 20,000 ... to approximately 4,500..." although he recommended that doe continue its polygraph screening program , albeit on a smaller scale , mr. mcslarrow said the department's polygraph testing conformed with nas's recommendation that such testing , at most , should be used only to trigger further testing , investigation , and collection of other information about the individual . mr. mcslarrow also said doe wanted to include random polygraph testing as part of its overall counterintelligence evaluation program , citing the nas finding that "'polygraph screening may be useful for achieving such objectives as deterring security violations , increasing the frequency of admissions of such violations , [and] deterring employment applications from potentially poor security risks,'" and that "'predictable polygraph testing ( i.e. , fixed - interval testing of people in specific job classifications ) probably has less deterrent value than random testing.' senator domenici commended mr. mcslarrow for doe's apparent willingness to revise its polygraph testing policy . "i have been appalled by doe's continued massive use of polygraph tests in the wake of a national study condemning the reliability of these tests .. . i commend doe for announcing plans to substantially reduce the number of people subject to polygraphs and to ensure that no negative actions are taken based on a single polygraph result," he said. senator bingaman said doe's proposed new polygraph policy was a step in the right direction , but warned that he continued to harbor serious reservations about the polygraph's accuracy as a screening tool . doe subsequently sought public comment on a supplemental rule it proposed on january 7 , 2005 . the proposed rule contained provisions mirroring mr. mcslarrow's earlier recommendations and retained mandatory polygraph screening already in place for doe employees occupying: all counterintelligence positions ; all positions in the office of intelligence at doe headquarters and at the field intelligence elements located at the national laboratories ; and , ●all positions in the doe special access programs ( and in non - doe special access programs if the program sponsor requires a polygraph examination ) . the proposed rule would limit polygraph screening to those employees – probably less than 1,000 , according to doe – having regular and routine access to all doe - originated "top secret" information , including top secret "restricted data" and top secret "national security information. under this rule , certain managers were authorized to identify additional individuals for polygraph testing , provided they sought input from doe's office of counterintelligence and the approval of either the energy secretary or the administrator of the national nuclear security administration .