no further action occurred . on september 27 , 2005 , representative roy blunt introduced h.r . 3908 , the charitable giving act of 2005 , which not only would have amended the internal revenue code to provide incentives for individuals and businesses to increase contributions to charities , but also would have amend rhya to include maternity group homes for homeless youth within tlp . referred to the house committees on ways and means and education and the workforce , no further action occurred . this provision , however , was similar to language already enacted in p.l . there is no single primary federal funding source for second chance homes . there are a variety of federal , state , and local programs , however , through which funding can be obtained for second chance homes . span indicated that second chance homes were expensive to operate . it reported that such costs ranged from $8,000 to $65,000 per year per teen family , depending on the location of the home , the ability of the providers to coordinate services in a community , and the level of care needed by teen families . not all sch providers receive federal funding to operate second chance homes . for example , in massachusetts , funding for some schs is received only from the state department of social services , the united way and / or state grants and contracts , while other homes receive funding from various sources , including individual donors , non - profits and foundations , faith - based groups , county or city governments , as well as federal grants . major federal sources for second chance homes are available via programs administered by hhs and the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) . how much funding is being used for second chance homes through these avenues , however , cannot be determined . such decisions are made according to the discretion of the agency administering the program . as mentioned above , some second chance homes have been closed in various states because of a lack of funding . selected hhs and hud programs that can be used as funding sources for second chance homes are discussed below . for fy2007 , all federal programs are operating under a cr until february 15 , 2007 . to date there have been very few rigorous evaluations on the effectiveness of second chance homes . hhs reports , however , that there have been several analyses regarding service delivery approaches of different programs that documented how the programs worked and provided descriptions of the teen mothers and their children . as a result , insights have been gained regarding the needs of the mothers and their children , as well as in some cases , program outcomes , such as subsequent employment , education or subsequent pregnancies . successful outcomes have been reported , according to hhs , by several states or programs related to reductions in repeat pregnancies , compared with the state average , higher rates of mothers completing school , lower rates of child abuse and neglect , improvements in the health of mothers and children , higher rates of mothers becoming employed , and a reduction in their dependency upon welfare .