whereas h.r . 1139 prohibits commercial mobile service providers from publishing the contents of a wireless 411 directory , s. 1350 allows such publication if opt - in consent is obtained . like h.r . how long can the data be retained ? will the data be used to create individual profiles that will be sold to marketing companies or used for other purposes unknown to the user or contrary to his or her preference ? will consumers be deluged with messages on their communications devices advertising sales at nearby stores or restaurants not unlike the "spam" in their e - mail inboxes ? the precision with which wireless service providers can determine a subscriber's exact location is improving with the implementation of enhanced 911 ( e911 ) capabilities for mobile telephones and other wireless devices , wherein wireless carriers are required to provide public safety answering points ( psaps ) with the location of wireless callers who dial 911 within 50-300 meters ( 150-900 feet ) . while this serves the laudable goal of ensuring mobile telephone users immediate access to emergency services , many worry about what other uses will be made of such location information . once the technical ability exists to provide a user's precise coordinates , some privacy advocates worry that more and more devices will incorporate it , making location information widely available without proper privacy safeguards . the debate over wireless privacy in many ways parallels the debate over internet privacy and internet spam . indeed , since wireless internet access devices are on the market , the issues intersect . one particular similarity is that the policy debate focuses on whether legislation is needed , or if industry can be relied upon to self - regulate . four laws , each discussed later in this report , address some of the issues — the telephone consumer protection act ( p.l . 102-243 ) , the wireless communications and public safety act ( p.l . 106-81 ) , the controlling the assault of non - solicited pornography and marketing act ( can - spam , p.l . 108-187 ) , and the undertaking spam , spyware , and fraud enforcement with enforcers beyond borders act ( us safe web , p.l . 109-455 ) — however , other concerns remain . much of the wireless privacy controversy parallels the debate over internet privacy ( see crs report rl31408 , internet privacy: overview and legislation in the 109 th congress , 1 st session , by [author name scrubbed] ) and spam ( see crs report rl31953 , " spam " : an overview of issues concerning commercial electronic mail , by [author name scrubbed] ) . in that context , questions have arisen over whether wireless carriers should be required to follow "fair information practices" with regard to collection , use , or dissemination of call location information . the ftc has identified four "fair information practices" for operators of commercial websites: providing notice to users of their information practices before collecting personal information , allowing users choice as to whether and how personal information is used , allowing users access to data collected and the ability to contest its accuracy , and ensuring security of the information from unauthorized use .