app . 2401 et seq. ) and the international emergency economic powers act ( 50 u.s.c . 1701 et seq. ) successive administrations have updated regulations to reflect changes adopted by the mtcr , changes in u.s. law , and the changing international political environment . the export administration act of 1979 has expired several times , but the president has invoked his authority to continue in effect the system of controls that had been maintained under the act . members of congress became concerned about missile proliferation in the mid - 1980s because growing evidence of missile proliferation in developing world was an additional consideration in funding president reagan's ballistic missile defense programs . libya had purchased soviet scud missiles and iran and iraq were firing missiles at each other . congress had little or no involvement in shaping the mtcr , because it was neither a treaty nor an executive agreement . soon after the regime was announced in april 1987 , it became apparent that companies and individuals from a number of mtcr member countries ( such as west germany , italy , britain , and france ) had transferred goods and technical assistance to missile development teams in argentina , brazil , iraq , egypt , and elsewhere . in 1987 , the united states also learned that china had transferred intermediate range missiles to saudi arabia . many members of congress thought the mtcr needed enforcement mechanisms , additional members , and stricter compliance . several bills were introduced at the time with the intention of strengthening the u.s. position on missile nonproliferation . those bills that included sanctions against nations , companies , and individuals who violate the mtcr guidelines gained widespread bipartisan congressional support . at the time , bush administration officials maintained that the president already had sufficient authority to reprimand or sanction foreign governments , companies , and individuals for inappropriate missile transfers and objected to the imposition of mandatory statutory sanctions . president george h.w . bush pocket - vetoed the export administration act of 1990 , which included a missile nonproliferation provision , as well as the chemical and biological weapons control act . however , he signed the defense authorization bill that contained a nearly identical section on missile nonproliferation policy . the act became law in the 101 st congress ( h.r . 4739 , title xvii of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1991 , p.l . it added chapter 7 to the arms export control act , sections 6 ( l ) and 11b to the export administration act of 1979 , and established an annual reporting requirement . chapter 7 of the aeca has been amended several times . 2751 et seq. ) chapter 7 of the aeca requires the president to impose sanctions on u.s. and foreign individuals who improperly conduct trade in controlled missile technology . if someone inappropriately transfers mtcr category ii goods or technology , they will be denied , for two years , any u.s. government contracts relating to missile equipment or technology , and u.s. export licenses for missile equipment and technology .