china has not joined the psi . the last presidential waiver for satellite exports to china was issued in 1998 . 110-53 on august 3 , 2007 . the united states could assist china to strengthen export controls , including the areas of regulations , licensing , customs , border security , and law - enforcement . the departments of commerce and state testified to the senate governmental affairs subcommittee on international security , proliferation , and federal services on june 6 , 2002 , that such exchanges were limited . periodically , china has tried to link the issues of missile proliferation and u.s. conventional arms sales for taiwan's self - defense . congress has exercised oversight of the administration's response to any direct or indirect linkage . after president george h. w. bush approved the sale of 150 f - 16a / b fighters to taiwan in september 1992 , the prc ended its participation in the "arms control in the middle east" talks . moreover , as discussed above , in november 1992 , the prc delivered 34 m - 11 missiles to pakistan , although that transfer took place probably with prior planning and regardless of president bush's announcement . during the 1998 summit in beijing , the clinton white house reportedly considered a prc request for a u.s. pledge to deny missile defense sales to taiwan , if china promised to stop missile sales to iran ; but no agreement was reached , reported the far eastern economic review ( july 16 , 1998 ) . on february 26 , 2002 , before the director general in charge of arms control at the prc foreign ministry , liu jieyi , attended meetings in washington on march 4-6 , an unnamed prc foreign ministry official told the associated press that the united states "can't just accuse us of violating our commitments and at the same time , sell large amounts of arms to taiwan," since such arms sales are "also a kind of proliferation. on july 24 , 2004 , wen wei po , a prc - owned newspaper in hong kong , quoted an unnamed official of the foreign ministry as linking weapons nonproliferation to u.s. arms sales to taiwan . nonetheless , state department officials said that china did not pose taiwan as a "tactical issue" in discussions about north korea . ( see discussion on north korea above. ) thus , for many years , the united states has faced challenges in getting china's responsible cooperation in international nonproliferation problems while continuing u.s. policy toward taiwan , as governed by u.s. interests and the taiwan relations act ( tra ) of 1979 , p.l . ( see crs report rl30957 , taiwan: major u.s. arms sales since 1990 , by [author name scrubbed]. ) there have been debates about using satellite exports to gain china's cooperation in missile nonproliferation . since 1988 , the policy of granting licenses to export satellites and presidential waivers of post - tiananmen sanctions ( section 902 of p.l . 101-246 ) have allowed satellites to be exported for launch by china great wall industry corporation ( the same company sanctioned for missile proliferation ) and — increasingly — for china's own use .