table 1 . status of military construction appropriations , fy2004 notes: dashes indicate no action yet taken . several issues regarding military construction have gained visibility during thelegislative deliberations of the current session of congress . among these are overall funding levels , realignment of overseas bases , base realignment and closure ( brac ) ,and perchlorate ground water contamination remediation . overall funding levels . the fy2004 budget submitted by the president on february 3 , 2003 , as subsequentlyamended , requested $9.24 billion in new budget authority , an amount $1.46 billionbelow the 2003 enactment . the emergency supplemental appropriations requestsubmitted in late september would increase the total request by $412 million andwould authorize the transfer of unspecified additional funds as they are needed . realignment of overseas bases . the department of defense has initiated efforts in germany and in the republic ofkorea to reduce the number and shift the locations of its permanent installations.known in europe as efficient basing - east and in korea as the land partnershipplan , they are part of a worldwide dod effort to transform itself into a lighter andmore agile military establishment . as part of this endeavor , the secretary of defense has tasked his combatant commanders to review military construction projects in order that they might supportchanging military objectives overseas . these commanders are required to submit abasing plan that enhances their abilities to project power , to support operations , andto conduct activities based upon the secretary's views of a military structuretransformed to meet the challenges of the 21st century . based on the dod study ofoverseas basic requirements , the administration in its amendment asked for thedeletion of 16 construction projects totaling $269 million that had been requested forgermany and turkey in its original fy2004 submission . this dod study is not yet complete , however , and the house appropriations committee , in its report , expressed concerns that current and projected militaryconstruction at overseas sites may not reflect a well - considered strategy . thecommittee , noting that dod has announced the retrenchment of some garrisons inthe republic of korea , recommended rescinding $107 million from prior yearappropriations at sites slated to be closed and re - appropriating them to installationsexpected to remain in service . the senate appropriations committee strongly supported the dod effort to reevaluate its overseas basing requirements , though both appropriations committeesnoted that a dod overseas basing master plan , due on april 1 , 2002 , had not yetbeen submitted . the senate committee recognized that the dod study of rebasinghad not progressed beyond its embryonic stage . in observing public statementsindicating that dod would likely reduce the number of troops stationed in germanyand would reconfigure its installations in korea , it did not find much of the newconstruction in europe and korea that had been requested in the may 1 , 2003 , budgetamendment . the senate committee recommended that an eight - member commission on the review of the overseas military facility structure of the united states be formed toassess whether current overseas basing is adequate and assess the feasibility ofvarious new configurations .