bid rigging 4 . market division ( customer or territorial allocation ) 5 . boycotts ( concerted refusals to deal ) 6 . tying arrangements ( "if you want x , you must also take y" ) all of the per se offenses , as concerted activity in restraint of trade , are violations of section 1 of the sherman act . any antitrust - violative conduct which does not consist of a per se offense is judged by the reasonableness of the activity . even when an otherwise unlawful action is found , if it is also determined that the action is ancillary to some lawful activity , and that its procompetitive consequences outweigh its anticompetitive effects , the action may well be found to be a not unreasonable violation of the antitrust laws . in other words , the rule of reason involves a balancing test . there is not , for example , any per se rule against monopolization , or attempted monopolization . there is no "no fault" monopolization , i.e. , no situation exists in which there is some "magic" number beyond which a firm may not increase its size or market share ; the determining factors will include the means by which those numbers were reached — in other words , the reasonableness of the actions which produced the final entity . most rule of reason offenses involve a single entity , and do not usually violate section 1 of the sherman act . horizontal price fixing 2 . competition and not the protection of any individual competitor . per se offenses are those for which there is no justification . as the supreme court has expressed it: ... there are certain agreements or practices which because of their pernicious effect on competition and lack of any redeeming virtue are conclusively presumed to be unreasonable and therefore illegal without elaborate inquiry as to the precise harm they have caused or the business excuse for their use . the kinds of activities which are most generally found to be per se antitrust offenses , and are most likely to be criminally prosecuted , include: 1 . vertical price fixing ( sometimes referred to as "resale pricemaintenance" ) 3 . there are also some statutes directed to specific industries or types of transactions which indicate the likely antitrust consequences for economic conduct in those areas . this report briefly summarizes ( 1 ) the primary united states antitrust statutes , and ( 2 ) some of the activities which are generally considered to be violations of those laws . there is also some reference to the prohibition against unfair competition and the "unfairness" jurisdiction of the federal trade commission ( ftc ) . there is not , however , any discussion of the extraterritorial reach of the united states antitrust laws ( save the cursory material in footnote 4 ) , a subject which is beyond the scope of this brief report . further , the laws whose descriptions follow do not constitute all of the statutes which may be applicable to , or implicated in antitrust issues , but rather , are those which are most often utilized .