a successor has not yet been named . in april 2005 , dr. carol jacobs , prime minister of barbados , was elected to succeed tommy thompson as chair of the global fund's board of directors . tommy thompson was chosen as the fund's first chairman of the global fund when he was serving as the u.s. secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) . according to global fund bylaws , the two - year chairmanship rotates cyclically between the groups of donors , developing countries , and non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) . ambassador randall tobias resigned from his position as the u.s. representative on the board in march 2006 , leaving the position vacant . the global fund's efforts are intended to mitigate the impact of infectious disease on countries in need and thus to contribute to a reduction in poverty . the fund projects that over five years , the grants it has approved will have treated 1.8 million hiv - positive people with antiretroviral ( arv ) therapy and 5 million people infected with tb through the directly observed treatment short - course ( dots ) , which emphasizes watching the infected patient take his or her medication every day for several months . in addition , the global fund projects that 52 million people will be reached through voluntary counseling and testing services for preventing the spread of hiv , over 1 million orphans will receive support , and 145 million malaria patients will receive the new artemisinin - based combination drug treatments ( act ) . artemisinin - based treatments have been found effective in dealing with drug - resistant varieties of malaria . the fund is also financing the purchase and distribution of 109 million insecticide - treated bed nets to prevent the spread of the malaria . global fund documents emphasize that it is a financing instrument complementing existing programs and that it is intended to attract , manage , and disburse additional resources , rather than re - channel existing resources . the fund is a fiduciary agent designed to direct new resources to programs in countries in need , rather than an agency that implements projects . the global fund is not a united nations agency , although it works closely with u.n. agencies , as well as with other aid agencies and ngos involved in the struggle against the three diseases . the world bank serves as the global fund's trustee , receiving contributions made by donors and disbursing funds as the global fund directs . the concept of an independent funding mechanism to fight infectious disease has a number of roots . france proposed an international fund to provide aids treatment in the developing world at the 1998 g - 8 summit , held in birmingham , england , reportedly to a cool reception . in august 1999 , during the 106 th congress , representative barbara lee introduced the aids marshall plan fund for africa act ( h.r . this bill , which did not come to a vote , would have established an aids marshall plan fund for africa corporation as an independent u.s. agency able to receive contributions from foreign governments as well as private sources .