table 4 . key dates in nnsa's proposal for the pit manufacturing and certification campaign note: many entries for fy2004 and beyond are from department of energy , fy 2005congressional budget request , vol . 1 , esp . some mpf entries before fy2004 are fromu.s . is nnsa's plan for certification reasonable ? yes: to certify pits without nuclear testing , nnsa believes it must use much more sophisticatedtechniques than were used to certify rocky flats pits in order to rule out each plausible source offailure . no: in one view , only nuclear testing can assure that pits will work as intended on groundsthat pits are sensitive to minor variations in process and materials , many potential unknowns exist,and computer models may not capture what we do not know . others see the certification plan asexcessive , claiming pits will work despite minor production variations . for decades , los alamosand livermore technicians made many one - of - a - kind pits for testing . these pits did not meet warreserve standards but , as evidenced by the nuclear test record , a great many of them worked . ( 64 ) prospects: absent nuclear testing , the united states seems sure to use nnsa's plan to certify pits . does the united states need new pits ( beyond limited quantitiesfor w88 ) ? yes: in one view , greater pit manufacturing capability is needed tohedge against uncertainty in pit life in order to ensure that the u.s. nuclear deterrent remainseffective . further , the international situation may require the united states to manufacturenew - design warheads , including pits ; pits in storage may prove unsuitable for these warheadsbecause of design or aging . no: some believe pits will deteriorate so slowly that a decision on mpfcan be deferred for decades . some see new types of warheads as undesirable because these warheadswould imply that the united states was preparing to test , build , deploy , and threaten the use ofnuclear weapons , so these critics reject the new - weapons argument as a rationale for new pits . thosewho favor abolishing nuclear weapons would not produce these weapons or their components . prospects: no one can be certain that nnsa will not need to manufacture pits at some future date,and at any rate nnsa will have a limited capacity to produce pits at pf - 4 . accordingly , the needfor some new pits is less at issue than are capacity , schedule , and the need for mpf . if so , what capacity is needed ? low: it is notclear that pits will fail for many decades , if ever , in the critics' view . pf - 4 could replace the few pitswithout spares that are destroyed during surveillance . if new - design warheads are needed , smallnumbers might suffice , or nnsa might use spare pits for those warheads , or it might convertexisting warheads for new missions without changing the nuclear explosive package . multiple - shiftoperations at pf - 4 would increase output somewhat if needed . further , critics argue , proceedingwith mpf would reduce funds for other stockpile stewardship programs .