a member . the speaker . if you are against busing , you vote 'yea.' he now realized that the guidance given to members was "inaccurate. the vote was not for or against busing , but for or against receiving information from hew . with this new understanding , representative o'neill announced that he had no objection to the resolution and that "i will , and i hope all other members will vote for the resolution. representative o'neill asked the chairman of the education and labor committee , representative carl perkins , why the committee had not acted on the resolution . perkins explained: "to be perfectly truthful and frank .. . i forgot about it ... [i]t was of the nature that the sponsor of the resolution could have picked up the telephone and gotten the information from hew. representative edith green emphasized that the resolution "is simply a request for information," not "a bill to legislate," and asked the hew secretary "in a perfectly orderly fashion to supply within 60 days the amount of money that is now being spent and in which districts for busing and the guidelines , rules and regulations which hew has drawn up to enforce this busing to achieve some magical racial balance. with the purpose of the resolution clarified , the house passed it 351 to 36 . the house has frequently used resolutions of inquiry to obtain information on matters of defense and military policy . a particularly heavy use of resolutions of inquiry came during the vietnam war . in 1971 , the house voted on two resolutions to give members access to the "pentagon papers," the defense department study entitled "united states - vietnam relationships , 1945-1967. . one of the cosponsors of the resolution , representative bella abzug , stated that the procedures adopted by the house armed services committee , which had a single copy of the study , did not provide members adequate access to the 47-volume study: "they cannot take notes , cannot have staff people review and comment , cannot report on what they have read . under such limitations , a congressman must have an elephantine memory to retain the facts that would enable him to exercise his constitutional duty. 489 directed the president "to furnish the house of representatives within fifteen days after the adoption of this resolution with the full and complete text" of the pentagon papers . the house armed services committee reported the resolution adversely , 25 to 2 , and it was tabled on the floor , 272 to 113 . 490 , containing the identical language , was also reported adversely and tabled . also in 1971 , the house considered three resolutions of inquiry to obtain information about u.s. covert operations in laos . 492 directed the secretary of state , "to the extent not incompatible with the public interest," to provide the house with any documents containing policy instructions or guidelines given to the u.s .