both must be satisfied . first , the release must have been caused solelyby a third party lacking a contractual relationship , direct or indirect , with the defendant . alandowner lacks a contractual relationship with predecessors in the chain of title if the disposalof the hazardous substances on the site preceded acquisition and at time of land acquisitionhe / she did not know and had "no reason to know" that the hazardous substance had beendisposed of there . "no reason to know," in turn , means that before the date of acquisition,he / she made "all appropriate inquiry" ( as defined above ) . asauthority , epa cited its inherent enforcement discretion . its criteria for ppas included that ( 1 ) epa enforcement action was anticipated at the facility , and ( 2 ) the purchaser agreed to makesubstantial monetary contribution to , or conduct of , the response action , where epa's responsecosts would not otherwise be recoverable . prospective purchasers of contaminated property were slow to take advantage of the new ppa device . so in 1995 , epa issued superseding guidance to add flexibility to the agency'scriteria for entering into ppas . ( 24 ) still , only about160-170 were entered into from the 1989guidance to 2002 . for a congress seeking to encourage redevelopment of brownfields , thisnumber was too low . as a result , the sba in 2002 inserted a definition of "bona fideprospective purchaser" ( bfpp ) into cercla and gave them not merely eligibility for aliability settlement , but an outright exemption from liability ( 25 ) - - except for the potentialwindfall lien noted below . and in contrast with ppas , which require the actuality orlikelihood of epa enforcement at the site and a negotiated settlement with the buyer , the newprovisions are self - executing - - epa need not do anything . once the parcel is bought , thebuyer becomes a bfpp automatically as long as the statutory criteria are satisfied . as epa put it: "the bfpp provisions represent a significant change in cercla . for the first time , a party may purchase property with knowledge of contamination and not acquireliability under cercla as long as that party meets the bfpp criteria. ( 26 ) more specifically , the sba exempts bfpps and their tenants from cercla "owner" or "operator" liability - - but not "transporter" or "generator" liability - - if the person does notimpede the response action or natural resource restoration . the exemption applies to anycontaminated site , not just those meeting the sba definition of "brownfields. a bfpp is aperson who acquires ownership after sba enactment ( january 11 , 2002 ) and who showsamong other things that - - all hazardous substance disposal at the facility occurred pre - acquisition the person made "all appropriate inquiry" ( as defined in parti ) the person exercises "appropriate care" as to hazardous substances foundat the facility by taking "reasonable steps" to stop releases , prevent any threatened futurerelease , etc .