, authorizing payment forexpenses related to detention of prisoners of war . accordingly , the following sections examine theconstitutional authority to take prisoners in war and , if congressional authority is required , whethercongress has provided it , or , with respect to u.s. citizens , prohibited it . the law of war permits belligerents to seize the bodies and property of enemy aliens . ( 219 ) the administrationhas taken the view that the authority to detain "enemy combatants" belongs to the president alone,and that any interference in that authority by congress would thus be unconstitutional . â§ 4001 ( a ) ) in the present circumstances , placing the controversy into the second or thirdcategory above . the government , on the other hand , sees the issue as one that falls squarely into thefirst category , asserting that congressional authority for the detentions clearly exists , although suchauthority is not strictly necessary . ( 220 ) however , theconstitution explicitly gives to congress the power to make rules concerning captures on land andwater , ( 221 ) which haslong supported congress' authority to regulate the capture and disposition of prizes of war as wellas confiscation of property belonging to enemy aliens . the government interprets the decision in hamdi to apply to padilla as wellas the detainees at guantã¡namo bay . these two cases are distinguishable because the government reportedly captured hamdi onthe battlefield , possibly creating a presumption that he is a combatant . ( 21 ) unlike padilla , hamdi wasnot alleged to have committed specific acts which could violate the law of war if committed by alawful soldier . padilla , even if he were a legitimate enemy combatant , would not likely be entitledto combat immunity for his alleged involvement in an enemy plot to commit acts of terrorism onamerican soil . ( 22 ) inboth cases , the government invoked its authority under the international law of war , and thepresident's authority as commander - in - chief , to justify the detention . ( 23 ) the administration alsoargued that if congressional authorization were necessary , it could be found in the authorization touse force ( "aumf" ) ( 24 ) and other statutes . the supreme court agreed that the aumf authorizes the detention ofcombatants captured during hostilities , but did not elaborate on the scope of that authority , nor didit decide whether the president has inherent authority to order detentions or if other statutoryauthority also applied . the law of war divides persons in the midst of an armed conflict into two broad categories:combatants and civilians . ( 25 ) this fundamental distinction determines the international legalstatus of persons participating in or affected by combat , and determines the legal protections affordedto such persons as well as the legal consequences of their conduct . ( 26 ) combatants are thosepersons who are authorized by international law to fight in accordance with the law of war on behalfof a party to the conflict . ( 27 ) civilians are not authorized to fight , but are protected fromdeliberate targeting by combatants as long as they do not take up arms .