colonel . he holds a b.a . in history and a m.a . in anthropology / archaeology from columbiauniversity . hans - ulrich seidt joined the german foreign service in 1982 . he has held assignments in moscow , nato headquarters in brussels , and the bosnia special task force . from 1994-1997,he was lecturer for international security policy at the internationales studienkolleg der robertbosch stiftung ; from 1997-1998 he was a senior research fellow at the deutsche gesellschaftfã¼rauswã¤rtige politik . at the time of this seminar , he was assigned to the embassy of germany inwashington , d.c . ( seepp . the commission report also indicated through several recommendations the need for international cooperation , with one recommendation calling for the development of a comprehensivecoalition strategy against islamist terrorism . crs speakers pointed to international cooperation ashelpful in controlling sources of support for terrorist acts , in particular financing and arms . ( see pp.8-9. ) imad - ad - dean ahmad is president and director of the bethesda - based minaret of freedominstitute , a non - profit educational and policy research organization . the institute's purposes are tocounter distortions and misconceptions about islamic beliefs and practices , demonstrate the islamicorigins of modern values , expose american and islamic - world muslims to free market thought , andadvance the status of muslim peoples . dr. ahmad is an adjunct professor teaching courses onreligion and science , and on islamic science , politics and economics at the university of maryland,and an adjunct professor at the johns hopkins school for advanced international studies , wherehe has taught courses on theories of social change and on islam and development . he is alsopresident of the islamic - american zakat foundation , a charitable organization . he is the co - editorof islam and the west: a dialog ( 1998 ) , and the author of signs in the heavens: a muslimastronomer's perspective on religion and science ( 1992 ) , and "political economy of liberty in thearab and islamic middle east," in the middle east policy journal ( vol . he graduated cumlaude from harvard university , and holds a ph.d. in astronomy and astrophysics from the universityof arizona . martha crenshaw is now the colin and nancy campbell professor in global issues and democratic thought at wesleyan university , where she has taught international politics and foreignpolicy since 1974 . she is one of the first u.s. scholars to publish on terrorism with a case study ofthe national liberation front in the algerian war , revolutionary terrorism: the fln in algeria,1954-1962 ( 1978 ) . his forthcoming book , understanding american terrorism: from the klanto al qaeda , will be available this summer . from the london school of economicsin economics , and a ph.d. in sociology from brown university . peter s. probst served with the central intelligence agency and the office of the secretary ofdefense for most of his 30 year career . he recently left government to establish a privateconsultancy , and joined the washington - based institute for the study of terrorism and politicalviolence as its vice - president and director of programs . one of the most controversial topics of discussion at the crs seminar was the utility ofsuch reforms .