the nnsaadministrator would report to the energy secretary . in urging reorganization , conferees cited the report by the president's foreign intelligenceadvisory board ( pfiab ) that blamed poor organization and a failure of accountability for doe'sci failures . the report also criticized doe for being a dysfunctional bureaucracy incapable ofreforming itself . ( 12 ) one result of this dual office is a partially bifurcated ci structure ( the two offices shareresources , funds , and personnel for some programs ( 13 ) ) that has sparked debate over its effectiveness , particularly inlight of emerging non - traditional counterintelligence threats . specifically , critics have warned thatinadequate communication and coordination between the two offices could threaten sensitive ci investigations . supporters argue that a separate , dedicated ci office within nnsa is necessary ifcounterintelligence is to receive the focus it warrants . observers have focused on two inter - related questions . first , are doe and nnsaaccomplishing their ci missions ? second , is the current partially bifurcated ci managementstructure within doe and nnsa the most effective approach to ci management ? congress , of course , could choose to maintain the current organizational structure . ( 29 ) if congress , however,ultimately decides to modify the structure , a number of organizational approaches have beenproposed . the range of alternatives currently being discussed include the following: ( 1 ) maintainthe status quo ; ( 2 ) completely separate doe and nnsa ; ( 3 ) consolidate ci implementation undernnsa , and leave ci policymaking in doe ; and ( 4 ) consolidate all counterintelligence - - bothpolicymaking and implementation - - either within doe , or , conversely , within nnsa . lee pled guilty to one felony count ofunlawful retention of national defense information ; the government dropped 58 additionalcounts . ( 7 ) ) in may , abipartisan house select committee released a declassified version of its report charging the prcwith having stolen nuclear weapons secrets from the united states . finally , in june , the president'sforeign intelligence advisory board ( pfiab ) , for the first time in its more than 38-year history ofproviding the president counsel on intelligence matters , publicly released one of its reports . itcriticized doe for the "worst" security record on secrecy that panel members said they hadencountered . ( 8 ) althoughdismissing assertions of wholesale losses of nuclear weapons technology through espionage , thepfiab panel did concur , on balance , with the intelligence community's assessment that the prc had obtained by espionage classified u.s. nuclear weapons information that probably acceleratedits program to develop future nuclear weapons . ( 9 ) in response , congress and the president approved legislationestablishing nnsa ( 10 ) to manage the department's national security - related nuclear programs . ( 11 ) as part of the restructuring , congress proposed creating dual ci offices in doe and nnsa.within doe , the already - existing office of counterintelligence ( oci ) was codified and maderesponsible for developing ci policy for both doe and nnsa ; but , was only authorized to implement that policy at non - nnsa facilities .