nonetheless , some measures may be useful . this paper takes ctr programs as a starting point and analyzes their potential application to india and pakistan . whiledomestic laws can be changed , or provisions can be waived , international treaties are more difficultto amend . the second category includes technical limitations , given what little we know aboutindian and pakistani nuclear weapons and their secret nuclear facilities . in addition , assistanceshould be guided by the impact it would have on the technical capabilities of the indian and pakistaninuclear arsenals - - that is , assistance should not advance the nuclear weapon programs of india andpakistan , nor should it encourage testing , deployment or increased operational readiness . the thirdcategory covers political limitations , including indian and pakistani willingness to engage incooperation and the impact of assistance on the nonproliferation regimes . the legal , technical , and political constraints described above appear to foreclose assistance thatwould directly involve a ) access to nuclear weapons ; b ) measures that would enhance operationalcapabilities of nuclear weapons ; c ) direct access to sensitive nuclear facilities . senator lugarsuggested in november 2004 that "we can promote exchanges between pakistani and indian securityexperts , and offer assistance on export controls , border security , and the protection , control andaccounting of nuclear arsenals . this will require some diplomatic and administrative skill to staywithin our npt obligations. ( 49 ) the measuresoutlined below are limited but feasible and could helpmitigate some aspects of the nuclear threat in india and pakistan . india's and pakistan's nuclear programs are far smaller than russia's and unlikely to incur the kinds of costs that the ctr program has thus far incurred . on the other hand , data are scarce on thestate of nuclear materials in india and pakistan , so it is difficult to determine the scope and timeframe of any such program . the 109th congress may consider this issue more fully if legislation is oncemore introduced . u.s. nonproliferation laws have been strengthened over the years , first to account for states that were not parties to the npt , then to target critical capabilities like enrichment and reprocessing , andfinally , to target the transfer of nuclear weapons or actual detonation of a nuclear explosive device . once a state has exceeded the maximum prohibition ( i.e. , possession or detonation of a nucleardevice ) , a logical question to ask is whether lesser restraints ( for example , in providing nucleartechnology not directly related to nuclear weapons ) are necessary or useful . applied more broadlyto overall nonproliferation policy , some observers have argued that the nuclear weapons "cat" is outof the bag and u.s. policy should reorient itself to "manage" the nuclear situation in south asia . atits extreme , this approach would include accepting the nuclear weapons status of india and pakistanand relaxing all restrictions . other observers have argued that the purpose of restraints was to inhibitproliferation and that relaxing the rules for "successful" states would set a bad precedent and resultin the collapse of the nonproliferation regime . a broader issue is whether the united states should strive for consistency in the treatment of states' wmd programs .