tellico dam . the tellico dam on the little tennessee river was to serve multiple purposes . is extinction normal ? how do current extinction rates compare to background levels of extinction ? the following are the major provisions of the esa in the order they appear in the u.s. code . an endangered species is defined as "any species which is in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range. a threatened species is defined as "any species which is likely to become an endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout all or a significant portion of its range. the esa does not rely on a numerical standard ; such a standard would not reflect the wide variety of many species' biology . ( for example , a population of 10,000 butterflies , all confined to one mountaintop , would be at greater risk than 10,000 butterflies scattered over dozens of mountaintops. ) the protection of the esa extends to all species and subspecies of animals ( not just birds and mammals ) , although for vertebrates , further protection can be given for distinct population segments within a species , and not just the species as a whole . more limited protection is available for plant species under the esa . there is no protection afforded under the esa for organisms ( eg , eubacteria , archaea , viruses ) considered neither animal nor plant . the term "take" under the esa means "to harass , harm , pursue , hunt , shoot , wound , kill , trap , capture , or collect , or to attempt to engage in any such conduct. ( harassment and harm are further defined by regulation at 50 c.f.r . there has been controversy over the extent to which the prohibition on taking may include habitat modification . a 1995 supreme court decision held that the inclusion of significant habitat modification where it actually kills or injures wildlife was a reasonable interpretation of the term "harm" in the law . the secretary of the interior manages and administers most listed species through fws . marine species ( including most marine mammals ) and anadromous fish are the responsibility of the secretary of commerce , acting through nmfs . the law assigns the major role to the secretary of the interior ( all references to "secretary" below are to the secretary of the interior unless otherwise stated ) and provides for the relationship of the two secretaries and their respective powers . species may be listed on the initiative of the appropriate secretary or , more commonly , by petition from an individual , group , or state agency . the secretary must decide whether to list the species based only on the best available scientific and commercial information , after an extensive series of procedural steps to ensure public participation and the collection of relevant information . at this point , the secretary may not consider the economic effects that listing may have on the area where the species occurs , although economic considerations are part of the critical habitat determination .