medicare does not cover most outpatient prescription drugs . in 1998 , an estimated 10 million elderly people , or 27% of medicare beneficiaries , did not have any form ofprescription drug coverage . the remaining 28 millionmedicare beneficiaries had some form of drug coverage for at least part of the year . however , coverage is notalways stable and access to drug benefits for seniorsis declining . ( 3 ) medicare beneficiaries are among the highest users ofprescription drugs . they represent 14% of the total u.s. population , and account for 43% ofthe nation's total drug expenditures . ( 4 ) with national spending on prescriptiondrugs rising , medicare beneficiaries face increasing challenges in being able to payfor their prescription drug needs . although most medicare beneficiaries have some form of prescription drug coverage , they still pay a portion of their total drug expenses out of pocket . in 1998,beneficiaries with coverage paid approximately 33% of their total drug expenses out of pocket . averageout - of - pocket drug expenditures for beneficiaries withcoverage was $325 in 1998 , while expenditures for those without coverage was $546 . for those in poor health , theout - of - pocket expenditures for uncoveredbeneficiaries averaged $820 . according to the 1998 medicare current beneficiary survey ( mcbs ) , coveredbeneficiaries paid a larger percentage of their totaldrug costs out of pocket in 1998 than in 1997 . between 1997 and 1998 , out - of - pocket expenditures for coveredbeneficiaries increased by almost 18 percent,while beneficiaries with no coverage had no change in expenses . prescription drug discount cards are widely available through some private companies and membershiporganizations , such as aarp ( formerly the americanassociation of retired persons ) . these companies have set up buying clubs that offer savings on prescription drugsand other medical services to attractconsumers looking for a better price on these items . the companies vary from internet mail order service companiesto pharmacy benefit managers ( pbms ) thatoffer discount card services , such as merck - medco and the aarp member choice program ( provided through theunited health group incorporated , with mailorder prescriptions filled by express scripts ) . card plans usually require an annual membership fee that can rangefrom $15 to $50 per year and offer discountcards that are accepted by a network of drugstores and / or doctors . ( 6 ) the plansoffer a discount to card holders on their prescription drug purchases at retailpharmacies . since the announcement of president bush's proposal , several pharmaceutical companies formed theirown senior discount card plans in early 2002 . ( some of these plans are described in the section below titled senior discount card plans ) . the final regulation for the medicare - endorsed prescription drug initiative was announced by the centers formedicare and medicaid services ( cms ) on august30 , 2002 and published in the federal register on september 4 , 2002 . ( 17 ) it is not known when or if the program will be implemented because a federal districtcourt ruled on january 29 , 2003 that the administration did not have the authority to implement the card initiative . the administration has said it is likely toappeal the court's decision .