appendix a . chronology of cuba travel restrictions , 1962-2018 1962 / 1963 — in february 1962 , president kennedy imposed a trade embargo on cuba because of the castro government's ties to the soviet union . pursuant to the president's directive , the department of the treasury's office of foreign assets control ( ofac ) issued the cuban import regulations . on july 9 , 1963 , ofac issued a more comprehensive set of prohibitions , the cuban assets control regulations , which effectively banned travel by prohibiting any transactions with cuba . 1977 — in march , the carter administration announced the lifting of restrictions on u.s. travel to cuba that had been in place since the early 1960s . the carter administration lifted the travel ban by issuing a general license for travel - related transactions for those visiting cuba . direct flights were also allowed . 1982 — in april , the reagan administration reimposed restrictions on travel to cuba , although it allowed for certain categories of travel , including travel by u.s. government officials , employees of news or filmmaking organizations , persons engaging in professional research , or persons visiting their close relatives . it did not allow for ordinary tourist or business travel that had been allowed since the carter administration's 1977 action . 1984 — on june 28 , the supreme court , in a 5-4 decision in the case of regan v. wald , rejected a challenge to the ban on travel to cuba and asserted the executive branch's right to impose travel restrictions for national security reasons . 1993 — the clinton administration , in june 1993 , slightly amended restrictions on u.s. travel to cuba . two additional categories of travel were allowed: travel to cuba "for clearly defined educational or religious activities" and travel "for activities of recognized human rights organizations. in both categories , travelers were required to apply for a specific license from ofac . 1994 — in august , president clinton announced several measures against the cuban government in response to an escalation in the number of cubans fleeing to the united states . among these measures , the administration tightened travel restrictions by prohibiting family visits under a general license and allowing specific licenses for family visits only "when extreme hardship is demonstrated in cases involving extreme humanitarian need," such as terminal illness or severe medical emergency . such visits required a specific license from ofac . in addition , professional researchers were required to apply for a specific license , whereas since 1982 they had been able to travel freely under a general license ( federal register , august 30 , 1994 , pp . 1995 — in october , president clinton announced measures to ease some u.s. restrictions on travel and other activities with cuba , with the overall objective of promoting democracy and the free flow of ideas . the new measures included authorizing general licenses for transactions relating to travel to cuba for cuban americans making yearly visits to close relatives in "circumstances that demonstrate extreme humanitarian need. this reversed the august 1994 action that required specific licenses .