the system will be implemented in phases . some 8,000employees ( primarily from dhs headquarters and nonmilitary members of the coast guard ) will becovered beginning in fall 2004 and the remainder of employees will be covered beginning in fall2005 . communicate openly with constituency groups and other public sector agencies . find clear benefitsfor employees and publicize them . build something new , rather than adding two systemstogether . following up on the merger: keep the focus on thecustomer . prepare for potentially high transaction costs due to the merger . be sensitive to lingeringeffects of physical and cultural consolidation . reform or standardize performance measurementmethods . always be ready to adjust . ( 51 ) mr. frumpkin states that communication , quick implementation , creating a new culture , andadjusting over time are critical areas to be considered in implementing mergers in the public sector . with regard to changing an organization's culture , he writes that: breaking free from existing routines , traditions , andcustoms does not mean obliterating everything and starting anew . instead , it requires the selectiveadoption of those cultural artifacts that are positive and the elimination of those that arecounterproductive . what emerges is a new organizational culture that is fresh and welcoming toall . ( 52 ) the general accounting office ( gao ) evaluated the process being used to design the newhuman resources management system at the dhs and reported in september 2003 that it is"collaborative and facilitates participation of employees. ( 53 ) gao recommended that "once the [dhs] strategic plan iscompleted the secretary of dhs and the director of opm ensure that the options selected for thenew human capital system support and facilitate the accomplishment of the department's strategicgoals and objectives. the dhs secretary is advised to "ensure the message communicated acrossdhs components is consistent , and [to] maximize opportunities for two - way communication andemployee involvement through the completion of the design process , the release of the systemoptions , and implementation , with special emphasis placed on seeking feedback and buy - in offront - line employees in the field. an issue that might be considered as the new personnel system is implemented is the kindof automated human resources and payroll systems the various agencies proposed for transfer to thenew department currently have and how those systems might be merged if a consolidation of hrmservices were to occur . prior to the march 1 , 2003 , transfer of employees to dhs , human resources management ( hrm ) offices were providing a full range of services at six of the eight large agencies beingtransferred to the new department . the transportation administration service center ( tasc ) ofthe department of transportation provided human resource services to the transportation securityadministration ( tsa ) on a fee - for - service basis . federal protective services had a personnelrepresentative in the central office in washington , dc , and in each of its 11 regional offices .