in its report ( h.rept . 109-504 of june 16 , 2006 ) on h.r . they can come up every year and explain what happened in the preceding year , but not by month [sic] . you cannot see how the project manager is spending against his original estimate and his obligation against his original estimate . it [full funding] gives you on the books of the government , a record . at this same hearing , w. bowman cutter , executive associate director for budget at omb , testifying in support of the carter administration's proposal to apply the full funding concept more comprehensively through the federal budget , stated: the president believes that full funding is desirable because it: provides a clearer understanding of the total effect of budget proposals , since full funding requires appropriations in terms of total costs for an entire project at the time any funding is provided . increases flexibility in programming and the ability of the government to speed up the project if changes in economic conditions warrant acceleration . permits construction progress at more economic rates with resulting savings to the government by providing program continuity and eliminating uneconomic start - up and stop costs that sometimes accompany incremental funding . donald scantlebury , director of financial and general management studies at gao , stated at the hearing: the significance of the full - funding concept is that it permits an agency to contract for the full cost of an item or items , such as ships , with the knowledge that full obligational authority is available to complete the item or items and that completion of the work will not be held up or stretched out by budget cuts or funding delays . prior to the institution of full funding , funds were provided in annual increments . shipbuilding has often been used as an example of explaining the full - funding concept because of the length of procurement lead which ranges from 3 to 7 years depending primarily on the type of ship.... each year authority was granted for only a portion of the ship or ships being contracted for . over the length of the contract budget reductions and constraints could delay timely completion of the ships and result in additional cost of the total ship.... we believe that full funding has the advantage of permitting agencies to complete long - term projects at optimum efficiency and reduces delays caused by funding restraints . 1996 gao report a 1996 gao report on budgeting for federal capital assets stated: despite the potential problems for individual agencies , up - front funding is critical to safeguarding congress's ability to control overall federal expenditures and to assess the impact of the federal budget on the economy . without up - front funding , projects may be undertaken without adequate attention being given to their overall costs and benefits . moreover , failure to fully funding projects before they are undertaken can distort the allocation of budge resources and obscure the impact of federal budgetary action on the private sector . only a few agencies , including the army corps of engineers ( one of our case studies ) have been exempted from the up - front funding requirement .