," national tax journal , vol . this report is intended to clarify part of the tax - exempt bond labyrinth . bruce davie and [author name scrubbed] , "tax - exempt bonds after the south carolina decision," tax notes , vol . 13 , june 27 , 1988 , p. 1573 . peter fortune , "tax - exempt bonds really do subsidize municipal capital ! 1 , march 1998 , p. 43 . roger h. gordon and gilbert e. metcalf , "do tax - exempt bonds really subsidize municipal capital ? ," national tax journal , vol . 4 , part 1 , december 1991 , p. 71 . walter hellerstein and eugene w. haper , "discriminatory state taxation of private activity bonds after davis ," state tax notes , april 27 , 2009 , p. 295 . george j. marlin and joe mysak , the guidebook to municipal bonds: the history , the industry , the mechanics ( new york: the american banker / bond buyer , 1991 ) . joe mysak , encyclopedia of municipal bonds : a reference guide to market events , structures , dynamics , and investment knowledge ( new york: bloomberg , 2012 ) . judy wesalo temel , the fundamentals of municipal bonds , 5 th edition ( new york: john wiley and sons , 2001 ) . [author name scrubbed] , the private use of tax - exempt bonds: controlling public subsidy of private activity ( washington , dc: the urban institute press , 1991 ) . nevertheless , the reader may wish to explore tax - exempt bonds in more depth or from a more general , less technical perspective . the following reading list should equip the reader with a good foundation for pursuit of either objective . the tax - exempt bonds issued for qualified private activities are limited by the type of activity financed and the volume of debt used for such activities . the history , tax laws , financial properties , and economic effects of tax - exempt bonds are all exceedingly complex and continually evolving . nevertheless , these projects are often afforded the same tax privilege as debt issued for strictly government owned and operated projects . congress limits the use of tax - exempt bonds for private activities because of concern about the overuse of tax - exempt , private activity bonds . on occasion , state and local governments will issue debt for projects whose purpose is less public in nature , such as privately owned and operated multifamily residential housing . state and local governments issue debt for most large public capital projects such as new schools , public buildings , and roads .