these provisions were included in p.l . citing problems implementing the technology , the bush administration sought extensions in installing the biometric readers / scanners required by the enhanced border security and visa entry reform act of 2002 . the 108 th congress enacted p.l . 4417 ) , which amended the law to extend by one year ( to october 26 , 2005 ) the deadline for installing at all u.s. ports of entry equipment and software capable of processing machine - readable , tamper - resistant entry and exit documents and passports that contain biometric identifiers . it also extended by one year the deadline for vwp countries to certify that they are issuing machine - readable , tamper - resistant passports that contain biometric and document authentication identifiers comporting with specified standards , and vwp participants who are issued passports on or after the new deadline to present passports that comply with such requirements . legislation in the 109 th congress at the time congress passed the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l . 108-458 ) , some congressional leaders reportedly agreed to revisit certain immigration and document - security issues in the 109 th congress that had been dropped from the final version of the legislation . many of these dropped provisions were introduced as h.r . 418 , the real id act of 2005 and ultimately folded into the emergency supplemental appropriations act for defense , the global war on terror , and tsunami relief , 2005 ( h.r . the border protection , antiterrorism , and illegal immigration control act of 2005 ( h.r . when the 109 th congress closed , these major immigration reform proposals were left pending . real id act the real id act ( p.l . 109-13 , division b ) expands the terrorism - related grounds for alien inadmissibility and deportation , as well as the meaning of certain terms used in the ina to describe terrorist activities or entities , to cast a wider net over groups and persons who provide more discrete forms of assistance to terrorist organizations , particularly with respect to fund - raising and soliciting membership in those organizations . oversight of these matter continue to be an of ongoing interest to congress . legislation in the 107 th congress congress's plenary authority over immigration policy derives from article 1 , ยง8 of the u.s. constitution , and the legislative branch has long taken the lead in immigration policy . the 107 th congress enacted several major laws that included significant revisions to visa policy administration and issuances . the key visa provisions in these major laws are summarized below . usa patriot act the usa patriot act ( p.l . 107-56 ) was a broad anti - terrorism measure that included several important changes to immigration law , including specific visa policy matters . foremost , it expanded the definition of terrorism and the designation of terrorist organizations used to determine the inadmissibility and removal of aliens . the act further sought to improve the visa issuance process by mandating data sharing so that consular officers have access to relevant electronic information .