this is allowed . however , section 3 of fifra provides for a 10-year period of "exclusive use" by the registrant of data submitted in support of an original registration or a new use . in addition , an applicant who submits any new data in support of a registration is entitled to compensation for the cost of data development by any subsequent applicant who supports an application with that data within 15 years of its submission . if compensation is not jointly agreed upon by the registrant and applicant , binding arbitration can be invoked . for many years , congress has been concerned about the tens of thousands of registered pesticide products that had not been subjected to modern safety reviews . fifra section 4 directs epa to reregister such products ( if they were first registered prior to 1984 ) , in order to assess their safety in light of current scientific standards . many of those older pesticide products have had their registrations canceled , often because registrants did not request reregistration . at least 14,000 products are no longer in use . nevertheless , the task for registrants and epa of reregistering the remaining older pesticide products is immense and costly , and is ongoing . for the purpose of reregistration , epa considers groupings of products having the same active ingredients ( known as "cases" ) , on a generic instead of individual product basis . for each active case , the agency evaluates existing scientific data to determine whether they are sufficient to inform epa's decision about the ingredient's eligibility for reregistration , given the safety standards specified by fifra and ffdca . for food - use pesticides , epa evaluates a pesticide's eligibility for reregistration at the same time the agency reassesses the tolerance for that pesticide under the ffdca . if data are not sufficient , the agency issues a "data call - in" to registrants , who are responsible for generating the necessary new data following epa protocols . registrants may share the cost of testing and analysis . epa is responsible for reviewing data and determining whether it adequately demonstrates the safety of the product . when all necessary data have been received and reviewed , epa prepares and issues a reregistration eligibility decision document , known as a "red. if registrants do not provide required test data in a timely fashion , epa is authorized to suspend registrations of products . fifra section 4 ( i ) directs epa to collect one - time reregistration fees and to deposit them into the reregistration and expedited processing fund , established under fifra section 4 ( k ) . annual maintenance fees for registered products also are deposited into this fund . these funds supplement epa appropriations and are meant to expedite epa processing of applications for pesticide reregistration ( including tolerance reassessment ) and to offset costs associated with pesticide registration review ( see below ) . other crs products address current pesticide issues , including crs report rl32218 , pesticide registration and tolerance fees: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] , and crs report rl32884 , pesticide use and water quality: are the laws complementary or in conflict ?