this can be considered both an advantage and adisadvantage . proprietary systems with esoteric command structures are often non - intuitive , andcould be difficult to operate by an untrained individual . incorrect commands could cause no results,and may increase the probability that the intruder would be noticed and removed from the system.additionally , different companies may have different command sets , even if they are both membersof the same industry , as their proprietary systems may have significantly different structures . thus,if a hacker or terrorist successfully attacks one company , that experience may not be valuable for useat the next company . others assert that many new control systems , as well as upgrades to legacysystems , are being assembled from commercial , off - the - shelf equipment and software , providingcommonalities across different industry sectors . they point to the needs of system maintenance andnew component integration as leading to similar control system architectures both within andbetween critical infrastructure sectors . by adopting such equipment and software , vulnerabilities thatare identified impact all sectors . the degree of integration between control system networks and publicly accessible networks is difficult to judge from the open literature . this makes assessment of the vulnerability of criticalinfrastructure industries from internet based attack difficult to know with certainty . ( 10 ) faced with anunclear risk , it may be difficult , from an industry perspective , to justify the additional costs ofupgrading privately - held industrial control systems to higher security standards . ( 11 ) current off - the - shelf industrial control systems have been designed foroperational speed and functionality , ratherthan for secure operation , and therefore may not have a high degree of operational security . ( 12 ) addition of security requirements may degrade the performance of these components belowoperating standards . events have shown that utility control system networks may be vulnerable to cyber - based incidents . computers at an inactive nuclear power plant in ohio were infected by the slammerworm in january 2003 . the infection disabled some computer functionality , including monitoringsystems for portions of the power plant . ( 13 ) also,it has been reported that other control systemcomputers have been compromised by other viruses . ( 14 ) given the uncertain vulnerability level and the potential systemic weaknesses involved in current off - the - shelf technology , there appears to be little market incentive to directly increaseindustrial control systems security . therefore the security systems for the corporate network , whichblock initial intrusion through the internet , may be the sole planned protection for the industrialcontrol systems . such an approach has been criticized , as while it may provide initial barriers tointrusion , it would not reduce any inherent vulnerabilities in the control system network . ( 15 ) security analysts also contend that industrial control systems are less obscure now than when they were initially developed . foreign utility companies increasingly use current commercial off - the - shelf industrialcontrol systems , increasing the international availability of systems and theirdocumentation . due to the similarity between these systems and systems installed domestically,potential terrorists need not break into an american utility to test their plans .