funding for guam and the virgin islands more than doubled . under tea - 21 funding for thp has remained at roughly the istea level . this rough parity continues to this day . the drop in funding in fy1983 reflects the shift to â½ % of federal aid primary contract authority and also the impact of thp being made subject to obligation limitation . the next major increase in funding occurred during fy1992-fy1993 under istea . by fy1993 the funding for american samoa and the northern marianas had more than tripled ( due in part to the change in the distribution formula in 1993 , mentioned earlier ) . the territories may receive highway funding from sources other than the thp , including the emergency relief program , the high priority projects program , and certain highway safety programs . the territories are not , however , eligible for federal highway administration discretionary programs . the eligibility for these programs is limited by statute to the states and the district of columbia , usually with puerto rico as the only exception . the arguments for and against federal - aid highway assistance to the territories have changed little since the debate of the 1960s that culminated in the founding of the thp . with the approaching reauthorization of tea - 21 the overall arguments are worth reviewing . safetea , which was introduced by request on may 14 , 2003 , would make a number of changes to the thp . section 1808 proposes a number of changes to the various parts of title 23 of the u.s. code that are relevant to the thp . some of the changes are technical and can be seen as adding clarity to the statute , while other changes have significant program effects . overall the bill could be seen as broadening the project eligibility for thp road projects . it does this specifying the eligibility of "collector roads," by allowing the secretary of transportation to apply any federal - aid highway eligibility provision to thp projects , and by allowing thp participation in ferry and ferry facility projects . the bill also ends the existing prohibition on tolls on territorial roads . on the other hand the bill does add some limitations including dropping the tea21 eligibility language that made seaports and airports eligible , as well as specifically prohibiting thp spending on local roads and for routine maintenance . funding for thp is held at the annual tea21 level of $36.4 million for the life of the reauthorization and the federal share is maintained at 100% . the bill also requires each of the territories to negotiate a new thp agreement with the secretary of transportation within 12 months of enactment . traffic growth is currently several times more rapid than the national average. the study , however , recommended against any new federal highway grant programs for the three territories . instead , the report recommended that the territorial governments should themselves finance an expanded highway development program by raising the territorial gasoline tax rates by five cents . it recommended that additional studies be conducted over the following years in order to develop a suitable highway improvement program for each territory , based on its individual needs .