administering the [u.s . refugee admissions program] in a more risk - based manner when considering the overall refugee admissions ceiling , regional allocations , and the groups of applicants considered for resettlement . a periodic review and update of the refugee high - risk country list and selection criteria . according to the dhs announcement , these measures "are designed to keep nefarious and fraudulent actors from exploiting the refugee program to enter the united states. refugee admissions for fy2018 totaled 22,491 , about half the fy2018 ceiling of 45,000 . these fy2018 admissions represented the lowest annual level of refugee arrivals in the united states since the establishment of the u.s. refugee admissions program in 1980 . the refugee ceiling for fy2019 is 30,000 . the fy2019 consultation document offered the following explanation for setting the refugee ceiling at that level , the lowest in the history of the refugee admissions program: this ceiling takes into account the operational realities associated with security measures to protect national security and public safety , as well as the need to conduct credible fear screenings of aliens seeking asylum at our borders and address the backlog of affirmative asylum cases . the hhs office of refugee resettlement ( orr ) , within the administration for children and families ( acf ) , administers a transitional assistance program for temporarily dependent refugees , asylees , cuban / haitian entrants , and other specified humanitarian groups . since its establishment in 1980 , the refugee resettlement program has been justified on the grounds that the admission of refugees is a federal decision , entailing some federal responsibility . unlike immigrants who enter through family or employment ties , refugees are admitted on humanitarian grounds , and there is no requirement that they demonstrate economic self - sufficiency . for fy2018 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 , which included appropriations for the departments of labor , hhs , and education , and related agencies , provided $1.865 billion for orr programs . this funding was supplemented by transferred funds from within hhs , for final fy2018 funding of $2.051 billion . table 2 details refugee resettlement funding for fy2009-fy2018 . orr - funded refugee assistance activities include transitional and medical services , social services to help refugees and other specified humanitarian groups ( referred to collectively as "refugees" below ) become socially and economically self - sufficient , and targeted assistance for impacted areas . as indicated in table 2 , the refugee social services , targeted assistance , and preventive health programs have been combined into the refugee support services program . transitional / cash and medical services accounts for a greater portion of the orr annual budget than any other activity for refugees . ( several of the orr programs — unaccompanied alien children , victims of trafficking , and victims of torture — are not refugee programs. ) in most cases , this assistance is administered by states and provided in the form of refugee cash assistance ( rca ) and refugee medical assistance ( rma ) . rca and rma are intended to help needy refugees who are ineligible to receive benefits from mainstream federal assistance programs . this assistance is currently available for eight months after entry .