4. technical . the great majority of advisory commissions perform technical functionsand give advice to agencies . are reorganization panels now passã© ? or , is the time approaching when a newcomprehensive commission will be viewed as essential ? have the events since september 11 , 2001changed the playing field for government organization and management ? is organizationalmanagement a separate field of study and endeavor , or should it be viewed as properly tied andsubordinate to the budgetary process , as some argue is presently the case ? to what degree shoulddepartments and agencies be able to initiate organizational changes on their own authority or takethe lead with their oversight committees in congress ? should organizational management beultimately placed under the purview of a central management agency which applies certain principles and general management laws across the board , with the burden of proof for exception resting onthe appealing agency ? in short , what political , legal , and administrative values should prevail in the21st century ? what can the experience of the landmark commissions of the 20th century tell us aboutwhat to expect as the nation continues down the path of democratic governance in the new century ? the commissions studied in this report contributed to the evolution of the executive branchof the federal government . each was concerned principally , if not exclusively , with the organizationand management of the executive branch . the commissions were temporary bodies , normallyunassociated with the legislative institutions of government . they did not conduct their proceedingsin an apolitical environment , however , nor were they able to ignore the work and ideas of those whohad trod this path before . most especially , these commissions were beholden to the framers of theconstitution and to an early 20th century political movement , progressivism . it is therefore necessaryto begin by studying the evolving theoretical foundations of the executive branch to fully understandthe role of landmark commissions . those commissions considered to be "landmark" in character , while they may be studiedindividually or collectively , may also be viewed as part of a much larger institutional category , thefederal "advisory commission. advisory commissions , or committees as they are often called , comein many sizes , lengths of service , and are assigned remarkably diverse mandates . indeed,categorizing the multitude of advisory commissions has proven to be a daunting task . ( 55 ) one attempt wasundertaken by hugh davis graham . these commissions , such as the current social securitycommission , remain popular , and the number appointed annually is likely to remain high . theso - called landmark commission , however , constitutes a very different situation . of necessity , acomprehensive review of the organization of the executive branch requires a coherency of objectivesand evaluations that are difficult to develop without some overarching theory or set of principles . has the day of the landmark commission passed ? has the loss in appeal of the so - called"orthodox theory" of organizational management made the comprehensive study approach obsolete ? can the entrepreneurial management paradigm be offered as a viable , comprehensible theory towhich a commission may repair in organizing its studies and recommendations ?