69 , mar . the executive order provides an additional 2.1% pay adjustment , allocated asan average 1.2% annual adjustment and 0.9% locality - based comparability payment . notes: the actual pay rates are calculated as follows . first , the basic general schedule ( gs ) isincreased by the annual adjustment percentage , resulting in a new gs schedule . these newbasic gs rates are then increased by the locality payment . i have asked repeatedly - - whatchanges in methodology would you like to implement so that fepca can go forward ? previously,the methodological problems appeared to be related to the locality component of federal pay , whichbush has tried to eliminate for the past two years . yet this year , his methodological problems seemto have spread to the employment cost index ( eci ) component . ( 88 ) table 1 . january 2004 recommended locality payments , authorized locality payments , and net annual and locality pay increases source: memorandum for the president's pay agent from the federal salary council , level ofcomparability payments for january 2004 and other matters pertaining to the locality payprogram ( washington: oct. 17 , 2002 ) , attachment 1 ; and report on locality - basedcomparability payments for the general schedule , annual report of the president's pay agent ( washington: 2002 ) , p. 21 . the pay agent stated: "this report shows the adjustments wewould recommend for january 2004 if the methodology and rates required by current law wereto be implemented . given the current national emergency situation and the consequentslowdown in the american economy , however , we believe it would be unwise to allow thelocality pay increases ... to take effect in january 2004. . u.s. president ( bush ) , "adjustmentsof certain rates of pay," executive order 13322 , federal register , vol . the executive order provides a 1.5% annual pay adjustment and a 0.5%locality - based comparability payment . u.s. president ( bush ) , "further adjustment of certainrates of pay," executive order 13332 , federal register , vol . the resulting pay rates ( annual +locality ) are compared with the 2003 pay rates ( annual + locality ) to derive the net increase inpay for 2004 . salary tables for 2004 are available on the internet at http: / / www.opm.gov . msa refers to a metropolitan statistical area . cmsa refers to a consolidated metropolitanstatistical area . the component parts of each pay area are described at 5 cfr 531.603 ( b ) . 2989 was incorporated in h.r . 2673 , the consolidated appropriations act for fy2004 . theconference agreement for h.r . 2673 , as agreed to by the house of representatives and thesenate , provides an appropriation of $1 million for the human capital performance fund . obligation or transfer of the funding was contingent upon the enactment of the legislation toestablish the fund within opm . funds shall not be obligated or transferred to any federal agency untilthe opm director notifies and receives prior approval from the relevant subcommittees ofjurisdiction of the committees on appropriations of opm approval of an agency's performance payplan . such amounts as determined by the opm director may be transferred to federal agencies tocarry out the purposes of the fund .