interpretations of these data vary . some suggest that these patterns illustrate that the pay gap between male and female workers is negligible and no further policy interventions are necessary . in contrast , proponents of further action note that some of the data that "explain" the pay gap , while not directly discriminatory , may be the result of discrimination . but title vii and the epa have different standards of proof , and because proof of intent to discriminate is not required by the "equal pay for equal work" standard of the epa , it may provide greater protection to minority groups than title vii in many cases . the epa's catchall exception , affording employers broad immunity for pay differentials attributable to "factors other than sex," would be significantly narrowed by the fair pay act . for example , female workers may be tracked to lower - paying fields , or supervisors may be hesitant to give more demanding work to female workers . further , even among rigorous studies , no widely accepted methodology has been able to attribute the entirety of the pay gap to factors other than the sex of the worker , making it difficult to eliminate the possibility of discrimination . although the ledbetter legislation discussed above is the only new pay discrimination law enacted by congress in recent years , the issue of pay equity continues to garner congressional attention . a number of measures have been introduced in the 114 th congress . the two most well - known of these are the paycheck fairness act and the fair pay act , both of which have been introduced repeatedly in every congressional session for a decade or more . other bills in the 114 th congress include the end pay discrimination through information act , the workplace advancement act , and the gender advancement in pay act , or gap act . each of these bills is described briefly below . introduced in each of the last several congressional sessions , the paycheck fairness act ( h.r . 1619 / s. 862 ) would increase penalties for employers who pay different wages to men and women for "equal work," and would add programs for training , research , technical assistance , and pay equity employer recognition awards . the legislation would also make it more difficult for employers to avoid epa liability , and proposed safeguards would protect employees from retaliation for making inquiries or disclosures concerning employee wages and for filing a charge or participating in any manner in epa proceedings . in short , while this legislation would adhere to current equal work standards of the epa , it would reform the procedures and remedies for enforcing the law . under the epa , as noted , prevailing plaintiffs may recover backpay in an amount equal to the total difference between wages actually received and those to which they are lawfully entitled and an additional amount equal to the backpay award as liquidated damages . compensatory damages are not authorized , and consequently , awards do not include sums for physical or mental distress , medical expenses , or other costs . the paycheck fairness act would authorize epa class actions and compensatory and punitive damages .