forces . the iraq war is the third consecutive major u.s. military operation , following the operation in kosovo in 1999 and the war in afghanistanin 2001-2002 , where helicopter performance was mixed . in kosovo , the army was criticized for notbeing able to quickly deploy and use task force hawk , a group of 24 ah - 64 apache attackhelicopters . critics emphasized that the task force had grown into a 5,000-soldier force that required500 c - 17 sorties to deploy , and that the army had kept its helicopter operations separate from thedaily air tasking order ( ato ) - the document issued each day by the air operations center thatcoordinated the operations of most u.s. aircraft . following the gulf war , dodinitiated efforts to ensure that u.s. battlefield commanders could gain rapid access to relevantintelligence collected by disparate sources . ( 144 ) a dod priority . the role of intelligence in supporting u.s. combat operations has been elevated in dod planning by the new operationalconcepts ( i.e. , new approaches to warfighting ) and associated military doctrines , especially network - centric warfare,that have been widely articulated in official dod publications since the early 1990s . intelligence is a key element of the administration's vision for defense transformation , whichemphasizes collecting intelligence through multiple sources and sharing it rapidly betweendistributed u.s. forces so as to provide those forces with a complete , real - time picture of thebattlefield . reflecting this focus , the administration states that it has accorded high - priority in dodbudget planning to intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) programs . ( 145 ) intelligence successes in the iraq war . the iraq war appears to have validated the central importance of detailed , accurate , and real - time intelligencein u.s. military operations . the availability of good intelligence was a major factor in the successof the war effort , enabling u.s. forces to carry out precision strikes against critical iraqi leadershiptargets and military formations while bypassing other targets that were not critical to the u.s. warplan . as a result , iraqi military command - and - control capabilities were rapidly degraded , criticaliraqi military formations were decimated before they had a chance to engage u.s. and british groundforces , civilian casualties were reduced , and ( significantly for the future of iraq ) damage to theinfrastructure needed for reconstruction was minimized . ( 146 ) intelligence in the iraq war was collected and made available to operating forces without many of the communications problems that had existed in the 1991 persian gulf war , the u.s. militaryoperation in kosovo in 1999 , and even the u.s. - led war in afghanistan in 2001-2002 . some of theimprovements resulted from the availability of new equipment ; others resulted from more responsiveorganizational relationships that facilitated the effective use of perishable intelligence data . pressreports indicate in particular that there was closer intelligence coordination between ground and airunits , enabling air strikes against enemy ground forces with fewer casualties to nearby friendlyforces . ( 147 ) a key form of intelligence was precise data on the location of important iraqi military installations .