both bills ( h.r . 1085 would establish anothercategory of ses appointee , one that is as yet unnamed and only for nasa . with regard to the various provisions of the legislation , he said that [t]he nasa industry exchange program ... introduces a means for nasa to engage in mutually beneficial , collaborate ventures with industry to infuse newideas and perspectives into the agency , develop new skills within the workforce , and strengthenmission capabilities . without such authority , talented individuals from industry remain an untappedresource for the agency since the salaries and benefits of the federal sector are not competitive withthe compensation packages offered to industry's most talentedworkers . enhancing the intergovernmental personnel act authority [which allows for exchanges between the federal government and state and localgovernments , universities , and non - profits] ... will allow individuals from academia or otherinstitutions to continue working in support of long - term projects or programs when the need forcontinuity is critical . enhanced recruitment , relocation , and retention bonuses [authority] .... would base bonuses on the higher locality pay salaries , allow greater amounts whencoupled with longer service agreements , and make more flexible payment options available ...[which] could be tailored to the situation at hand , and tie payment of the incentive to actualperformance . the enhanced annual leave provisions are targeted particularly to mid - career hires , who likely would give up attractive vacation packages to becomefirst - time federal employees ... . these flexibilities help nasa to compete with the compensationpackages available to private sector employers . the bill's provision to allow a limited number of term appointments to be extended up to six years , rather than four , will enhance its usefulness byaccommodating the length of some nasa programs and projects . in addition , the bill provides thata term employee may be converted to a permanent position in the same line of work without furthercompetition [provided requirements are met] ... . ultimately , it may make the concept of termappointments more attractive to potential applicants and thereby provide a more robust labor poolfor nasa management to consider . in order to attract world - class talent into nasa's most essential positions [enhanced critical pay authority up to the vice president's salary is sought which].... will help us to compete in an enormously competitive jobmarket . separation incentives ( buyouts ) are a valuable tool to encourage voluntary attrition ... nasa needs the tools to encourage targeted attrition in areas inwhich the need for certain skills has diminished so that it can recruit and reshape a workforce thatis aligned to current and future mission needs . [the authority to pay a higher amount as a buyout isrequested because the current amount] is not always enough to entice highly paid nasaprofessionals to leave . the [demonstration project] authority we are seeking would remove the coverage limit [of 5,000 employees] to allow widespread testing of newideas . ( 20 ) the international federation of professional and technical engineers , afl - cio ( ifpte ) represents more than 8,000 nasa employees nationwide . in a june 25 , 2003 letter torepresentative sherwood boehlert , chairman of the house committee on science , ifpteannounced that the union was endorsing h.r .