further legislation was not then proposed . how and where are these workers housed ? does the manager or supervisor have authority and responsibility with respect to the off - hours behavior of these young workers ? what happens if one of these young persons becomes ill and needs medical attention ? beyond the personal , there are strictly workplace questions . what is the employment relationship between these workers and the manager or supervisor ? are the youth workers employees , independent contractors , or something else entirely ? to the extent that they are employees , by whom are they employed ? the manager or supervisor may also be an employee of some more distant entity . where does responsibility ultimately reside ? how are wages and benefits handled ? what employment records are maintained — and by whom ? from a policy perspective , some may ask: should young persons be excluded , by law , from working in street or door - to - door sales or in related support services other than actual selling ? were otherwise applicable hours restrictions to be observed , would such work be acceptable ? would a blanket prohibition on outside sales work by persons under 18 years of age unduly restrict their capacity to earn ? is there something inherently inappropriate about street sales or door - to - door sales ? is such work wrong when 16- and 17-year - olds are involved , but a legitimate entrepreneurial activity if all of the sales staff ( and , perhaps , support staff ) are 18 and over ? is such work acceptable when confined to a certain radius from the permanent residence of the sales staff ? and , how expansive should that radius be ? in may 1985 ( the 99 th congress ) , then - representative ron wyden ( d - or ) , stating that "unscrupulous door - to - door selling groups" were exploiting young persons ( some of them , children ; others , young adults ) , introduced legislation to establish a national clearinghouse on fraudulent youth employment practices . while wyden conceded that "the vast majority of door - to - door sellers are wholly honorable and reputable," others , he suggested , were not . these companies "can be peddling anything from magazine subscriptions to chemical cleaners. he outlined a host of alleged violations of law and fraudulent sales practices engaged in by such firms and urged his colleagues to help "put these dangerous and unscrupulous operators out of business . and ... take a step toward protecting our youth from dangerous employment practices. 2544 ) died at the close of the 99 th congress . hearings on the general issue were subsequently conducted by the senate permanent subcommittee on investigations ( 1987 ) and by the house committee on government operations' subcommittee on employment and housing ( 1990 ) . in each case , the matter was restricted to general oversight . in november 1999 ( the 106 th congress ) , senator kohl introduced s. 1989 , the traveling sales crew protection act — his interest sparked by an auto accident in wisconsin in which seven young people were killed and others injured .