statutes . fundamental research is also defined within nsdd - 189: 'fundamental research' means basic and applied research in science and engineering , the results of which ordinarily are published and shared broadly within the scientific community , as distinguished from proprietary research and from industrial development , design , production , and product utilization , the results of which ordinarily are restricted for proprietary or national security reasons . nsdd - 189 has not been superceded and continues to be the government policy regarding controls on federally funded research results . in the wake of the terrorist attacks of september 2001 , then - assistant to the president for national security affairs condoleezza rice reaffirmed this position in a letter to the center for strategic and international studies , by stating , ...this administration will review and update as appropriate the export control policies that affect basic research in the united states . in the interim , the policy on the transfer of scientific , technical , and engineering information set forth in nsdd - 189 shall remain in effect... executive branch agencies have followed this general policy by requiring that the results of agency - funded extramural research be published promptly and with wide dissemination . for example , the national science foundation research policy states: nsf expects significant findings from research and education activities it supports to be promptly submitted for publication , with authorship that accurately reflects the contributions of those involved . it expects investigators to share with other researchers , at no more than incremental cost and within a reasonable time , the data , samples , physical collections and other supporting materials created or gathered in the course of the work . research performed with national institutes of health funding is also to be disseminated to the public: it is nih policy to make available to the public the results and accomplishments of the activities that it funds . therefore , pis [principal investigators] and grantee organizations are expected to make the results and accomplishments of their activities available to the research community and to the public at large , and to effect their timely transfer to industry for commercialization . the department of defense also encourages the publication of research it funds . for example , office of naval research policy states: publication of results of the research project in appropriate professional journals is encouraged as an important method of recording and reporting scientific information . in general , federal agencies appear to agree that there should be open publication of research results when the research has been funded by taxpayer dollars . the exception is when research is classified . classified research projects , even those performed by scientists outside of government laboratories , are not published in the open literature , with information being transferred only between those who possess requisite clearance . some classified research areas are later declassified , and the advances developed in these programs used more generally . current mechanisms for federal agencies to control the publication of federally funded extramural research results include classification , export and arms trafficking regulations , and specifications in federal contracts , such as prepublication review .