he signed p.l . 101-168 after insisting that congress include language prohibiting the use of district revenuesto pay for abortion services except in cases where the mother's life was endangered . the district successfully fought for the removal of the provision limiting district funding of abortion services when congress considered and passed thedistrict of columbia appropriations act for fy1994 , p.l . the fy1994 actalso reinstated rape and incest as qualifying circumstances allowing for the publicfunding of abortion services . the district's success was short lived . the district ofcolumbia appropriations act for fy1996 , p.l . 104-134 , and subsequent district ofcolumbia appropriations acts , limited the use of district and federal funds forabortion services to cases where the mother's life is endangered or cases where thepregnancy was the result of rape or incest . the prohibition on the use of district and federal funds is included in the house , senate , and conference versions of the district of columbia appropriations act forfy2002 , p.l . the fy2002 district of columbia appropriations bill as approved by the senate appropriations committee on october 11 , 2001 , and the house on september 25,2001 , included $16 million in funding for emergency planning . the district's initialfy2002 budget request included a $16 million federal payment specifically for costsassociated with security support - - including counter - terrorism and crowd control - - for the imf / world bank meeting that was scheduled for late september 2001 . themeeting , which has been postponed to a date to be determined , also was scheduledto receive $17 million in funding from the imf and world bank for security support . 107-96 includes a provision that reallocates the $16 million special federal payment to emergency security planning activities in response to the september 11,2001 terrorist attacks . the act allocates $3.4 million as reimbursement to thedistrict for costs associated with security planning for the world bank / imf meeting . three additional budget items include funding that may be used to combat or respondto terrorist acts . however , funds for these operations are derived from local revenuesources: the metropolitan police department ; district of columbia national guard ; and the district of columbia emergency management agency . budget requests forthese operations are identified in the following table . in addition , congressappropriated $1.4 billion in a special federal payment for the development anddeployment of a wireless telecommunication system linking the district government,the u.s. capitol police , the u.s. park service police , and the secret service . table 5 . district of columbia federal and localappropriations that may be used to respond to terrorismthreats congress provided additional assistance for emergency preparedness and terrorism response activities in the department of defense appropriations forfy2002 , p.l . the act includes $200 million in special federal paymentsto district of columbia and selected regional agencies , including the washingtoncouncil of governments and the washington metropolitan transit authority , foremergency response - related activities . the defense appropriations act for fy2002was signed by the president on january 10 , 2002 . table 6 . fy 2002 defense appropriations act , p.l.107-117: district of columbia emergency preparedness fund .