2557 , sec . 2003 ) , which passed the house , would authorize this change in cost share arrangements . in 1986 , when the cost - sharing formula was established , vessels requiring more than 45-foot draft were considered highly specialized ships . the rationale for their argument is as follows . they argue that the present hmt funding scheme inflates the supply of larger ships . the fundamental question is who should pay for dredging: port users or taxpayers ? if it is decided that port users should pay , which users in particular: shippers or carriers ? whether the federal government or local port authorities should administer the fee and whether a nationally uniform fee or a port - specific fee is more equitable and efficient are also key questions . in addition to these issues , policymakers may revisit the cost sharing arrangement between federal and non - federal sources . answering these questions involves a trade - off between maximizing the overall efficiency of the u.s. maritime transportation system and the economic development of specific coastal cities . while economic analysis provides a framework for evaluating financing options , the answer to each of these questions is inherently a political choice . as one study on dredging explains , "the conflict over funding is a conflict of values and goals , a conflict about who pays and who benefits . those conflicts can only be resolved in the political process with political compromises. one option is to maintain the status quo — that is , to continue funding harbor dredging through a cargo - value - based tax . some observers view the present system as at least one step more efficient than funding from general revenues . if port users are required to pay at least part of the cost of dredging , they argue , it promotes a more efficient use of resources because the users are not likely to pay more in fees than they hope to save in shipping costs . also , if port users are required to pay for dredging , they are likely to require that the government spend their resources on the most worthwhile projects . conversely , they argue , if general taxpayer revenue is used to pay the full cost of dredging , funds will more likely be wasted on unjustified or marginally useful projects . others contend that the present funding system is broken and must be overhauled because the original intent of congress was to have both exporters and importers paying the tax . they argue that it is unfair that importers are essentially paying for the dredging needs of exporters . some also contend that the legal and trade challenges to the hmt make it an unstable funding source . some economists believe a user fee system could be re - structured in such a way as to promote better use of the nation's marine transportation system . advocates of a port - specific , carrier - based fee argue that , from an economic efficiency point of view , the user fee model would be superior to other funding models .