appendix a . legislative history of energy assistance liheap was not the first federal energy assistance program created to help low - income households with their energy bills . appropriations for home energy assistance initially came about in the 1970s at the time of the opec ( organization of the petroleum exporting countries ) oil embargo of 1973-1974 . in the fall of that year , a number of countries in the middle east stopped exporting oil to the united states , a stoppage that continued until march of 1974 . prices of heating oil rose , while supplies were restricted . what followed were several years in which congress directed funds to assistance focused on lowering energy bills through weatherization and education . later in the 1970s , assistance evolved to include crisis assistance for households facing shutoff or other emergencies , followed by a system of direct payments to subsidize the energy bills of low - income households . when liheap was enacted , direct assistance for energy bills was the focus of the program , but all of these forms of assistance―weatherization , education , and crisis assistance―were made part of the program and continue to be eligible uses of funds . this appendix discusses the evolution of energy assistance in the 1970s and early 1980s , culminating in the creation of liheap in 1982 . energy assistance programs prior to liheap the first federal funds for energy assistance were the outgrowth of a program that was created in maine just after the start of the oil embargo by opec countries . in 1973 , the maine office of economic opportunity applied to the federal office of economic opportunity ( oeo , the federal agency in charge of administering war on poverty programs in the 1960s and 1970s ) to fund a project they had conceived of called "project fuel. energy costs , particularly the costs of heating oil and wood , were growing in maine , and the state determined that it would assist low - income and elderly households in meeting their energy needs . oeo approved funding for the state at the end of 1973 . project fuel used funding primarily to help "winterize" homes , but also to provide crisis counseling , and purchase fuel for use in emergency situations such as equipment breakdown or when dealers ran out of fuel . project fuel prompted what would become the first federal program to assist low - income households during the energy crisis , the emergency energy conservation program ( eecp , p.l . 93-644 ) enacted as part of the headstart , economic opportunity , and community partnership act at the beginning of 1975 . the law authorized the community services administration ( csa , which replaced the oeo as part of the same bill ) to use funds primarily for weatherization and conservation purposes , but also gave the authority to use funds for fuel voucher or stamp programs . community action agencies , community development corporations , state offices of economic opportunity , and other public or private nonprofit organizations were eligible to apply to administer the funds . congress first appropriated funds for the eecp in fy1975 , $16.5 million , as part of a supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .