forces . ( 45 ) tenet alluded to a comprehensiveoperation plan prepared in 1999 to disrupt al qaedafinances , impede their activities and bring osama bin laden to justice . the plan included not onlyheightened analytical efforts to track al qaeda but also to act against the terrorist organization.seeking candidates fluent in middle eastern and south asian languages and with police , military,business , technical , or academic experience , cia recruited and trained officers for counterterroristassignment . should we enhance our domestic collectioncapabilities , and if so , how ? ... this is a thorny subject , in which we must balance deeply - held civil liberty and privacy concerns with the need to protect our nation . this will not beeasy . ( 65 ) the joint inquiry has sought to determine and describe the background to the attacks of september 11 , 2001 . in describing procedures that may have affected the ability of governmentalofficials to gain advance notice of the terrorists' plans , the inquiry focused on testimony thatsuggested available information in the possession of some agencies was not fully shared with othersin a timely manner . congress and the executive branch have acted in the usa patriot act , in otherlegislation , and in changed administrative procedures to address these issues . some observers,however , have criticized these changes , arguing that the roles of intelligence and law enforcementare inherently different and that mixing them can undermine the civil liberties of u.s. persons . someobservers suggest that the independent commission , receiving extended testimony from intelligence,law enforcement , and legal experts , could play a useful role in the achievement of a public consensuson the proper balance between needs to protect the nation against international terrorists and toprotect civil liberties . the final report of the two intelligence committees is expected to be submitted in 2003 afterit has been declassified . it will reflect the views of members , which may not necessarily coincidewith the conclusions of the joint inquiry staff . it may include judgments on the performance ofagencies and their leaders . it may propose changes in the responsibilities of agencies . it willundoubtedly influence the oversight of the counterterrorist effort during the 108th congress . the twocommittees have , however , already made public a considerable amount of evidence , analysis , andtestimony that will support a deeper understanding of the background to the september 11 attacks . the emphasis appears to be focused on a perceived need to bridge the "walls" between intelligenceand law enforcement and to encourage the fbi's current concentration on counterterrorism . the investigations and the assessments of the tragic events of september 11 , 2001 have not yet been concluded . thus far , a number of statutory changes have been enacted and a new departmentof homeland security has been established . many observers believe that further changes may benecessary , especially in regard to intelligence and law enforcement , to confront what is likely to bea lengthy campaign against the forces of international terrorism . some believe that there should bemore precise statutory protections of civil liberties . the character and extent of any changes remainunder discussion . they livedlawfully . they trained lawfully . they boarded the aircraft lawfully .