matching equity funding is required . eligibility criteria: applications to a commission for a grant or other assistance for a project are made through , and evaluated for approval by , the state - appointed member of the commission representing the applicant . funding : the 2008 farm bill ( p.l . the rural population has declined over the past decade . according to the u.s. census , as of july 2012 , approximately 46.2 million people ( 14.6% of the u.s. population ) lived in rural areas , down from approximately 16% in 2000 . while rural farming and mining counties have long experienced dwindling populations , more recently rural retirement and recreation areas have also seen declines as the baby - boomer generation increasingly opts for urban areas in retirement . manufacturing now accounts for about 22% of rural private sector earnings and about 11% of all rural jobs . the service sector , as with the u.s. domestic economy as a whole , however , dominates rural job opportunities . although over 90% of total farm household income now comes from off - farm sources , farming , and agriculture more generally , remain the major legislative focus for much of congressional debate on rural policy . since 1973 , omnibus farm bills have included a rural development title . the most recently passed is title vi of the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( p.l . agriculture and manufacturing issues are increasingly seen as part of global and regional restructuring issues , which have significant implications for rural areas , especially those areas where these production sectors remain dominant . how to position rural areas to better compete in a global environment is a key issue framing debates about the future of rural america . omnibus farm bills are the major modern legislative vehicle for addressing many rural development issues . while other legislation has significant implications for rural areas and rural residents ( eg , transportation initiatives , environmental regulation , finance and taxation , medicare , social security ) , congress has used periodic farm bills to address emerging rural issues as well as to reauthorize a wide range of rural programs administered by the various usda rural development mission agencies . while the extent of overlap between federal agencies and programs targeting rural areas has been of concern to some rural policy observers , legislation enacted since 1990 reflects an effort to address rural issues more comprehensively . usda's rural development mission is to enhance rural communities by targeting financial and technical resources to areas of greatest need . three agencies , established by the agricultural reorganization act of 1994 ( p.l . 103-354 ) , are responsible for the mission area: the rural housing service ( rhs ) , the rural business - cooperative service ( rbs ) , and the rural utilities service ( rus ) . an office of community development provides further community development support through usda rural development's state offices . congress has enacted many public laws bearing on rural policies and rural residents . the rural electrification act of 1936 , to cite one significant example , was central to the provision of electrical power and telephone service throughout rural america .