cir . 2009 ) ; on remand , 92 fed . cl . 373 ( 2010 ) , affirmed without opinion , 418 fed . appx . 920 ( fed . cir . 2011 ) in 2000 , plaintiff developer bought 82 acres adjacent to the mississippi sandhill crane national wildlife refuge for $964,000 . long before , in 1977 , the land had been designated as critical habitat for the crane , a listed endangered species . soon after its purchase , plaintiff sold 8 of those 82 acres for $430,000 . when the navy expressed interest in buying the remainder , for construction of navy housing , the fws issued an esa biological opinion concluding that the project could go forward only if the loss of sandhill crane critical habitat in the remainder parcel was mitigated by the preservation off - site of 77 acres of equivalent habitat value . thus when , in 2002 , plaintiff contracted with the navy for sale of the remainder , for $1.9 million , the navy imposed a condition: that plaintiff purchase and transfer 77 acres to the fws , for inclusion in the refuge . this the plaintiff did , at a cost of $312,000 . plaintiff claims this mitigation condition was a taking . held ( federal circuit , 2009 ) , the trial court mischaracterized the property interest . the trial court ( court of federal claims ) viewed the property interest asserted by the plaintiff as taken to be its interest in selling the land to the navy without conditions . holding that this was not a property interest under the takings clause , the trial court granted summary judgment for the united states . but a closer reading of the pleadings shows that the actual property interest alleged to have been taken was plaintiff's right to develop the remainder parcel . the right to develop land is clearly cognizable under the takings clause , and the plaintiff has properly pled a taking thereof . therefore , the trial court on remand must do a penn central analysis of the taking claim with regard to the right to develop . in doing so , the trial court must bear in mind that plaintiff's actual or constructive knowledge of the pre - purchase designation of critical habitat ( in 1977 ) is relevant , though not dispositive , on the taking question . the trial court found the taking claim to lack final - decision ripeness , since plaintiff had not applied for an esa incidental take permit . nor , it held , did the futility exception to proving ripeness apply . because the plaintiff no longer owned the property , the absence of ripeness could not be cured , so the case was dismissed with prejudice . comment: even had plaintiff's claim been ripe , it is difficult to see how the trial court , on remand , could have found a penn central regulatory taking . first , plaintiff netted roughly $1.6 million on its sale to the navy ( $1.9 million minus $312,000 for mitigation ) , a profit of about 80% in two years .