is much more difficult . the agent will not havediplomatic immunity and cannot be readilyreturned to the u.s. if apprehended in the host country . he or she may be subject to arrest , imprisonment , or,potentially , execution . there is a potential foragents working in businesses to become entangled in unethical or illegal activities - - to "go into business forthemselves" - - that could embarrass the u.s. anddetract from their official mission . ( 18 ) requirements for u.s. intelligence agents with highly developed skills in foreign languages are difficult to meet . few graduates of u.s.colleges have such skills and language education is expensive . recruiting u.s. citizens who have ethnicbackgrounds similar to members of the societies in whichthe terrorist groups operate may subject individuals to difficult pressures especially if the agent has family in thetargeted area . the house intelligence committeereported in september 2001 that the intelligence community's "most pressing need is for greater numbers of foreignlanguage - capable intelligence personnel , withincreased fluency in specific and multiple languages . the committee has heard repeatedly from both military andcivilian intelligence producers and consumersthat this is the single greatest limitation in intelligence agency personnel expertise and that it is a deficiencythroughout the intelligencecommunity. ( 19 ) it is administratively difficult to develop resources throughout the world over a long period of time andcosts are higher than addingintelligence staff to embassies . few observers could have predicted the intense u.s. concern with somalia , kosovo,or afghanistan that eventually developed . ten years from now there may be a whole set of challenges from groups that no one today is even awareof . in short , reorienting humint collection to give significantly greater attention to terrorist or potentially terrorist groups would have important administrativeimplications for the intelligence community . while budgetary increases would not necessarily be dramatic giventhe size of the existing intelligence budget ( evenpaying hundreds of human agents would be far less costly than deploying a satellite ) , the infrastructure needed totrain and support numerous agents serving undernon - official cover would grow significantly . extensive redundancy would be required to cover terrorist groups thatmay never pose significant threats to u.s.interests . with such considerations in mind , the senate intelligence committee , in its report accompanying the fy2004 intelligence authorization bill ( s. 1025 ) , noted interest among some members in more vigorous humint collection , "especially unilateral - - collection - - under non - official cover and fromnon - traditional humint 'platforms. further changes have been proposed in the 108th congress . ( 30 ) these initiatives reflect a determination to adapt fisa to the currentinternationalenvironment in which international terrorists may operate within and outside u.s. borders . the new department of homeland security that began operations in early 2003 has the statutory responsibility of using both intelligence and law enforcementinformation to provide assessments of terrorist activities and threats . the homeland security act ( p.l . 107-206 ) established within dhs an intelligence analysisdirectorate designed to integrate intelligence and law enforcement information relating to potential or actual terroristthreat to the united states . subsequently , theadministration announced the establishment of a separate terrorist threat integration center under the directionof the dci , which is to perform essentially thosefunctions .