table a - 1 . summary of all appropriations bills ( $s - millions , discretionary budget authority ) notes: a the administration included a request for $1.3 billion in supplemental funding for fy2002pellgrants in its fy2003 budget , with equal offsets from reductions in funds added by congress tolabor , hhs , and the department of education . the house and the senate appropriationscommittees both provided $1 billion for pell grants and scored the offset as zero . b does not include $1.1 billion in mandatory spending for veterans eligible for disabilitypayments,requested by the administration on may 15 , 2002 , and included in the senate and enactedversion . c totals include emergency , contingent emergency spending , rescissions and offsets , andnon - emergency spending . table a - 2 below lists the funding in the fy2002 supplemental that was requested by the administration and enacted by congress . as enacted , h.r . 4775 provided that funding would be available for fy2002 unless designated otherwise . ( 100 ) the table below shows thoseaccounts where congress extended the availability offunds beyond fy2002 . as shown in table a - 2 , which follows , congress also appropriated funds in several categories: emergency funds as designated by both the president and congress ( designatedby "e" ) ; contingent emergency funds to be designated as emergency funds if thepresident submits a budget request including that designation ( designated by"c" ) ; non - emergency funds ( designated by "n" ) ; and rescissions and offsets ( designated as "r" ) . emergency funding is not counted against the statutory ceilings that are in effect for fy2002 as part of the 1997 budget enforcement in a general provision referred to as the "all or none"provision , h.r . underthe terms of p.l . 107-206 , the president had 30 days after enactment ( september 1 ) to decidewhether to designate all or none of the $5.1 billion as emergency funding . if he chose to agree withcongress and use the $5.1 billion , he would have had to submit a budget amendment specifying theemergency designation . the august 13 decision , however , has the effect , in terms used by the whitehouse , of a "pocket veto" by the president of the contingent emergency spending . funds that willnot be used include about $500 million for dod funding , $275 million for veterans' medical care,and about $700 million for foreign assistance including $250 million in aid for israel and thepalestinians , and $200 million in hiv / aids funding . white house officials said , however , that theadministration would seek about $1 billion of the $5.1 billion as an amended fy2003 appropriationrequest , including funds for israel , the palestinians , international hiv / aids , and thetransportation security agency . ( see table 4 below for a complete list of the affected programs. ) the president's decision not to use the contingency funds makes significant changes in the policy priorities endorsed by congress . dod lost about $1 billion in contingency funds , butmaintained a 56% share of total funding in p.l . 107-206 compared with 50% in the bill as clearedby congress .