but these taxpayers mostly do not report capital gains and losses . this is the basic approach taken between 1924 and 1938 . any remaining net loss would be carried forward . in the case of a net short - term loss and a net long - term loss the simplest way is to begin with short - term losses which can be used on a dollar for dollar basis to offset ordinary income . if short - term losses exceed the limit they would be carried forward along with all long - term losses . the assets in these plans are not affected by the net loss restrictions . as a consequence , the benefits of increasing the net loss deduction would tend to accrue to taxpayers in the upper income ranges . an increase in the net capital loss limit may not be an effective device to stimulate aggregate demand . in the short run , an increase in the loss limitation could produce an incentive to sell stock , which could depress stock prices and erode confidence even further . furthermore , the empirical evidence suggests that the tax benefits of an increase in the net capital loss limitation would be received by a relatively small number of higher income individuals . the restoration of the value of the loss limitation to its 1978 level is more complicated to address , but two important comments may be made . the most effective economic stimulus is one that most closely translates dollar for dollar into spending . direct government spending on goods and services would tend to rank as the most effective , followed by transfers and tax cuts for lower income individuals . one argument that might be made for providing capital gains tax relief is that it would increase the value of the stock market and thus investor confidence . indeed , such an argument has been made for a capital gains tax cut in the past . such a link is weaker and more uncertain than a direct stimulus to the economy via spending increases or cuts in taxes aimed at lower income individuals . indeed , it is not altogether certain that capital gains tax relief would increase stock market values — the evidence is mixed . stock markets rise when increases in offers to buy exceed increases in offers to sell . capital gains tax revisions may be more likely to increase sales than purchases in the short run through an unlocking effect , and this effect could be particularly pronounced in the case of an expanded capital loss deduction . although these benefits may stimulate the stock market because they make stocks more attractive investments , they also create a short - term incentive to sell — and an incentive to sell the most depressed stocks . thus , if the method of stimulating the economy is expected to work via an increase in stock prices , such a tax revision whose effect is expected via a boost in the stock market could easily depress stock prices further . overall , it is a uncertain method of stimulating the economy .