each is discussed below . in order to enhance the oversight of student loan repayment programs , opm may want to expand the information provided in its annual report to congress . additional data that could be reported might include the following: the costs of administering such programs ; the number of individuals who leave government service after receiving repayments and completing the minimum required service period , the number of individuals who have been granted waivers from repaying the benefit if they do not fulfill the service agreement ( an agency head may waive the repayment for reasons of equity or public interest ) , and the attrition rates of employees both receiving and not receiving repayments . other information that could be included in the opm report might be the composition as to sex and race of recipients , to determine whether the program is being administered in an equitable manner , and details on the written determination document that recipients sign to attest that they would leave federal service in the absence of the student loan repayment . congress , opm , and the agencies themselves also may wish to examine whether the intent of congress that repayments be used sparingly and with great discretion is being fulfilled , particularly since the number of repayments has increased so significantly between fy2004 and fy2005 . individual executive agency reports on student loan repayments are not available publicly . perhaps agencies would consider posting these reports on their internet websites . oversight of the repayment programs may be strengthened by evaluations conducted by agency inspectors general or the national academy of public administration . currently , several agencies have anecdotal evidence on the effectiveness of their student loan repayment programs . some agencies are into their fourth year of using the incentive while others have one to three years of experience with the program . in order to further assess the impact of repayments , agencies may institute systematic entrance and exit interviews that query their employees on the importance of receiving student loan repayments compared to other available recruitment and retention incentives . in addition , the recruitment and retention results for new hires who received and did not receive the repayments could be compared to determine the effectiveness of the repayments . information on the specific recruitment and retention challenges that agencies are trying to mitigate through the use of repayments also would illuminate whether they are primarily competing with other agencies or with the private sector for staff . three executive branch agencies — the departments of justice and defense and the securities and exchange commission — have been in the forefront of student loan repayment programs since fy2003 . the department of state has been so since fy2002 . together , these four agencies account for 81.3% ( 3,392 ) of recipients of repayments and 84.1% ( $22,432,654 ) of the total cost of repayments in the executive branch in fy2005 . opm's annual report could provide congress with a more complete measure of the efficiency and effectiveness of repayment programs if it included detailed information on the administrative practices and costs and the outcomes of the programs at these four agencies . as amended by p.l .