highlights follow . the united states international broadcasting act of 1994 reorganized within usia all u.s. government international broadcasting , including voice of america ( voa ) , broadcasting to cuba , radio free europe / radio liberty ( rfe / rl ) , radio free asia ( rfa ) , and the middle east broadcasting network . the 1994 act established the broadcasting board of governors ( bbg ) to oversee all u.s. government broadcasting ; abolished the board for international broadcasting ( bib ) , the administering body of rfe / rl ; and recommended that rfe / rl be privatized by december 31 , 1999 . this recommendation was repealed by p.l . during the reorganization debate in 1999 , the 105 th congress agreed that credibility of u.s. international broadcasting was crucial to its effectiveness as a public diplomacy tool . therefore , congress agreed not to merge broadcasting functions into the state department , but to maintain the broadcasting board of governors ( bbg ) as an independent agency as of october 1 , 1999 . for fy2008 international broadcasting activities the president is requesting $668.2 million , an increase of 3.8% over the fy2007 estimate of $644 million , but a decrease of 1.7% from the fy2006 enacted level of $679.6 million , including rescissions and supplementals . of the $668.2 million request , $618.8 million would be for broadcasting operations , such as voa , $10.7 million for capital improvements , and $38.7 million for broadcasting to cuba . the bbg is planning to eliminate several voa services including uzbek , greek , and cantonese as well as the rfe / rl macedonia service . bbg also plans to reduce several others , such as voa and rfe / rl service in ukrainian , tibetan , and romanian . reportedly , eleven former voa directors are appealing to congress to reverse the proposed administration cuts . at the same time , bbg's fy2008 request would increase middle east broadcasting network funds by some $20 million . the state department traditionally has had sole authority to issue visas overseas . the homeland security act of 2002 ( h.r . 107-296 , signed into law on november 25 , 2002 ) now provides the secretary of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) with exclusive authority to: 1 ) issue regulations regarding administering and enforcing visa issuance , 2 ) impose upon any u.s. government employee , with consent of the head of his / her agency , any functions involved in visa issuance , 3 ) assign dhs employees to each overseas post where visas are issued , and 4 ) use the national foreign affairs training center to train dhs employees who will be involved in visa issuance . the act states that these authorities will be exercised through the secretary of state . the homeland security act of 2002 further provides the secretary of state and consular officers with the authority to refuse visa applications . the act stipulates that within one year after the act is signed , the secretary of dhs and the secretary of state must report to congress on implementation of visa issuance authorities and any proposals that are necessary to improve the activities surrounding visa issuance .