water rights . wilderness statutes have provided different directions concerning federal reserved water rights associated with the designated wilderness areas . the wilderness act expressly states that it does not claim or deny a reserved water right ( section 4 ( d ) ( 7 ) ) , whereas some wilderness statutes have expressly reserved , or denied , claims to federal water rights . wilderness statutes frequently provide that state law dictates regulation of water allocation and use . buffer z ones . the wilderness act is silent on the issue of buffer zones around wilderness areas to protect the designated areas . however , in response to concern that designating wilderness areas would restrict management of adjoining federal lands , language in many subsequent wilderness bills has prohibited buffer zones that would limit uses and activities on federal lands around the wilderness areas . land and rights acquisition and future designations . the wilderness act authorizes the acquisition of land within designated wilderness areas ( called inholdings ) , including through donation or exchange for other federal land ( section 5 ( a - c ) ) , subject to appropriations . congress has also enacted several wilderness statutes with intended or potential wilderness that are within or adjoining designated wilderness areas . these areas are to become wilderness when certain conditions have been met , such as acquisition , as specified in the statute . wilderness study , review , and release . many of the wilderness statutes have directed the agencies to review the wilderness potential of certain lands and present recommendations regarding wilderness designations to the president and to congress . ( see the " wilderness review , study , and release " section , below. ) however , the wilderness act and most of the initial statutory wilderness review provisions were silent on the management of the areas during and after the review , leading to concerns about how to manage areas not recommended for wilderness designation . a legislative provision , called release language , was developed to address this concern . release language provides direction on the timing of future wilderness review and of the management of areas not designated as wilderness until the next review . the wilderness act , and subsequent statutes , authorized some uses to continue , particularly if the uses were authorized at the time of designation . for example , the wilderness act specifically directs that "the grazing of livestock , where established prior to the effective date of this act , shall be permitted to continue subject to such reasonable regulations as are deemed necessary by the secretary of agriculture" ( section 4 ( d ) ( 4 ) ( 2 ) ) . congress expanded on this language by providing additional guidance on continuing livestock grazing at historic levels in designated wilderness areas ( h. rept . 96-617 , which accompanied p.l . 96-560 , and appendix a — grazing guidelines — in h.rept . 101-405 , which accompanied p.l . many of the subsequent wilderness statutes also expressly directed continued livestock grazing in conformance with the wilderness act and the committee reports . the wilderness act extended the mining and mineral leasing laws for wilderness areas in national forests for 20 years , through 1983 .