, trade deficit ) . in 2009 , the united states had a current account deficit of $378.4 billion , composed of a goods and services deficit of $374.9 billion , an investment income surplus of $121.4 billion , and a net unilateral transfers deficit of $124.9 billion . therefore , for the united states , the terms current account deficit and trade deficit can be used interchangeably with little inaccuracy . relatively weaker recovery and more damped investment spending in much of the rest of the world makes the united states an attractive destination for foreign investors and helps to reinforce this pattern of net capital inflows . although there is no dampening effect on economic activity , the foreign sector is not seen as a significant contributing force to the pace of economic activity . if , on balance , foreign investors see further investment in the united states as a more risky undertaking , other factors equal , the capital inflow will ebb and bring the trade deficit down with it . on the other hand , if the relative rate of return from investment in u.s. assets grows more attractive , the net capital inflow could expand and bring the trade deficit up with it . a u.s. recovery will likely include a recovery of investment spending . if increased investment spending is not matched by increased domestic saving , the trade deficit is likely to rise . while the private saving rate is likely to be higher than its pre - recession level , the government saving rate is likely to be lower , making it difficult to judge whether the overall saving rate will be significantly above its pre - recession value . private investor behavior is sensitive to the investment alternatives available . the relative attractiveness of global investment alternatives will be influenced by the relative pace of the economic recoveries in the united states and the rest of the world . at this time , the expectation is that europe and japan will rebound more slowly than the united states . also , the recent troubles in greece and other euro area economies may diminish the attractiveness of the euro area as an investment destination . however , most emerging markets , especially in asia , are expected to outpace the developed economies , including the united states . a risk factor that could exert a medium - term influence on foreign suppliers of capital to the u.s. economy is the adequacy of diversification in their asset holdings , which already contain substantial dollar balances . diversification would likely manifest itself as a slowing in the rate of accumulation of dollar assets , not as the "dumping" of dollar assets already held . such diversification was a likely reason for a significant weakening of private capital inflows between 2002 and 2007 . regarding the behavior of foreign central banks , it is uncertain whether they will continue to increase their already large holdings of dollar assets .