mbeki's role was controversial . president jacob zuma and a team of his own mediators took over in late 2009 . the republic of south africa held its first universal suffrage elections in april 1994 . framework convention on climate change . south africa is the only african member of the g20 , the premier forum for international economic cooperation . weak regimes and instability elsewhere in the region have historically had a negative impact on south africa , and the country continues to face a large influx of illegal immigrants . by some estimates , more than three million zimbabweans currently reside illegally in south africa . some south africans blame these immigrants for the country's high crime and unemployment rates , and in may 2008 tensions erupted in the townships , sparking a wave of xenophobic attacks that displaced over 25,000 and left over 60 dead . isolated attacks have occurred since then , and the potential for further violence cannot be ruled out . in order to promote greater stability , south african officials have played prominent mediator roles in african conflicts , and south african troops actively support peacekeeping missions throughout the continent . in 2002 , they helped to persuade the parties to the prolonged conflict in the democratic republic of the congo ( drc ) to sign a peace agreement following negotiations in south africa . president thabo mbeki was less successful in mediating the conflict in cote d'ivoire , a country which continues to face political turmoil . former president nelson mandela played a leading role in brokering a peace agreement in burundi , and south africa contributed hundreds of troops to the peacekeeping mission there . over 1,200 south african troops are currently participating as peacekeepers in the u.n. stabilization mission in the drc ( monusco ) , and over 900 south african soldiers and police serve under the u.n. - african union mission in darfur ( unamid ) . in a move believed by many to protest the sudanese government's policies in darfur , the mbeki government was instrumental in preventing sudan from attaining the chairmanship of the african union in 2006 . it has , however , protested the imposition of tougher u.n. sanctions against sudan and an international criminal court ( icc ) indictment of sudanese president omar al bashir as counterproductive . former president mbeki continues to play an active mediation role in sudan . the country has supported democratic advances on the continent , providing millions of ballots in 2006 for elections in the drc . in 2007 , the heads of state of the southern african development community ( sadc ) nominated then - president mbeki as mediator between the zimbabwean government and the opposition in an effort to resolve its political and economic crises . the african national congress ( anc ) , which led the struggle against white minority rule and the apartheid system of state - enforced racial segregation , won control of the national assembly . the assembly chose as president nelson mandela , the anc leader who had been released from prison in 1990 , after serving 27 years . his release followed years of secret contacts between the anc and key white business and political figures .