each of these topics is discussed below . issues regarding implementation of these requirements and other provisions are likely to be considered by the 109 th congress . such debates may particularly occur as the congress considers a new high school initiative released by the administration in conjunction with its fy2006 and fy2007 budgets . relevant aspects of this initiative are discussed below , at the end of the report section on pupil assessment . this report concludes with a brief discussion of debate in some states and leas over continued participation in the title i - a program , and the potential effects of opting - out of participation in the program . under the nclba , the title i - a requirements for state - developed standards of ayp are substantially expanded in scope and specificity . these standards serve as the basis for identifying schools and leas where performance is inadequate , so that these inadequacies may be addressed first through provision of increased support and , ultimately , a variety of "corrective actions. the nclba provisions regarding ayp were adopted largely in reaction to perceived weaknesses with the ayp requirements of the 1994 iasa . the latter were frequently criticized as being vague , lacking a required focus on specific disadvantaged pupil groups , failing to require continuous improvement toward an ultimate goal , and being applicable only to schools and leas participating in title i - a , not to states overall or to all public schools . before the enactment of the nclba , there was tremendous variation among the states in the impact of their ayp standards — i.e. , the number and percentage of title i - a schools and leas identified as failing to meet ayp standards . in some states , a very large percentage of title i - a schools have been identified as needing improvement , while a small number of states had identified very few or even no such schools for at least some years preceding the enactment of the nclba . as under the iasa , ayp is defined primarily on the basis of aggregate scores for various groups of pupils on state assessments of academic achievement . however , under the nclba , state ayp standards must also include at least one additional academic indicator , which in the case of high schools must be the graduation rate . ayp standards will now have to be applied separately and specifically to economically disadvantaged pupils , lep pupils , pupils with disabilities , and pupils in major racial and ethnic groups , as well as all pupils . the only exception is that pupil groups need not be considered in cases where their number is so relatively small that achievement results would not be statistically significant or the identity of individual pupils might be divulged . state ayp standards must also be applied to all public schools , leas , and states overall , although corrective actions for failing to meet ayp standards need only be applied to schools and leas participating in title i - a . the ayp state standards will also have to incorporate a goal of all pupils reaching a proficient or advanced level of achievement within 12 years .