amendment no . 25 would have amended the definition of "covered agency" to include not just the department of homeland security , but any other agency designated by the department of homeland security or with which the department shares critical infrastructure information . another important definition is of voluntary . section 214 of the ciia protects critical infrastructure information voluntarily submitted to the dhs when accompanied by an express statement of expectation of protection from disclosure . the term "voluntary" with respect to the submittal of critical infrastructure information to a covered federal agency means "the submittal thereof in the absence of such agency's exercise of legal authority to compel access or submission of such information and may be accomplished by a single entity or an information sharing and analysis organization on behalf of itself or its members" the ciia defines "information sharing and analysis organizations" as "any formal or informal entity or collaboration created or employed by public or private sector organizations , for purposes of– ( a ) gathering and analyzing critical infrastructure information . ( b ) communicating or disclosing critical infrastructure information . and ( c ) voluntarily disseminating critical infrastructure information . in addition , the definition of voluntary includes a critical exclusion . a voluntary submission to dhs does not include filings that were also made with the securities and exchange commission or federal banking regulators , statements made pursuant to the sale of securities , or information or statements submitted or relied upon as a basis for making licensing or permitting determinations , or during regulatory proceedings . consequently , information falling within the exclusion would not be protected from disclosure . the last critical definition is of an express statement . in order to obtain the protections of the ciia , the submission must be accompanied by an express statement . in the case of written information or records , this means a written marking on the information or records similar to "this information is voluntarily submitted to the federal government in expectation of protection from disclosure as provided by the provisions of the critical infrastructure information act of 2002. . in the case of oral information , ciia requires the submission of a similar written statement within a reasonable time period following the oral communication . section 214 of the ciia is entitled "protection of voluntarily shared critical infrastructure information. the section establishes several protections for critical infrastructure information voluntarily submitted to the department of homeland security for use regarding the security of critical infrastructures and protected systems and for other purposes when such information is accompanied by an express statement to the effect that the information is voluntarily submitted to the federal government in expectation of protection from disclosure . to encourage private and public sector entities and persons to voluntarily share their critical infrastructure information with the department of homeland security , the ciia includes several measures to ensure against disclosure of protected critical infrastructure information by dhs .