both of those efforts have flagged . the pursuit of ftas continued when , on june 6 , 2000 , president clinton and jordanian king abdullah announced that their two countries would begin negotiations on establishing a free trade area . an agreement was quickly reached and was signed on october 24 , 2001 . similarly , president clinton and singapore prime minister goh chok tong announced , somewhat unexpectedly , on november 16 , 2000 , that their two nations would launch negotiations to complete a free trade agreement . and on december 6 , 2000 , the united states and chile started negotiations to establish an fta . chile had long been mentioned as a potential addition to nafta or as a partner in a stand - alone fta . in the meantime , many countries , including the other major trading powers , were actively negotiating free trade agreements . what should u.s. criteria be in choosing fta partners ? are ftas a substitute for or a complement to u.s. commitments and interests in promoting a multilateral trading system via the world trade organization ( wto ) ? what effect will the expiration of tpa have on the future of ftas as a trade policy strategy ? this report will monitor pending and possible proposals for u.s. ftas , relevant legislation , and other 113 th congress interest in u.s. ftas . free trade areas are part of the broad category of trade arrangements under which member - countries grant one another preferential treatment in trade . preferential trade arrangements include the following: free trade areas ( ftas ) , under which member countries agree to eliminate tariffs and nontariff barriers on trade in goods within the fta , but each country maintains its own trade policies , including tariffs on trade outside the region ; customs unions , in which members conduct free trade among themselves and maintain common tariffs and other trade policies outside the arrangement ; common markets , in which member countries go beyond a customs union by eliminating barriers to labor and capital flows across national borders within the market ; and economic unions , where members merge their economies even further by establishing a common currency , and therefore a unified monetary policy , along with other common economic institutions . the european union is the most significant example of a group of countries that has gone from a customs union to an economic union . the process of forming an fta usually begins with discussions between trading partners to ascertain the feasibility of forming an fta . if they agree to go forward , then the countries undertake negotiations on what the fta would look like . at a minimum , participants in an fta agree to eliminate tariffs and some other nontariff trade barriers and agree to do so over a specific time period . in addition , the partner countries usually agree on rules of origin , that is , a definition of what constitutes a product manufactured within the fta and , therefore , one that is eligible to receive duty - free and other preferential trade treatment . rules of origin prevent products from nonmembers entering an fta market over the lowest tariff wall .