as a result , the documentation requirements for these programs are unknown . therefore , it is unclear how , and the extent to which , the entities that administer other needs - based housing assistance are verifying eligible immigration status for noncitizen beneficiaries . additionally , much of the funding provided through hud's other needs - based housing programs is administered through charitable organizations . an important component of any policy discussion on eligibility is the mechanism by which eligibility is determined . the following section discusses the documentation requirements for citizens and noncitizens to demonstrate eligibility for housing assistance . for the section 214-covered programs , which include the largest housing assistance programs ( public housing and the section 8 tenant - based voucher and project - based rental assistance programs ) , phas and private property owners are required to verify the eligibility of each person in a household . once the documents have been submitted , a pha or property owner must verify the documents using the save system ( discussed earlier in this report ) . every applicant must declare in writing under threat of perjury that he or she is a citizen , an eligible noncitizen , or is choosing not to provide documentation ( and is therefore ineligible for assistance ) . citizens are not required to provide documentation of their citizenship status , although phas may adopt a policy requiring documentation , such as a u.s. passport . also , household members over the age of 6 must provide their social security numbers and / or certify that they have not received a social security number in order to receive housing assistance . it is important to note , however , that social security numbers do not prove citizenship or eligible immigration status . noncitizens age 62 or older are required to provide a signed declaration under threat of perjury of their eligible immigration status and proof of their age . phas and property owners are not required to further verify their immigration status . other eligible noncitizens / qualified aliens must provide a signed declaration under threat of perjury of their eligible immigration status , documentation from the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , and a signed verification consent form relating to communications between dhs and hud . a pha or property owner may provide an extension of up to 30 days if a family certifies that the required evidence is temporarily unavailable and they need more time to locate the required documents . if the alien thinks that the information returned through the save system is inaccurate , the alien may appeal to dhs . a pha or property owner may provide assistance temporarily while the alien's status is being verified . other noncitizens who are members of households that include eligible noncitizens / qualified aliens may choose not to contend that they have eligible immigration status . in the case of these mixed - status families , eligible noncitizen / qualified alien members of the families may receive pro - rated benefits ; however , the family must identify in writing to the pha or property owner any family members who will be living in the household but have elected not to contend that they have eligible immigration status .