under whatcircumstances ? should a separate fund be made available to these victims and who should administer it ? table 3. international security assistance force participatingcountries as of july 31,2002 source: un security council , monthly report on the operations of the isaf , august 16 , 2002 . 107-81 ) to address some of these concerns . a ministry ofwomen's affairs has been established within the itga . schools reopened in afghanistan in march 2002 and girlsreturnedto the classroom for the first time since the taliban came to power . how much impact will this legislation have onreconstruction initiatives specifically focused on women and children ? to what extent will their needs be a primarypointof focus in aid distribution and the recovery effort ? what are the barriers to the implementation of women'sprojects ? collateraldamage includes civilian losses , considered to be a by - product of war , despite efforts to minimize innocent civiliancasualties . language in the fy2003 senate foreign operations bill refers to afghan civilians suffering injury from militaryoperationsand recommends assistance that is available under the patrick leahy war victims fund be used to provide"rehabilitationand related assistance. should legislation be developed specifically for afghan citizens who are victims ofcollateraldamage ? how should individuals be compensated either for injury or death of a family member ? can peace occur withoutu.s.involvement in the peacekeeping effort ? how involved will the u.s. troops be in assembling and training an afghanarmy ? what role should the united states play in drug enforcement and the war on terrorism inside afghanistan ? many believe a peacekeeping force is essential and the united states must be part of such a force . until recently , the bushadministration has been adamant that it will not take part in a peacekeeping force in afghanistan . however , theu.n . hascalled for more foreign troops to disarm various groups and control warlords . the recent upsurge in conflictsuggests thepossibility that the u.s. decision may be reconsidered . under the current mandate , peacekeepers are in kabul andhave noimpact outside the capital . some argue that the isaf is too small and too limited to be effective . amid discussionaboutthe type of peacekeeping force required has been the question of how long peacekeepers will be required to stay . there remain the twin evils of drugs and terrorism , inextricably linked , but requiring different forms of intervention andenforcement . moreover , in addition to cracking down on the problem itself , alternative forms of livelihood arecritical,such as crop substitution , community projects , and other programs to benefit those directly involved in theseactivities . critical to afghanistan's recovery in the short term and stability in the long term is the credibility and effective functioningof its government . it must be able to pay regularly the salaries of its police , armyofficers,and public employees . moreover , the itga is facing the critical need for economic revitalization , accounting andbankingmechanisms , and debt relief for the average afghan . it is crucial that it be able to extend its governmental institutions outside kabul . what rolewill theunited states continue to play in helping to build administrative capacity in the form of a national government andinstitutional development ?