the position was vacant on two occasions . the fy2009 budget resolution ( s.con.res . 70 , 110 th congress ) , for example , imposed a requirement that the cbo director prepare estimates of the deficit impact of certain legislation in support of a point - of - order procedure in the senate against legislation increasing the deficit over the long term . nine persons so far have served as cbo director: alice rivlin , rudolph penner , robert reischauer , june o'neill , dan crippen , douglas holtz - eakin , peter r. orszag , douglas elmendorf , and keith hall . the current director , keith hall , was first appointed on march 3 , 2015 . eleven persons have served as deputy director ; five of them also served as the acting director ( for periods amounting in total to about three years ) . the current deputy director , robert a. sunshine , was appointed to the position in august 2007 ; he served as acting director during the two - month interregnum between directors orszag and elemendorf . the requirements regarding the appointment and tenure of the cbo director , which are simple and straightforward , are set forth in section 201 ( a ) of the 1974 congressional budget act , as amended , and codified at 2 u.s.c . 601 ( a ) ( see the appendix ) . the speaker of the house of representatives and the president pro tempore of the senate jointly appoint the director after considering recommendations received from the house and senate budget committees . section 201 ( a ) also authorizes a cbo director to continue to serve past the expiration of his term until a successor is appointed . a cbo director may be removed by either house by resolution . section 201 ( a ) also provides that the director shall appoint a deputy director . the deputy director serves during the term of the director that appointed the deputy director ( and until his or her successor is appointed ) but may be removed by the director at any time . the deputy director serves as the acting director if the director resigns , is incapacitated , or is otherwise absent . nine persons have served as director of cbo during the nine terms beginning in 1975 ( see table 1 ) . alice rivlin served two terms as cbo director from 1975 to 1983 . prior to serving as cbo director , rivlin served as assistant secretary for planning and evaluation with the department of health , education , and welfare and as a senior fellow with the brookings institution . rudolph penner served as cbo director for one term from 1983 to 1987 . previously , penner served as chief economist at the office of management and budget under president gerald ford and as director of tax policy studies with the american enterprise institute . robert reischauer served two terms as cbo director from 1989 to 1995 . ( he was not appointed until about halfway into the first four - year term. ) reischauer previously served as cbo deputy director ( under alice rivlin ) and as a senior vice president of the urban institute .