genisys . * this project is a new effort in 2003 to put together old and new databases so that they can be readily queried . this "ultra - large all - sourceinformation repository" could include information about potential terrorists andpossible supporters , purchase of terrorist types of material , training and rehearsalactivities , potential targets , and status of defenses , as well as research into methodsof protecting privacy . ( 48 ) bio - surveillance ( re - named bio - alirt in fy2004 ) :* this project is an effort to collect and analyze information from non - traditional human,agricultural and animal health data bases in order to develop indicators and models,and set up a prototype bio - surveillance system for a citywide area like norfolk,virginia to increase dod's ability to detect a clandestine biological warfare attack . machine translation projects . translingual information detection , extraction and summarization ( tides ) . * tides is designed to get critical information quickly forintelligence analysts and operators by developing tools that can rapidly find,summarize , and translate key information in foreignlanguages . effective affordable reusable speech - to - text ( ears ) : anticipated to increase the speed of translation from oral sources by ten to 100-fold ( including broadcasts and telephone ) , as well as extract clues about the identity ofspeakers , ears is intended to serve the military , intelligence and law enforcementcommunities . multispeaker environments ( muse ) and global autonomous language exploitation ( gale ) : muse and gale are successorprograms to ears . muse is to produce transcripts from command centers andmeeting rooms and gale is to develop techniques for detecting key intelligence inmassive amounts of foreign language transmissions . communicator: designed to enable military personnel to get logistical support and tactical information when in the field , prototypes of this"smart phone" have already been deployed on navy ships . babylon: another battlefield system likely to be deployed in afghanistan in the next few months , babylon is intended to aid those in the field bytranslating foreign phrases for the service member . ( 49 ) protection of critical information infrastructure . defensenet ( dnet ) : this effort is intended to increase the security and performance of dod's information infrastructure in handling largevolumes of information . mis - information detection and generation ( midget ) : a new project in 2003 , this effort is designed to detect and reduce dod's vulnerabilityto mis - information about adversaries that appears in open - sourcedata . tools for high - level decision makers . rapid analytic wargaming ( raw ) : this project is intended to develop gaming technologies that simulate asymmetric threats to be used by themajor commands in training and operational settings . war gaming the asymmetric environment ( wae ) . * this effort is an initiative to develop tools and models to help analysts and decisionmakers predict the behavior and the reactions of terrorists to u.s.actions . genoa / genoa ii: * project genoa attempts to improve collaborative reasoning , estimate plausible futures , and create actionable optionsamong intelligence analysts in various organizations .