minor changes were made to these programs . the heoa also amended and extended the perkins loan program , making several changes to it , including increases to loan limits and an expansion of loan cancellation benefits . the campus - based programs' authorization of appropriations , along with many other provisions under the hea , expired at the end of fy2014 . however , section 422 of the general education provisions act ( gepa ) automatically extended the programs' authorizations through fy2015 . congress provided appropriations for the fseog and fws programs beyond fy2015 under a series of appropriations measures , most recently through march 23 , 2018 , under the continuing appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l . the perkins loan program was amended and extended through fy2017 under the federal perkins loan program extension act of 2015 ( extension act ; p.l . the authority for institutions to make new perkins loans expired on september 30 , 2017 . this report begins by providing a brief description of each of the campus - based programs , including the terms under which such financial aid is awarded to students and the procedures under which federal funds are allocated to institutions for that purpose . it then provides historical information on federal funds appropriated for each of the programs , an analysis of the number and types of students served , and selected program statistics . this part of the report provides a description of each of the three hea campus - based financial aid programs — the fseog program , the fws program , and the federal perkins loan program . program descriptions explain the purpose of each program and the terms under which aid is provided to students . they also include a brief explanation of how federal funds are allocated to institutions for the purpose of providing aid to students . approximately 52% of title iv institutions awarded fseog aid , 46% employed students in fws , and 20% advanced loans under the perkins loan program . while fewer institutions of all types participate in the perkins loan program than in either fseog or fws , far fewer two - year and proprietary institutions participate in the perkins loan program than the other two programs . it is possible that these lower levels of participation are due to factors such as the administrative burden of administering a revolving loan fund and the generally higher cohort default rates of students who attend these types of institutions . figure 1 displays the number of institutions participating in each of the campus - based programs since ay1995-1996 . over the past 20 years , institutional participation in fseog and fws has been relatively steady . institutional participation in the perkins loan program has , in general , continued a pattern of decline that has occurred over the past quarter century ; however , it did experience a 4% increase in ay2013-2014 . figure 2 provides data on the number of students served by the fseog , fws , and perkins loan programs from ay1995-1996 to ay2015-2016 . in terms of the number of students served , fseog is the largest of the three campus - based aid programs .