the deficit was not eliminated until 1998 , however . the deficits caused interest payments on the national debt to rise from 1.9% of gdp in 1980 to 3.1% of gdp in 1985 . tax rates were greatly reduced after the war ended . in contrast to world war ii , president truman relied largely on taxation and a reduction of non - military outlays , rather than borrowing from the public or money creation , to finance the korean conflict . in budgetary terms , a buildup did not begin until 1966 and the war was in decline from 1970 onwards . the military buildup was not as marked as in other wars because military outlays were already high from the cold war arms race . arguably , fiscal policy in the 1960s and 1970s was not framed in terms of events in vietnam ; this was done in part purposely due to the domestic controversy surrounding the conflict . unlike world war ii and the korean conflict , non - military expenditures were increased throughout the vietnam era , beginning with the great society programs . throughout the conflict , the government attempted to avoid tax increases , although it did raise taxes between 1968 and 1970 . thus , borrowing from the public played a greater part in war financing than it had in the korean conflict . there was no explicit policy during the vietnam conflict instructing the federal reserve to keep federal interest costs low , as there was in world war ii and at the beginning of the korean conflict . nevertheless , inflation rose significantly as the conflict progressed , although this was probably the result of a belief that the economy could grow at a faster rate than was actually possible , rather than a desire to use money creation as a significant source of revenue . the first tax act of the vietnam era was a tax reduction , the revenue act of 1964 , which was implemented to counter a perceived economic slowdown . this act embodied many of the proposals made by president kennedy in 1961 to "get america moving again. its major provisions included a reduction in individual income and corporate tax rates , and an expansion of the standard deduction . nevertheless , the vietnam conflict put strains on the budget that ultimately influenced budgetary decisions . in 1968 and 1969 , temporary 10% surcharges were applied to individual income and corporate taxes , ostensibly to curb inflation . as opposed to past conflicts where taxes were raised , taxes were cut in 2003 . the tax cut's major provisions were an acceleration of the 2001 income tax rate reductions and a reduction in the tax rate on dividends . the measure led to the last budget surplus ( in 1969 ) until 1998 . later that year , the tax reform act of 1969 was passed . it was advertised as a measure to reform the tax code and close certain loopholes , but also had the effect of raising revenue by 0.2% of gdp in 1970 . the revenue act of 1943 was meant to alter the distribution of taxation . it was the first tax bill to be vetoed , and congress overrode the veto .