circuit . in the case of accused driver and bodyguard for osama bin laden , salim ahmed hamdan , a federal judge held the petitioner's ongoing trial by military commission to be illegal , leading the government to suspend temporarily the operation of military tribunals . circuit court of appeals overturned that decision , allowing dod to restart the military commissions , but the supreme court granted certiorari and reversed . two other district judges issued contradictory opinions as to whether the detainees have any rights enforceable in federal court ; these decisions also have been appealed . the administration has filed motions either to dismiss all of these petitions on the basis that the dta has curtailed the courts' jurisdiction or to convert the cases to appeals subject to the strictures of that act . the supreme court rejected the government's argument that the hamdan case should be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction pursuant to the dta . congress responded by passing the military commissions act of 2006 , which , in addition to providing explicit authority for military commissions , cuts off jurisdiction to hear all habeas cases and other legal actions brought by aliens in relation to their detention as "unlawful enemy combatants," including such cases that are currently pending . the detention and treatment of the suspected enemy combatants at guantánamo bay has been a consistent source of friction for the bush administration since it began transporting prisoners there in january , 2002 . after criticism from human rights organizations and many foreign governments regarding the determination that the geneva conventions of 1949 do not apply to the detainees there , president bush shifted position with an announcement that taliban fighters are covered by the 1949 geneva conventions , while al qaeda fighters are not . taliban fighters are not , however , treated as prisoners of war ( pow ) because they reportedly fail to meet international standards as lawful combatants . the president had determined that al qaeda remains outside the geneva conventions because it is not a state and not a party to the treaty . the president proclaimed , in a previously secret memorandum that was issued february 7 , 2002 , that "[a]s a matter of policy , the united states armed forces shall continue to treat detainees humanely and , to the extent appropriate and consistent with military necessity , in a manner consistent with the principles of geneva. the bush administration deems all of the detainees to be "unlawful combatants," who may , according to administration officials , be held indefinitely without trial or even despite their possible acquittal by a military tribunal . the 9 / 11 commission , apparently finding the international discord over the treatment and status of the detainees to be harmful to the u.s. effort to thwart terrorism , recommended the development of a common coalition approach toward the detention and humane treatment of captured terrorists . after the hamdan decision was announced , the department of defense issued a memorandum announcing that al qaeda detainees were to be considered to be covered by the protections of common article 3 , and that dod regulations pertinent to detainee operations , other than those pertaining to military commissions , were understood to comply with common article 3 .