laws. in late 2003 , a convoluted turn of events involving nuclear safeguards inspections in iran and a decision by libya in december to renounce its wmd programs provided evidence that pakistani scientists had supplied nuclear technology to iran , libya , and north korea . pakistani officials denied any government knowledge of such cooperation and at first , denied that a.q . khan ( former head of khan research laboratories ) and his associates had assisted libya or north korea . khan confessed to his proliferation misdeeds in early february 2004 and was pardoned by president musharraf immediately . interviewed on february 17 , 2004 , musharraf noted that pakistan's investigation had not uncovered evidence of transfers to other countries other than iran and libya. it was not until president musharraf published his memoirs in september 2006 that he admitted nuclear technology had been sold to north korea . nonetheless , president bush , in a speech that focused on proliferation at the national defense university on february 11 , 2004 , stated that khan and others sold "nuclear technologies and equipment to outlaw regimes stretching from north africa to the korean peninsula. bush further stated that "khan and his associates provided iran and libya and north korea with designs for pakistan's older centrifuges , as well as designs for more advanced and efficient models. both north korea and pakistan have been subject to sanctions in the past for wmd trade . north korea has been under one form or another of sanctions for close to fifty years ; pakistan has been sanctioned in what some observers deem an "on again , off again" fashion , mostly for importing wmd technology , and also for testing a nuclear device . the sanctions on the north korean entity , changgwang sinyong corporation , were imposed pursuant to the arms export control act and the export administration act on the basis of knowing involvement in the transfer of category i ( under the missile technology control regime ) missiles or components . the sanctions on the pakistani entity , khan research laboratories , were imposed pursuant to executive order 12938 from march 2003 to march 2005 . both of these entities have been sanctioned repeatedly in the past for missile trade . on the nuclear side , all sanctions were waived following september 11 , 2001 , and it is unlikely that such sanctions will be imposed again , absent significant evidence of the pakistani government's involvement in nuclear trade . at the time the 1994 agreed framework with north korea was negotiated , there was concern about , but scant evidence of , north korean interest in uranium enrichment . reports relating to north korea's procurement of enrichment - related equipment date as far back as the mid - 1980s , a time when north korea was progressing rapidly in its plutonium production program . for example , in 1987 , north korea reportedly received a small annealing furnace from the west german company leybold ag . although they have many other uses , annealing furnaces can be used in production of centrifuge rotors for uranium enrichment .