appropriation . a provision of law providing budget authority that permits federal agencies to incur obligations and to make payments , of the treasury for specifiedpurposes . annual appropriations are provided in appropriations acts ; mostpermanent appropriations are provided in substantive law . authorization . a provision in law that authorizes appropriations for a program or agency . budget authority . authority provided by law to enter into obligations that normally result in outlays . reconciliation process . a process established in the congressional budget act by which congress changes existing laws to conform tax and spending levels to thelevels set in a budget resolution . pago requires that any increase in the deficitor reduction in the surplus due to legislation be offset by other legislation orsequestration . pago is enforced by estimating the five - year budgetary effects of allnew revenue and direct spending laws . changes recommended by committees pursuant toa reconciliation instruction are incorporated into a reconciliation bill . revolving fund . an account or fund in which all income derived from its operations is available to finance the fund's continuing operations without fiscal yearlimitation . scorekeeping . procedures for tracking and reporting on the status of congressional budgetary actions affecting budget authority , receipts , outlays , the surplus or deficit,and the public debt limit . supplemental appropriation . budget authority provided in an appropriations act in addition to regular or continuing appropriations already provided . supplementalappropriations acts sometimes include items not included in regular appropriationsacts for lack of timely authorization . trust funds . accounts designated by law as trust funds for receipts and expenditures earmarked for specific purposes . with enactment of p.l . 108-7 , ( 7 ) the accounts arefunded through the close of the fiscal year . on march 25 , 2003 , the president sent a fy2003 supplemental request to congress , with requests for additional funding in support of actions in the middle east . accounts within theexecutive office of the president , as well as the department of homeland security would beaffected . usually under the budget procedures , congress adopts a concurrent resolution establishing the congressional budget for the government and setting forth budgetary levels for several years in thefuture . the house and senate appropriations committees then allocate the discretionary fundinglevels ( 302 ( b ) ) allocations to each of the subcommittees . those allocations are subject to change . the house and senate have yet to reach agreement on such a congressional budget resolution forfy2003 . appropriations for the department of the treasury , in addition to funding the operations of the department , fund the work of a group of law enforcement organizations , which include the bureauof alcohol , tobacco , and firearms ; the customs service ; the secret service ; the financial crimesenforcement network ; and the federal law enforcement training center . treasury appropriationsalso cover the internal revenue service , the financial management service , and the bureau of the public debt . several of those entities have transferred to the department of homeland security andthe department of justice . for the most part , the u.s . postal service operates outside federal funding support .