we are people with visions . ...we respect all sincere and active political trends in the region but we are not supportive of a trend against another . we are muslims and arab ; we respect the diversity of religious schools of thoughts and respect all religions in our country and abroad . as arabs , we reject dividing the arab communities based on sectarianism or doctrine because this affects social and economic immunity and prevents its modernization and development on the basis of citizenship regardless of religious sects or thoughts . at a december 2013 event in london , qatari foreign minister khaled al attiyah said , "we have the same policy but it may be that our approach has changed. the united states opened its embassy in doha in 1973 , but u.s. relations with qatar did not blossom until after the 1991 persian gulf war . in the late 1980s , the united states and qatar engaged in a prolonged diplomatic dispute regarding qatar's black market procurement of u.s. - made stinger anti - aircraft missiles . the dispute froze planned economic and military cooperation , and congress approved a ban on arms sales to qatar ( ยง566 ( d ) , p.l . 100-461 ) until the months leading up to the 1991 gulf war , when qatar allowed coalition forces to operate from qatari territory and agreed to destroy the missiles in question . oil and natural gas export proceeds provide roughly half of the government's revenue , but the imf expects the contribution of the non - hydrocarbon sector to grow steadily over the next five years . qatar continues to base its annual state budgets on an assumed oil price of $65 per barrel , making qatar better positioned than other producers to deal with declining oil market prices . in recent years , government spending has exceeded budget projections , but conservative energy export price estimates have ensured large surpluses . the imf has estimated that qatar's fiscal surpluses will continue through at least 2015 , but are likely to decrease in size . the government continues to invest surplus revenue abroad for future generations and has increased public spending in support of domestic infrastructure , housing , and health sector improvements . qatari press outlets feature limited criticism of domestic budget transparency , spending priorities , foreign contractors , and government efficiency . some observers have raised questions about the long - term ability of qatar to attract private sector investment and produce employment opportunities once the current phase of large state - supported infrastructure investment is complete . by all accounts , qatari officials remain confident in their economic prospects and appear to have used the post - 2008 downturn as an opportunity to assess lessons learned during the country's boom , to reconsider planned projects , and , where possible , to take advantage of lower input costs by delaying project start dates or renegotiating contracts . managing the infrastructure and service needs created by the influx of laborers to the county remains an immediate challenge . the country's population , including expatriates , more than tripled between 2000 and 2010 , growing to over 2 million in 2013 .