appendix a . dispute settlement in trade agreements wto uruguay round agreements understanding on rules and procedures governing the settlement of disputes the uruguay round agreements include a dispute settlement understanding that sets out rules and timetables for resolving disputes . disputes arise when one country adopts a trade policy measure or takes some action that one or more wto members considers a violation of a wto agreement or to be a failure to live up to obligations . a third group of countries can declare their interest in the case and enjoy some rights as well . settling disputes is the responsibility of the dispute settlement body ( dsb ) . the first stage in dispute settlement is consultation between the governments concerned . ( consultation is always a possibility even in later stages of dispute settlement. ) consultation can take up to 60 days . if consultations fail , the complaining country can ask for the appointment of a panel ( up to 45 days ) . the other country can block the creation of a panel once , but when the dsb meets a second time , the panel can no longer be blocked . the panel reports to the parties within 6 months and makes a final report to all wto members within 3 weeks . the dsb adopts the report within 60 days . if there is no appeal , the process should take about 1 year . either side , however , can appeal the panel's ruling on points of law . appeals are heard by three members of a permanent seven - member appellate body . appeals should not last more than 60 days , with a maximum of 90 days . the dsb has to accept or reject ( by consensus ) the appeals report within 30 days . with appeal , the process should take about 1 year and 3 months . the losing country must follow the recommendations of the panel or appeals report and state its intention to do so within 30 days of the report's adoption . countries can be given a reasonable period of time to comply . if a country fails to act within this period , it has to enter into negotiations to determine mutually acceptable compensation . if after 20 days , no satisfactory compensation is agreed , the complaining country may ask the dsb for permission to impose trade sanctions which the dsb should grant within 30 days or the expiration of the "reasonable period of time. north american free trade agreement chapter 20 dispute settlement disputes arise when one nafta country complains that another nafta country has taken , or is proposing to take , action inconsistent with the agreement or that nullifies or impairs benefits that the complaining country thinks would accrue under the agreement . complaints arising under both nafta and the wto may be settled in either forum at the discretion of the complaining party ( with some exceptions ) . consultation which can take from 15 to 45 days is the first stage of dispute settlement . if disputing parties cannot resolve the complaint , normally within 30 days , after consultations have begun , a country may refer the issue to the nafta commission for resolution .