testing is about providing useful information and it can change the way schools operate. at the same time , the expanded title i - a assessment requirements might lead to a variety of costs , or unintended consequences , in both financial and other forms . one such "cost" is expanded federal influence on state and local education policies . assuming that states will continue to implement them in order to maintain title i - a eligibility , then assessment requirements attached to an aid program focused on disadvantaged student s are broadly influencing policies regarding standards , assessments , and accountability affecting all student s in the participating states . this represents a substantial increase in federal influence in the assessment and accountability aspects of k - 12 education policy . in the majority of states that did not previously mandate standards - based assessments in each of grades 3-8 , their policies may have resulted primarily from cost or time constraints , or the states may have determined that annual testing of this sort is not educationally appropriate , or at least that its benefits are not equal to the relevant costs . these costs may include not only the direct costs of test development , administration , scoring , reporting , etc. , not all of which may be paid through federal assessment grants , but also an increased risk of "over - emphasis" on preparation for the tests , especially if the tests do not adequately assess the full range of knowledge and skills which schools are expected to impart . this report will be updated regularly to reflect major legislative developments and available information . at the least , annual testing of students in grades 3-8 would increase the importance of having tests that are well designed and closely linked to state content and achievement standards which are truly challenging . the following section of this report describes the major student assessment - related provisions of the esea as amended by the nclb . this report concludes with a review of major potential benefits and costs of the expanded student assessment requirements of esea title i - a . the primary benefit from annual administration of a consistent series of standards - based tests would be the provision of timely information on the performance of students , schools , and leas , throughout most of the elementary and middle school grades . while a majority of students have already been taking assessments in many of grades 3-8 , these have been typically a mix of crts and nrts , state - mandated and locally selected tests , with no provision that most of these are either equivalent statewide or aligned to state content and achievement standards . even under the broadest interpretation of ed's draft policy guidance , which would allow states to use modified nrts in addition to crts , and locally varying tests which are deemed to be equivalent , the resulting state assessment systems would be more coherent , consistent , and well articulated than the current systems in most states . the availability of such consistent , annual assessment results would be of value for both diagnostic and accountability purposes .