appropriations bills typically include some unauthorized appropriations . generally , the house rules committee reports a special rule adopted by the house , waiving the prohibition against unauthorized appropriations for most or all unauthorized appropriations in a reported bill . clause 2 ( f ) amendments can increase those unauthorized appropriations allowed to remain . this report is not an official statement of house procedures . the house parliamentarian advises the presiding officer on procedural issues regarding offset amendments and other matters . although this report provides useful background information , it should not be considered a substitute for consultation with the parliamentarian on specific procedural problems and opportunities . offset amendments are needed to ensure amendments increasing funding for certain activities in a regular appropriations bill , supplemental appropriations bill , or continuing resolution do not also cause spending ceilings associated with the annual budget resolution to be exceeded . additionally , a separate order of the house prohibits amendments increasing the total spending level in a general appropriations bill . there are two types of offset amendments , clause 2 ( f ) and reachback ( or fetchback ) amendments , available during consideration of regular and supplemental appropriations bills in the committee of the whole . clause 2 ( f ) refers to clause 2 ( f ) of house rule xxi , which establishes some of the parliamentary procedures governing the consideration of such amendments . parliamentary rules may be suspended or waived to consider offset amendments that violate these rules , typically by house adoption of a special rule . however , this approach has been used infrequently . there are certain procedural advantages of clause 2 ( f ) amendments over reachback amendments and vice versa . there are generally three limited opportunities to suspend or waive the rules governing consideration of an offset amendment: ( 1 ) if no one raises a point of order ; ( 2 ) if the house adopts a special rule explicitly waiving points of order against the amendment ; or ( 3 ) if the house agrees by unanimous consent to waive the rules . otherwise , if the presiding officer sustains a point of order against an amendment for violating the parliamentary rules previously discussed , the amendment falls . first , house rules are not generally self - enforcing . a representative must raise a point of order that an amendment violates a specific rule . if no one opposes an amendment , a point of order does not have to be raised . second , under current practice , the house rules committee usually reports a special rule setting additional procedural parameters for the consideration of appropriations measures . the house typically adopts the special rule and then considers the particular appropriations measure pursuant to it . if an offset amendment would violate one or more parliamentary rules , the sponsor may ask the rules committee to include a waiver protecting the amendment from the point ( s ) of order . special rules generally do not provide special protection for offset amendments to appropriations bills . third , a member might ask to consider an amendment violating the rules by unanimous consent .