state surveys . in may 2001 , the texas primary care office of the department of health conducted a nationwide survey of state health departmentsutilizing j - 1 waiver programs . ( 18 ) the survey posedspecific questions regarding the administrationof the programs in the states and asked for recommendations on the programs . the responsesindicated that many of the states with "conrad 20" programs also requested waivers through usdaand arc , and that those without "conrad 20" programs utilized the usda waiver program . recommendations from the states for the j - 1 visa waiver program included the following: allow states to determine the appropriate use of the program ; allow states to determine the number of waivers needed based on the needs ofthe states ; allow fees to support the program ; have hhs coordinate ongoing support and technical assistance ; and have the department of state and uscis provide information and technicalassistance to the states . table 1 . citizenship / visa status of physicians and international medical graduates in residency programs , august 1 , 2003 source: crs presentation of data presented in s. brotherton , p. rockey , and s. etzel , "u.s. graduate medical education , 2003-2004," jama , vol . a j - 2 nonimmigrant is the spouse or child of a j - 1 nonimmigrant . on september 30 , 2004 , representatives sheila jackson - lee and john hostettler offered an amendment in the nature of a substitute to h.r . the new bill would extend theprogram until june 1 , 2006 ; allow states to recruit specialist as well as primary care physicians ; exempt waiver recipients from the h - 1b cap ; and allow the placement of five physicians instate - designated shortage areas . historically , some have argued that the j - 1 visa waiver program should be made permanent or extended for a number of years to allow an investigation into the use of foreign physicians to meethealthcare shortages and their impact on american physicians . during the committee markup ofh.r . 4453 , it was expressed that the purpose of the two - year extension was to allow thesubcommittee time to look into this matter , as well as receive input from hhs regarding theplacement of physicians outside of hhs - designated physician shortage areas . ( 24 ) the compromise onthis issue was to allow each state to place 5 of their 30 physicians allowed under the conrad programin shortage areas determined by the state before making it a permanent provision of the program . on october 6 , 2004 , h.r . 4453 was debated on the house floor . several members , including representatives sensenbrenner and moran , urged passage of the bill , citing the program'ssuccess in serving underserved populations in their states . the bill passed the house and wasreferred to the senate on october 6 , 2004 . no further action has taken place . on november 17 , 2004 , s. 2302 was debated and passed by the house .