economy , and on industries particularly affected by the agreement . ( 4 ) the report found thatnafta had a small positive effect on the overall u.s. economy , but that some industriesexperienced significant changes in the volume of bilateral trade with nafta partners . the reportstates that nafta's most important effects are not easily measured or observed , and the full effectsof the agreement will take many years to make themselves known . it may provide direct financing in cases whereconventional sources of financing are not available . 107-210 ) and is now part of a new reformed taaprogram . the previous nafta - taa program provided assistance , including employment servicesand training , to workers who have lost their jobs due to import competition or production shifts tomexico or canada . the new reformed taa program would expand eligibility for workers hurt bya shift in production to certain other countries , and extend benefits to workers previously ineligiblesuch as secondary workers and downstream workers in the case of nafta countries . ( 2 ) this report will look at the broad effect of nafta on the u.s. economy and the trade - related effects at the industry level . it will also describe the two main adjustment assistance programs . thereport will analyze , to the extent feasible , the effectiveness of nafta trade - related adjustmentassistance programs . the overall effect of nafta on the u.s. economy has been relatively small , primarily becausetwo - way trade with mexico amounts to less than three percent of u.s. gdp . therefore , any changesin trade patterns with mexico would not be expected to be significant in relation to the overall u.s.economy . in some sectors , however , trade - related effects could be expected to be more significant,especially in those industries that were more exposed to the removal of tariff and non - tariff tradebarriers , such as the textile and apparel , and automotive industries . most of the trade - related effects of nafta may be attributed to changes in u.s. trade and investment patterns with mexico . at the time of nafta implementation , the u.s. - canada freetrade agreement already had been in effect for five years and some industries in the united statesand canada were already highly integrated . most tariffs on products traded between the unitedstates and canada were zero at the time of nafta implementation . in contrast , mexico hadfollowed an aggressive import - substitution policy for many years prior to nafta in which it hadsought to develop certain domestic industries through trade protection . one example is the mexicanautomotive industry which had been regulated by a series of five decrees issued by the mexicangovernment between 1962 and 1989 . the decrees established import tariffs as high as 25% onautomotive goods and had high restrictions on foreign auto production in mexico . under nafta,mexico agreed to eliminate these restrictive trade policies . in 1997 , president clinton submitted a congressionally mandated comprehensive assessment of the operation and effects of nafta after three years . ( 3 ) the report , conducted by the internationaltrade commission ( itc ) , analyzes the actual impact of the first three years of nafta on the overallu.s .