appendix a . eligibility standards . a country's eligibility for agoa benefits may become a subject of controversy . some observers feel that the president must strictly enforce eligibility requirements to ensure continued adherence to reforms . however , others have cited the unpredictability of a country's agoa benefits from year - to - year as a source of investment risk , and have suggested minimum eligibility terms of greater than the current one - year period . another suggestion includes allowing congress to override the president's decision to terminate agoa benefits through legislation . several countries have been considered candidates for losing agoa eligibility . east african community ( eac ) comprised of burundi , kenya , rwanda , tanzania , and uganda , this organization sought to revive historic regional integration arrangements that had existed since 1917 . this cooperation broke down in the 1970s due to widespread transshipments and the varied economic paths of its participants . the community was established once again by the three original members ( kenya , tanzania , and uganda ) in 1999 . on july 1 , 2010 , the community established an eac common market providing for free movement of goods , labor , services and capital within the region . in the agreement , the partner states agreed to eliminate tariff , non - tariff , and technical barriers to trade ; harmonize and mutually recognize standards ; implement a common trade policy ; and ease cross - border movement of persons through an integrated border management system . west african economic and monetary union ( waemu ) waemu is made up of benin , burkina faso , côte d'ivoire , mali , niger , senegal , togo , and guinea - bissau , the sole non - francophone member . this grouping was originally created to promote economic integration among countries that share the cfa franc ( communauté financière africaine ) , a currency formerly tied to the french franc prior to its disappearance in 2000 ( but still backed by the french treasury ) . the member states have espoused the long - term goal of a full economic union with a common market , macroeconomic convergence , regulatory harmonization , and a common investment policy . a preferential tariff arrangement was concluded for member states in 1995 , and a customs union with a common external tariff of 22% became operational in 2000 . waemu countries have established a common accounting system , periodic reviews of member countries' macroeconomic policies , a regional stock exchange , and the legal and regulatory framework for a regional banking system . appendix b. u.s. – ssa trade relationshi . diversification of agoa exports . the provision of appropriations adequate to enable greater cs compliance with the original agoa goal of deploying at least 20 cs officers in not less than 10 african countries could also further attainment of the goals laid out under agoa . congress may wish to consider reinstating the annual agoa reporting requirement . small business participation . small business accounts for about 55% of the u.s. gdp , and employs a large portion of american workers .