the second section analyzes the economic rationale for grs . federal grants that arrive before june 30 , 2009 , might avert some of the pro - cyclical state actions ( eg , budget cuts and tax increases ) for many states . if the grants arrive too late for fy2009 , state budget officials could simply add this revenue to the operating budget for fy2010 and perhaps avoid implementing tax increases and spending cuts that would otherwise begin on july 1 , 2009 . the third section analyzes grs in the context of its possible use for stimulus of the nation's economy in 2009 including estimated distribution to the states based on the original grs formula . the appendix provides a more detailed legislative history of the grs program created by the 1972 act and its three extensions . general revenue sharing ( grs ) is typically defined as unconditional federal grants to state and local governments . these grants are intended to provide state and local governments with spending flexibility . a one - time grs type grant to states that closed the estimated fy2009 fiscal imbalance of $31 billion and forestalled anticipated state spending cuts and tax increases for fy2010 of $64.7 billion could provide significant fiscal stimulus . this assumes other federal spending would not be reduced and the states spent the federal grants immediately . the degree of stimulus would be tempered by the net spending response of the recipient government . research has generally shown that for every $1 lump sum transfer , only a portion is translated into new spending . for fy2010 , several state and local governments are likely going to increase taxes to help close budget gaps . the spending option for states that would produce the most relative stimulus for each dollar of spending would be to avoid net job losse s ( e.g . , layoffs , furloughs , and , to a degree , early retirement and hiring freezes ) . to see why this is true , consider what would happen if net job losses occurred . first , layoffs reduce aggregate demand because when workers are laid off , their income would fall steeply until they find new jobs , causing their consumption to fall . ( even though all of the federal spending is not entirely multiplied through the economy because of employment taxes and income taxes , the stimulative action is relatively effective because the federal government is essentially "paying" the state employees. ) second , since government services are included in gdp , measured economic activity would be directly reduced as long as resources ( workers ) lay idle . in an environment of rising unemployment , it is unlikely that all of these resources would quickly be put back to use through market adjustment . if grs prevented net job losses , these negative effects on the economy could be avoided . the saving behavior of potentially separated employees would likely enhance the stimulative effect of avoiding job losses . ( however , avoiding induced early retirement may provide less stimulus than avoiding furloughs and lay - offs. )