appendix a . chronology of cafta - dr negotiations appendix b . it will not be updated . the cafta - dr was the most controversial free trade agreement ( fta ) vote since the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) implementing legislation was passed in 1993 . many lawmakers were uncomfortable with the agreement as written , particularly the labor provisions , treatment of certain sensitive industries ( sugar and textiles ) , investor - state relations , pharmaceutical data protection , and basic sovereignty issues . it was also caught up in an overarching congressional controversy over how trade negotiation objectives should be defined in ftas based on the trade promotion authority ( tpa ) framework , as well as , concern by some members over the perceived ineffectiveness of the executive - legislative consultation process . these issues were raised repeatedly in "mock markups" of draft implementing bills held by the senate finance and house ways and means committees on june 14 and 15 , 2005 , respectively . the senate finance committee voted 11-9 to approve the draft legislation , with one non - binding amendment that would have extended the trade adjustment assistance program to cover workers in services industries . the house ways and means committee voted 25-16 for approval of the draft legislation , also adding a non - binding amendment with "a requirement that the administration report on activities conducted by the cafta - dr countries and the united states to build capacity on labor issues," and a provision requiring monitoring of cafta - dr's effects on u.s. services industries . a "mock conference" was not held , to the expressed consternation of some members . the bush administration sent the final implementing bill to congress on june 23 , 2005 . it included a new section 403 , the house amendment requiring that the administration transmit biennial reports on progress made in implementing the labor provisions , including the labor cooperation and capacity building mechanism . it also called for monitoring progress in meeting the challenges outlined in the so - called white paper on labor produced by the vice ministers of trade and labor of the cafta - dr countries . under tpa procedures , identical bills were introduced jointly as h.r . 3045 and s. 1307 and referred to the house ways and means and senate finance committees . the senate finance committee acted first , favorably reporting out s. 1307 by voice vote on june 29 , 2005 . the house ways and means committee followed suit , reporting favorably by a vote of 25 to 16 on june 30 , 2005 . the measure came before the full senate on june 30 , 2005 , where , following 20 hours of floor debate , s. 1307 passed 54 to 45 . 3045 did not come before the house until july 28 , 2005 , where , following two hours of debate , it narrowly passed 217 to 215 . on the same day , the senate voted 56 to 44 to substitute h.r . 3045 for s. 1307 , a necessary procedural vote to comply with the constitutional requirement that revenue bills originate in the house . president bush signed h.r .