the other gulf states have mostly been in arrears . the september 11 commission report stated that khalid shaykh mohammad , alleged mastermind of the september 11 plot , lived in qatar during 1992-1996 at the invitation of shaykh abdullah bin khalid al thani , the current interior minister and a former minister of islamic affairs , adding that khalid shaykh was warned by qatari officials in 1996 of a u.s. indictment , and fled . qatar also hosts an outspoken islamic cleric of egyptian origin , shaykh yusuf al - qaradawi . in september 2004 , in one of his most hardline statements , qaradawi said that it is a religious duty for muslims to fight u.s. forces and civilians in iraq . despite his statements , qaradawi meets with and sometimes appears at panel discussions with qatari senior officials . the uae is praised by u.s. officials for providing assistance in several terrorist investigations ; it assisted in the 2002 arrest of at least one senior al qaeda operative in the gulf , abd al - rahim al - nashiri . in august 2004 , the uae emirate of dubai , in cooperation with pakistani investigators , arrested an alleged senior al qaeda operative , qari saifullah akhtar . bahrain has on a few occasions in 2003 and 2004 arrested suspected al qaeda activists , although it has later released many of them pending trial or because of a lack of legal justification for holding them . qatar and oman are generally cited by the 2005 state department terrorism report for supporting or assisting u.s. counter - terrorism efforts , and the 2004 and 2005 state department reports did not repeat language from the 2003 report that "members of transnational terrorist groups and state sponsors of terrorism are present in qatar. several of the gulf states are providing assistance on port and container security . in december 2004 , the uae emirate of dubai , a major gulf port hub , signed a statement of principles to participate in the u.s. "container security initiative" to screen u.s. - bound container cargo in dubai . oman joined that initiative as well in november 2005 . on the other hand , some in congress have expressed concern , including during consideration of the u.s. - oman fta , that some gcc or non - gcc firms might try to use u.s. - gulf ftas to invest in operations of u.s. ports . the new concerns built on earlier security - related questions that scuttled a february 2006 u.s. decision to allow the dubai - owned firm , dubai ports world , to take over operations at six u.s. ports . u.s. officials say that the fta agreements with the gulf countries would permit the united states to block such investments on security grounds . some saudi clerics , and even some saudi officials , such as interior minister prince nayef , have earned opprobrium in the united states for similar statements that appear to blame the united states and u.s. policy for islamic terrorism against the united states .