in that case , . it should not go beyond theprovisions proposed by the board. ( 3 ) on april 8 , 2003 , the subcommittee on financial institutions and consumer credit of house financial services committee held a hearing on h.r . 1474 , the check clearing for the21st century act of 2003 . the actwould enable this by creating a new type of paper document , a "substitute check," that would be thelegal equivalent of the original check . the substitute check would: contain an image of the front and back of the original check ; conform to the industry standards for substitute checks ; contain the magnetic - ink character recognition ( micr ) line that would permitthe substitute check to be processed on check - sorting equipment ; and , bear a legend that indicates that it is the legal equivalent of the originalcheck . using this substitute check , a bank would be able to truncate a check from a bank with which it has no electronic exchange agreement by sending a substitute check instead of the original check . asa result , check truncation would remain voluntary . banks that now use paper checks would be ableto process either the substitute check or the original checks without any modification in their checkclearing process or their back - office operations . the cost of check processing would be unchangedfor banks already using check truncation and banks that chose not to adopt check truncation . much of the draft legislation spells out in detail the legal similarity between the original check and the substitute check under the uniform commercial code . for example , it would create awarranty structure to protect against losses associated with the substitute check . the proposal wouldalso create an indemnity structure to address losses resulting from receiving a substitute check , ratherthan the original . in addition , the draft legislation would provide an expedited recredit procedure . recredit is the act of giving credit to an account even though the documentation to do so is beingquestioned . in short , the recrediting procedure allows customers' accounts to be credited as soonas possible whether or not there are problems associated with the receipt of the substitute checksinstead of the original . the expedited recrediting sections of the fed's proposal and the check clearing for the 21st century act are different . the fed's proposal would give customers involved in a transaction wherea substitute check was used a one day right to a recredit if they claim a check was improperly paid . that means that customer's account could be recredited the amount of the improper payment by theclose of the next business day . in contrast , the check clearing for the 21st century act provides fora recredit 10 days after a claim of an improper payment . under both versions , consumers usingbanks that have signed truncation agreements would not get this recrediting right . only customers of banking institutions that have not voluntarily agreed to check truncation would have this right . furthermore , under the fed's proposal , the time the consumer has to request a recredit of disputedfunds was 60 days . under the check clearing act ( p.l . 108-100 ) , it would be 40 days .