section 550 of p.l . 109-295 , the fy2007 dhs appropriation , resolved these issues temporarily by providing three years of regulatory authority for dhs . the law requires vulnerability assessments for high - risk chemical facilities and implementation of security plans to address hazards revealed in such assessments . other legislative proposals that were considered by the 109 th congress would have done the same , but also addressed issues such as how to facilitate congressional oversight of dhs implementation , the role of inherently safer technology , the criteria used to designate facilities as more or less "risky," and whether state and local right - to - know laws should be preempted by the federal provisions . it remains to be seen whether congress will tackle such issues in the future . crs report rl31547 , critical infrastructure information disclosure and homeland security , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl31861 , high - threat chemical agents: characteristics , effects , and policy implications , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl31542 , homeland security — reducing the vulnerability of public and private information infrastructures to terrorism: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl33043 , legislative approaches to chemical facility security , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl31294 , safeguarding the nation ' s drinking water: epa and congressional actions , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl32189 , terrorism and security issues facing the water infrastructure sector , by [author name scrubbed] . a range of possible strategies is summarized below . additional information on this topic is provided by crs report rl33043 , legislative approaches to chemical facility security , by [author name scrubbed] . policy makers choosing among policy options for reducing terrorist risks associated with chemical plants are faced with at least three fundamentally political issues: the effect of public disclosure ; the relative importance of diverse risks ( and associated costs and benefits of risk reduction ) , and who should be responsible ( and held accountable ) for achieving results . although legislation to enhance the security of a broad range of chemical facilities was introduced in previous congresses ( the 107 th and 108 th ) , none was enacted . a shift in committee structure in both the house and the senate may have affected the fate of legislation in the 109 th congress . the committee on homeland security and governmental affairs took the lead in holding hearings and developing legislation in the senate . however , senator inhofe , chairman of the senate committee on environment and public works , which held hearings during the previous congress , placed a hold on the bill because of concerns about its coverage of drinking water and wastewater treatment facilities ( which fall within the purview of his committee ) . in the house , bills were referred to both the committee on energy and commerce , which held hearings during the 108 th congress , and to the now permanent committee on homeland security , which reported a bill very similar to the senate bill .