guaranteeing the rule of law . in addition to the security tasks listed in the previous section , some analysts of peacekeeping and peacebuildingoperations cite the immediate creation of institutions to guarantee the rule of law as essential to theestablishment of a secure climate in which democracy can prosper . while the rule of law starts witha democratic constitution , and requires a representative parliament , analysts have found that theinstitutions which most directly touch the lives of the citizens , ensuring their rights day - to - day anddeeply affecting their perception of their government , are often those which most urgently need tobe built or rebuilt in post - conflict situations . an analysis of seven peacekeeping experiences - - cambodia , el salvador , mozambique , somalia , haiti , bosnia , and panama , - - identified two crucial rule of law "gaps" that could createextreme difficulties . the first was an "enforcement gap," i.e. , a lack of police forces capable ofdealing with serious lawlessness and violent domestic disorder , as discussed earlier . the second,was an "institutional gap," i.e. , the lack of an adequate number of impartial and competent judges,humane prisons and jailers , and a fair and coherent legal code , in post - conflict societies . ( 54 ) former u.s . ambassador william g. walker , who has played a prominent role in three peace operations , suggests the complexities , and long - term nature , of efforts to strengthen the rule of lawby developing the above - mentioned institutions . "all parts of a legal system - - the judiciary , theprosecutors , the bar , the police , the prison system , the codes - - must work properly and insynchronization . if a single component is left unreformed , the system will continue to generateinjustice . decades are required to produce a new police , not to mention a transformed judiciary,composed of officials not schooled in the behavior of the past . few international donors have thepatience , long - term commitment , or resources necessary to assume such a burden. ( 55 ) for iraq , analysts have recommended a variety of means to help assure the rule of law . in addition to recommendations regarding the police , discussed earlier , analysts have recommended avariety of forms of legal assistance , such as teams of international legal specialists - - includinglawyers , judges , court administrators and corrections officers - - to monitor , train , and supplementiraqi personnel . ( 56 ) as of late april , 2003 , theunited states army had begun to assess the judicialsystem in iraq , ( 57 ) and as mentioned earlier , thestate department has begun the bidding process onassistance for the police , and justice and prison systems . a recent review of rule of law assistance programs since the 1980s indicates that their contribution to strengthening democracy is uncertain .