these included h.res . 587 , introduced by representative christopher smith , and h.res . 596 , introduced by representative burton . on april 8 , the senate agreed by unanimous consent to s.res . ambassador to serbia remains in belgrade . following the february 21 attack on the u.s. embassy in belgrade , administration officials sharply condemned the violence and breach in security , pinning responsibility for foreign mission security on the serbian government . secretary rice called serbia's police presence "inadequate or unresponsive. the administration thereafter ordered the withdrawal of non - essential u.s. personnel and dependents from serbia . the administration has pledged to support kosovo's independence and implementation of the ahtisaari plan through participation in eu - led and nato missions in kosovo and economic assistance . it asserts that kosovo's situation is unique and does not represent any precedent for other international circumstances . u.s. officials have also spoken against any effort to partition kosovo along ethnic lines . on march 19 , president bush issued a presidential determination to authorize the furnishing of defense articles and defense services to kosovo "to strengthen the security of the united states and promote world peace. in 1999 , the 106 th congress debated whether u.s. and nato air strikes in kosovo were in the u.s. national interest , and whether the president could undertake them without congressional approval . in the end , congress neither explicitly approved nor blocked the air strikes , but appropriated funds for the air campaign and the u.s. peacekeeping deployment in kosovo after the fact . in 2000 , some members unsuccessfully attempted to condition the u.s. military deployment in kosovo on congressional approval and on the implementation of aid pledges made by european countries . many members of congress said that they expected u.s. allies in europe to contribute the lion's share of aid to the region and expressed concern that european countries were slow to implement their aid pledges . congress moved to limit u.s. aid to kosovo to 15% of the total amount pledged by all countries . the 107 th congress focused on limiting the cost of the continuing u.s. engagement in kosovo . for example , the fy2002 foreign aid appropriations law ( p.l . 107-115 ) specified that aid to kosovo "should not exceed 15 percent of the total resources pledged by all donors for calendar year 2002 for assistance for kosovo as of march 31 , 2002. . it also barred u.s. aid for "large scale physical infrastructure reconstruction" in kosovo . kosovo's status has been another theme in legislation . in the 108 th congress , several resolutions were introduced that advocate u.s. support for kosovo's independence . in the first session , h.res . 28 were introduced , expressing the sense of the house that the united states should declare support for kosovo's independence . in the senate , s.res . 144 expressed the sense of the senate that the united states should support the right of the people of kosovo to determine their political future once "requisite progress" is made in achieving u.n. benchmarks in developing democratic institutions and human rights protections .