there are drawbacks to using the econometric models . such modeling is highly sensitive to the assumptions that are used to establish the parameters of the model and are hampered by a serious lack of comprehensive data in the services sector . such shortcomings likely will not be as apparent in analysis of bilateral trade agreements between the united states and another trading partner , but they likely will become important when the analysis involves a large number of countries , such as in a regional or multilateral trade agreement . in addition , these models likely understate the adjustment costs that are inevitably involved in liberalizing trade and they may well understate the positive effects of trade liberalization over the long run , because such effects are beyond the time - frame of the estimates . as a result , it is possible that trade liberalization may have a larger positive impact on the u.s. economy over the long term than most economic models indicate . nevertheless , even if the derived benefits from multilateral negotiations were twice as great as the most optimistic estimates indicate , except for unilateral reductions in trade barriers in all countries , the overall impact on the u.s. economy is expected to be modest , at best , relative to the size of the u.s. economy . the effects on the economy from liberalizing trade on a regional basis through proposed trade and investment arrangements may well yield numerous gains for the u.s. economy as a whole . congress may choose to reject any trade agreement in favor of maintaining the status quo , or it may choose to circumvent the arduous task of negotiating multilateral trade agreements and unilaterally remove all barriers to u.s. trade . while unilaterally removing all trade barriers would please economic purists , it is unlikely given the issues it would raise and the prospects that it would leave u.s. negotiators with few bargaining chips during trade negotiations . such an action likely would engender a public backlash , particularly from those labor and trade groups that would be most directly affected by such a policy . in addition , the task of demonstrating the benefits of liberalizing trade is complicated by the fact that the short term adjustment costs associated with trade liberalization are difficult to equate clearly with the benefits that accrue slowly over time . this means that it is difficult to demonstrate conclusively at the early stages of negotiations that the long - term benefits of trade liberalization will outweigh the short - term adjustment costs . given these prospects , it seems likely to assume that policymakers will weigh the benefits of greater trade liberalization against the anticipated dislocations for workers and industries and determine whether to accept or reject each agreement on the basis of a broad set of factors . while such analyses cannot forecast every outcome , they can aid policymakers in assessing which industries and sectors likely will experience the highest adjustment costs and , therefore , which industries and groups may need assistance in receiving training or other assistance . often , congress has addressed trade - induced changes through trade adjustment assistance for workers and firms displaced as a result of trade agreements and trade liberalization .