regionalism . south korean politics is highly regionalized . the mdp's base is in the southwestern cholla region ( also known as honam ) , whereroh won 93% of the vote in the 2002 presidential election . ( see figure 2 ) in the last nation - widenational assembly elections , held in april 2000 , no gnp candidate won any of cholla's 29 seats . conversely , gnp candidate lee hoi chang won 71% of the vote in the southeastern kyongsang region ( also known as yongnam ) , the gnp's stronghold . in the 2000 national assembly elections,the gnp won 64 of the 65 constituencies in kyongsang . before kim dae jung's victory in 1997,south korea's military governments gave preferential treatment to the kyongsang region , leadingcholla residents to accuse the government of discrimination . the greater seoul area , which is thehome of nearly half of the south korean electorate , has emerged as the swing vote . there has beendiscussion of combating regionalism by adopting multiple - seat constituencies in the nationalassembly . corruption . ( 1 ) ngos . since the end of military rule , non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) have increased dramatically in south korea , particularlyin the past five years . the groups exist on both the local and national levels , range widely in size,and focus on a wide array of issues , including the environment , government and corporatecorruption , disability rights , women's rights , crimes committed by u.s. forces in korea , revising theu.s. - rok status of forces agreement ( sofa ) , and returning land used by u.s. forces . manyinternational ngos have set up local chapters in seoul . in contrast to the student - led , class - basedgroups of the 1980s that spent much of their time organizing militant anti - government and anti - u.s.protests , an increasing number of ngos have hiring permanent staff , fundraisers , and researchoffices . ( 2 ) as they have begun to professionalize theiroperations , they seem to have begun to havea greater impact on south korean domestic and foreign policy . south korean ngos have been particularly adept at forming loose , temporary coalitions with one another to organize large - scale protests on a particular issue . many of the most successfulexamples of citizen activism in south korea involved the formation of umbrella organizations thatpool the resources of member groups . the country's rapid adoption of the internet - - south koreahas one of the world's highest rates of internet usage - - has facilitated such networking by enablinggroups to quickly establish linkages , coordinate activities , and spread the word about protestactivities . ( 3 ) the anti - american protests in 2002 werea case in point . decentralization . the growing influence of korean civil society groups has been possible in part because of the growing decentralization ofpower in south korea . in the early and mid - 1990s , new laws were passed creating local assembliesand establishing popular election of local officials for the first time since the 1950s . increased localautonomy has encouraged political consciousness and activism , as south koreans have come toexpect local and national elected leaders to be more responsive and accountable to theirconstituents .