in fact , p.l . 13 also provided a definition of "obscene" and of the term "determined to be obscene. it would have required the director to carry out and publish analyses of the impact of museum and library services , and would have increased from 3% to 3.5% the amount available for federal administrative costs , to provide funding for this new function . the senate - passed bill included the following provisions that were contained in s. 888 as reported by the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions , but were not contained in h.r . 13 as passed by the house: provisions that would have made the chairman of the national commission on library and information science a member ( nonvoting ) of the national museum and library services board ; a prohibition against using imls funds for construction ; and provisions that would have raised liability amounts in the arts and artifacts indemnity act . s. 238 ( reed ) was introduced on january 29 , 2003 , and was referred to the senate committee on health , education , labor and pensions . the library services and technology provisions of this bill were essentially the same as those in s. 2611 ( reed ) , introduced in the 107 th congress . the bulk of lst funding is distributed to states via formula grants . funding is also provided for library services for native americans , and for national leadership projects . lst grants to the states are allocated to state library administrative agencies ( slaas ) , and may be used for the following basic purposes: ( a ) expanding services for learning and access to information in a variety of formats in all type of libraries , developing and improving electronic or other linkages and networks connecting providers and consumers of library services and resources ; and / or ( b ) targeting library services to under served or disadvantaged populations , such as persons with disabilities , those with limited literacy skills , or children from poor families . although the bulk of funds appropriated for lst are used for state grants , a percentage of total funds is reserved for national activities , native americans , and federal administration . out of total lst appropriations for a given year , 3.75% must be reserved for national activities . however , the level of fy2004 and fy2005 appropriations for the imls were not sufficient to trigger the higher state grant amounts authorized by p.l . participating states are required to develop five - year plans that set goals and priorities consistent with the purposes of lst grants ( i.e. , to enhance information - sharing networks and target library services to disadvantaged populations ) . the plans must provide for independent evaluations of federally assisted library services . a wide variety of types of libraries—public , public school , college or university , research ( if they provide public access to their collections ) , and ( at state discretion ) private libraries—may receive lst aid , not just the public and research libraries eligible for aid under the predecessor legislation , the library services and construction act ( lsca ) .