as introduced , s. 129 and h.r . 1601 were identicalexcept for one provision relating to personnel demonstration projects . ( 15 ) both bills include a numberof the provisions that were in s. 2651 ( 107th congress ) . s. 129 , as passed by the senate and as ordered to be reported to the house , would amend current law provisions on critical pay , civil service retirement system computation forpart - time service , agency training , and annual leave . ( 20 ) subcommittee chairwomanjoann davis stated that h.r . 1601 , along with other initiatives , seeks "to address the veryreal pay , benefit and personnel issues that keep potential employees from joining the civil serviceand sometimes drive our best employees and managers away. ( 21 ) in his statement , representativedanny davis cautioned that "[g]ranting federal agencies flexibilities that do not addresswell - documented problems or are not clear solutions to these problems is a disservice to federalemployees and the taxpayers. ( 22 ) carl demaio,president of the performance institute , a privatethink tank , recommended that the personnel flexibilities be accompanied by a plan to coordinate allhuman capital activities . ( 23 ) the national presidentof the american federation of governmentemployees ( afge ) , john gage , testified that his union strongly prefers s. 129 becauseit does not include the demonstration project authorities included in h.r . he alsorecommended that the exercise of any of the enhanced flexibilities be predicated on the fullimplementation of the pay comparability provisions of the federal employees pay comparabilityact . ( 24 ) the national commission on the public service , in its report to congress issued on january 7 , 2003 , characterized the personnel provisions enacted in p.l . 107-296 , the homeland security actof 2002 , as "promising approaches to personnel reform. among its proposals , the commissionrecommended that operating agencies develop more flexible personnel management systems to meettheir special needs and that congress and opm continue efforts to simplify and accelerate therecruitment of federal employees . ( 25 ) this report discusses each of the provisions in s. 129 , as passed by the senate and as ordered to be reported to the house . comments from the 107th congress senate subcommitteehearings , the 107th congress section analyses that accompanied s. 2651 and s. 1612 , and the 108th congress joint senate and house subcommittee hearing and thehouse subcommittee hearing are included under the discussions of relevant provisions of the bills . for a comparison of each of the provisions in s. 129 with current law , see crs report rl31516 , federal workforce flexibilities: a side - by - side comparison of s. 129 ( 108thcongress ) with current law . [author name scrubbed] , specialist in social legislation , domestic social policy division , congressional research service ( crs ) , prepared the text on provisions relating to retirement . l.elaine halchin , analyst in american national government , government and finance division,crs , prepared the text on provisions relating to senior executive service authority for the whitehouse office of administration . barbara schwemle , analyst in american national government,government and finance division , crs , prepared all other text .