they may believe that these weapons increase their operationalflexibility . if a chemical or biological weapon was disseminated widely , especially in the case of a contagious pathogen , there might be governmentintervention to quarantine individuals or groups of individuals . ( 16 ) since for some chemical , biological,and toxin weapons there exists a delay beforesymptoms develop , terrorists may feel that their use will increase the chances of successfullyavoiding arrest . the variety of potential effects and timing can complicate medical treatment andpreparedness , as it might not be readily apparent what chemical or pathogen has caused thesymptoms , nor what antidote will prove most effective . ( 17 ) the use of chemical or toxin weapons could generate a disproportionate public response because of a broad public perception that their use is akin to poisoning . according to experts , therehas long been fear of and antipathy towards the use of poison . it is especially frightening to thevictim , as the symptoms may seem to appear from nowhere . poisons lacking an antidote may raiseconcerns further , as the victim perceives that there is no recourse or cure available . toxins range in effect from disabling to acutely toxic . the mostdeadly compound currently known , botulinum toxin , is a bacterial toxin . toxins are more potentthan chemical weapons , requiring less material to produce equivalent casualties , but they are notself - reproducing , so more material is required than for a biological weapon . symptoms from toxinexposure typically occur on a timescale intermediate between chemical and biological weapons,generally appearing over the course of several hours . chemical , biological , and toxin weapons also differ in their medical treatment and theavailability of effective prophylaxis . ( 11 ) chemicalweapons , with their quick - acting effects , must betreated as promptly as possible . because of the large range of potential effects caused by chemicalweapons , there is no universal treatment for chemical weapon exposure . ( 12 ) exposure to nerve agentscan be directly treated with medication to prevent or reduce symptoms . exposure to vesicants , suchas mustard gas , is generally untreatable ; most people exposed will exhibit the agent's effects . theeffects from vesicant exposure , primarily blisters and lesions , can be treated . in addition , injury fromexposure to choking agents , such as chlorine , can be ameliorated by prompt medical treatment tolimit permanent lung damage . many biological agents either respond to medical treatment or have effective prophylaxis . single or combination antibiotic regimens , if employed early in the course of the disease , areeffective against many bacteria that might be used as biological weapons . such timely treatmentmay be difficult if recognition of a bioterror event is delayed . some viruses targeted as biologicalweapons have effective prophylaxis in the form of vaccines , while others reportedly respond toantiviral drugs . ( 13 ) however , some potentialbiological weapons lack prophylaxis , treatment , or cure . additionally , biological weapons can be engineered , with some effort , in a laboratory to be resistantto specific countermeasures . treatment of injuries sustained from toxin weapons may be more complicated .