these amendments have not been enacted . in deliberations leading up to the enactment of the usfspa , the senate armed services committee stated the following: military spouses are still expected to fulfill an important role in the social life and welfare of the military community . child care and management of the family household are many times solely the spouse's responsibility . nevertheless , since 1982 the nature of military families and family life has changed . female representation in the armed forces has increased from 11% to 16% , same - sex spouses are allowed to receive benefits , and the number of dual - service married couples has more than doubled since 1985 . what role do the services play in facilitating delivery of those benefits ? what practical problems arise in the implementation of and service involvement in claims on those benefits ? how does the current system for a divorce - related division of military retired pay work ? these frequently asked questions reflect confusion and controversy over social policy and economic equity issues . the administrative and legal implementation has proven complex , due to the large number of couples affected and the variety of circumstances surrounding their military service and divorce . prior to 1981 , state courts disagreed as to whether they were authorized or constrained by federal legislation or federal legal precedent in dividing military retired pay in divorce - related property settlements . inconsistencies among the states and perceptions of unfairness and arbitrariness were common grounds for criticism of the system . the supreme court ruled ( 6-3 ) on june 26 , 1981 , in the case of mccarty v. mccarty , that the former spouse of a military member or retiree could not be awarded any share of that member's / retiree's retirement pay as a part of a divorce property settlement in a community property state , because then - current federal law did not authorize the treatment of military retired pay as divisible property in such a settlement . in reaching this ruling , however , the court did not necessarily endorse its social impact . justice blackmun ( writing for the majority ) , virtually invited congress to consider a change in the law to allow such a division to be made: we recognize that the plight of an ex - spouse of a retired member is often a serious one . see hearing on h.r . 6270 before the military compensation subcommittee of the house committee on armed services , 96 th cong. , 2d sess . that plight may be mitigated to some extent by the ex - spouse's right to claim social security benefits , cf . hisquierdo , 439 u.s. at 590 , and to garnish retired pay for the purposes of support . nonetheless , congress may well decide , as it has in the civil service and foreign service contexts , that more protection should be afforded a former spouse of a retired servicemember . the decision , however , is for congress alone . we very recently have reemphasized that in no area has the court accorded congress greater deference than in the conduct and control of military affairs .