who should pay . every level of government is facing tremendous budgetary pressures to reduce spending while still funding priorities . historically , federal programs provided much of the support for local water infrastructure projects , but that role has changed , particularly as a result of shifting of federal programs from grants to loans , but also due to declining federal resources . at issue is what role can the federal government play in local project financing , and what should the federal role be in setting and supporting local priorities . this report identifies a number of issues receiving attention in connection with water infrastructure . consensus exists among many stakeholders — state and local governments ; equipment manufacturers , construction companies , and engineers ; and environmental advocates — on the need for more investment in water infrastructure . many in these varied groups support one or more options for doing so , ranging from water - related fees that could be dedicated to water infrastructure , or some sort of new federal credit assistance program such as a national infrastructure bank . increased public / private partnerships are advocated by some , and other options also may merit exploration . there is no consensus supporting a preferred option or policy , and many advocate a combination that will expand the financing "toolbox" for projects . most agree that there is no single method or "silver bullet" that will address needs fully or close the financing gap completely . at least for the near term , communities will continue to rely on the srf programs , tax - exempt governmental bonds , and available tax - exempt private activity bonds to finance their water infrastructure needs . the 112 th congress focused extensively on cutting federal spending , and this emphasis is expected to continue in the 113 th congress . unclear for now is whether such actions will be applied to infrastructure programs equally with others , or whether infrastructure investments will be perceived as supporting economic activity by increasing the capital stock and raising productivity and thus be protected from major reductions , or even be provided with greater federal resources . security . beyond the traditional infrastructure needs related to regulatory compliance and system repair and expansion , the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , generated new investment needs for drinking water and wastewater systems . the national costs of addressing water and wastewater security needs have not been well quantified . in 2002 , the awwa estimated that municipal water systems would have to spend more than $1.6 billion just to ensure control of access to critical water system assets . this estimate did not include the capital costs of upgrades to address vulnerabilities that water system managers have identified in vulnerability assessments , or the costs facing wastewater systems and smaller drinking water systems . epa's 2009 report on public water system infrastructure needs included $422.0 million for projects to address security needs . epa concluded that security - related needs were underestimated , as many water systems incorporate these costs into the costs of broader construction projects rather than report them separately .