the measure was defeated . there are several policy issues concerning the provision of federal funding for states with large populations of unauthorized aliens . as discussed above , the provisions in prwora which limited immigrant access to public benefits were the result of a desire that immigrants be self - sufficient and not rely on public resources to meet their needs . additionally , proponents did not want the availability of public benefits to constitute an incentive for immigrants to migrate to the united states . nonetheless , others argue that immigration is solely a federal issue . the federal government is wholly responsible for establishing immigration policy , and for policing the borders to keep out unauthorized aliens . thus , they argue that the burden to pay for immigration - related cost should be born by the federal government , not the states . additionally , some question the wisdom of only providing funding to help cover the costs of unauthorized aliens when no federal funds are provided to states to cover the emergency medical costs of nonimmigrants and legal permanent residents who have been in the country for less than five years . another issue concerns the lack of reliable data on the number and distribution of unauthorized aliens . as the 2000 census of the u.s. population is being released , preliminary data analyses offer competing population totals that , in turn , imply that illegal migration soared in the late 1990s and that estimates of unauthorized residents of the united states have been understated . the department of homeland security estimates that there are about 7 million unauthorized aliens living in the united states . in testimony before the house committee on the judiciary subcommittee on immigration and claims , jeffrey passel , a demographic researcher at the urban institute , offered an estimate of 8 to 9 million unauthorized residents . at the same hearing , economists from northeastern university using employment data reported by business establishments as well as 2000 census totals concluded that the unauthorized population may be 11 million . these discrepancies suggest that assessments of the unauthorized population by state may be an inaccurate and problematic basis for distributing grant funds . none of these estimates addresses the distribution among states of the unauthorized population ; however , anecdotal reports suggest that unauthorized aliens may be dispersed among many states rather than concentrated in a few states as previously presumed . if this is true , a program which limits the number of states eligible for additional reimbursement for medical treatment of unauthorized immigrants may exclude smaller states that have proportionally high numbers of unauthorized aliens in relation to their population , but not high absolute numbers of unauthorized aliens . funds are available for reimbursement "only to the extent that such costs are not otherwise reimbursed through any other federal program. no payment can be made "with respect to services furnished to an individual unless the immigration status of the individual has been verified through appropriate procedures" established by the secretary of hhs and the attorney general . obviously , the lack of an appropriation has been the primary impediment to the implementation of this provision .