complaints against the eu . of the 26 complaints filed by the united states against the european union or specific eu countries , 13 arecurrently listed by the wto secretariat as remaining in the consultative stage and thus do not appearto have a definitive solution . in all of these cases , the 60-day consultation period in the dsu haspassed . these cases allege , in reverse chronological order: safeguards agreement and gattviolations stemming from the eu tariff - rate quota on u.s. corn gluten feed briefly imposed whilethe u.s. maintained its three - year safeguard on wheat gluten ; the eu's failure to protect trademarksand geographic indications for agricultural products in violation of the agreement on trade - relatedintellectual property ( trips ) ; french and eu subsidies to develop a flight management systemrelated to airbus ; export subsidies resulting from income tax treatment of exports by various eumembers ; and eu export subsidies on processed cheese . in addition , there are two outstandingcomplaints related to the now settled dispute over eu's banana import regime . seven complaints filed by the united states were settled either through consultations or before a panel had begun its work . since settlement of a case must be mutually agreed by the disputingparties , the united states apparently achieved a satisfactory solution in these situations . two ofthese cases dealt with customs duties on rice and grain , respectively , and five involved intellectualproperty issues . in four of these either a panel had been requested or else a panel was establishedor later suspended . five of the cases brought by the united states were taken through the full panel process . two were won by the united states: beef hormones and bananas . three of the cases were lost on appeal,each of these dealing with customs classification of computer equipment . the eu eventually complied in the successful challenge to the eu's banana import regime , though two and one - half years had passed from the end of the original compliance deadline ( january1 , 1999 ) before a settlement was reached . maintaining that the eu had not complied by thisdeadline , the united states requested authorization to impose sanctions on eu products under article22 of the dsu . in april 1999 , the wto authorized the united states to suspend $191.4 million intrade concessions , an arbitrated amount reflecting the level of trade injury suffered by the unitedstates . the united states imposed 100% ad valorem duties on eu products in this amount shortlythereafter and , following a compliance panel proceeding , protracted negotiations between the eu,the united states and ecuador , and the institution of new eu measures , the eu eventually complied . the united states suspended the increased duties july 1 , 2001 . the case also focused attention onthe dsu itself , with the eu challenging u.s. domestic procedures and countermeasures undersection 301 of the trade act of 1974 as violative of dsu requirements . in contrast , the eu chose to accept retaliation in the beef hormone case , in which the united states had obtained panel and appellate reports finding that the eu's ban on imports of meat fromanimals to which certain growth hormones were administered violated the wto agreement onsanitary and phytosanitary measures .