but , again , the caveat is that terrorism seeks to shock . the tragedies ofseptember 11th seemed to bear out both of these trends . second , there is a growing concern about the increasing availability of information and resources for the building of weapons by subnational groups that in former years had been feasibleonly with the resources of a state . like the rest of the world , terrorist groups have access to the vastamount of technical data disseminated through the internet . more and more information that mightpreviously have been difficult to collect is becoming easily accessible . among the groups that havereportedly demonstrated interest in acquiring unconventional weapons ( besides al qaeda ) are theplo , the red army faction , hezbollah , the kurdistan workers' party , german neo - nazis , and thechechens . ( 9 ) at the same time , the breakup of thesoviet union increased potential access to a vast,highly advanced arsenal of not only nuclear but also chemical and biological weapons and expertise . the combination of greater movement of people , knowledge and products across borders in aglobalized world , and greater availability of materials and expertise in the post - soviet era , havetogether led to a potentially serious erosion in state control over chemical and biological weapons ( or their ingredients ) . ( 10 ) third , the nature of international terrorism has evolved in dangerous ways in recent years . although many traditional groups carry on in their struggles , the growth of religiously - orientedgroups has led to an increased commonality of interests between populations in disparategeographical areas . in part in reaction to american global policies and cultural as well as politicalglobal reach , groups are developing ties across formerly divisive ideological , ethnic , and nationallines . the area of potential recruits is thus broader than it might have been for a traditionalethnonationalist / separatist group supported only by its local constituency , for example . also , thisinternationalization of the threat has often led to a greater distance between groups and targets . theresult is not only a removal of moral constraints but also political constraints , with less worry aboutpotentially sullying a homeland or killing potential constituents . thus , the internationalization ofterrorism may unfortunately imply an increase in just the sorts of incentives that lead groups toconsider unconventional weapons . fourth , and perhaps most important , there are clear indications of interest in cbw on the part of contemporary terrorist groups , as well as some evidence of actual capabilities . with along - standing expressed desire to acquire them and a demonstrated willingness to kill americans,al qaeda ( and its associates ) is the group that most worries u.s. experts . osama bin laden hasreportedly pursued the development of chemical and biological weapons since the early 1990s . ( 11 ) in1998 , he spoke of acquiring weapons of mass destruction being a "religious duty," and the eleventhvolume of al qaeda's 5,000-page "encyclopedia of jihad" is devoted to explaining how to constructcbw . ( 12 ) there are many substantiated examples in the open press of efforts by al qaeda and its allies to develop these weapons .