circuit . pennsylvania filed a separate lawsuit on january 27 , 2003 . on january 30 , the attorneys general in eight states , mostly from the midwest and the south filed a petition in support of the final rule . alternatives to the current nsr situation focus on either energy or environmental considerations . for example , the administration's proposed revisions to routine maintenance are an outgrowth of the president's national energy policy and are intended "to provide greater regulatory certainty without sacrificing the current level of environmental protection...." the policy goal is not to reduce emissions . as stated in the proposed rule: what these [epa's] analyses indicate , however , is that regardless of which scenario is closest to what comes to pass , none of the proposed provisions related to the rmrr [routine maintenance , repair , replacement] exclusion will have a significant impact on emissions from the power sector . the bush administration's nsr focus on energy policy contrasts directly with the focus of the clinton administration's enforcement initiative where , by seeking to enforce nsr requirements , epa attempted to exploit an existing authority to reduce emissions . likewise , proposed legislation in the 107 th congress to define a modification in terms of a power plant's age was another attempt to use nsr as an emissions reduction program . nsr is one approach that the clean air act takes to control emissions from existing sources , but arguably more efficient and more effective methods to ensure declining emissions from existing sources over time have been developed since nsr was added to the caa in 1977 . for example , title iv of the caa , enacted in 1990 , explicitly and substantially reduces so 2 and nox emissions from existing utility plants . in fact , title iv reduced more so 2 emissions from coal - fired electric generating facilities in its first year of implementation ( 1995 ) than nsr has in its 20 years of existence . the "cap and trade" program has had nearly100% compliance ( indeed , substantial over - compliance ) ; the implicit logic of epa's lawsuits suggests nsr's compliance with respect to electric generating facilities has been near zero . the title iv program began without significant delays ( so 2 program on - time , nox program 1 year late ) ; the epa lawsuits could take years to resolve with uncertain results . much of the popular debate on nsr has focused on "grandfathered" powerplants . one example from a 1998 report by a public interest group states: the clean air act of 1970 , as amended in 1977 and 1990 , contains a major exemption that allows older coal - burning power plants to emit between 4 and 10 times the amount of pollution that new plants may emit under the clean air act . in part , this colossal loophole exists because industry lobbyists argued successfully that its older plants would soon retire , and that therefore it would be wasteful to require expensive retrofits to control pollution from these plants . however , over 20 years later , many of these same plants , built in the 30s , 40s , 50s and 60s , are still operating , largely without environmental controls .