it is also limited in its scope . §§12101 et seq . , provides broad nondiscrimination protection for individuals with disabilities in employment , public services , public accommodations and services operated by private entities , transportation , and telecommunications . enacted in 1990 and amended in 2008 by p.l . 110-325 , the ada is a civil rights statute that has as its purpose "to provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of discrimination against individuals with disabilities. the ada has been the subject of numerous lower court decisions and the supreme court has decided 20 ada cases . in the most recent supreme court decision , united states v. georgia , the court held that title ii of the ada created a private cause of action for damages against the states for conduct that actually violated the fourteenth amendment . however , the court did not reach the issue of whether the eleventh amendment permits a prisoner to secure money damages from a state for state actions that violate the ada but not the constitution . in the same term , the supreme court decided arbaugh v. y . & h corp. , a case under title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 , which has implications for the ada's prohibition of discrimination where employers employ 15 or more employees . on december 7 , 2007 , the supreme court granted certiorari in huber v. wal - mart stores , to determine whether an individual with a disability who cannot perform her current job must be reassigned to a vacant , equivalent position without competing with other workers . however , the court dismissed the petition since the case was settled prior to oral argument . the eighth circuit court of appeals in huber held that wal - mart was not required to automatically reassign her to the vacant position she wanted but could place another , better qualified , candidate in the position . noting that wal - mart did place the plaintiff in a less lucrative position , the court of appeals stated that the plaintiff "was treated exactly as all other candidates were treated for the wal - mart job opening , no worse and no better. currently , there is a split in the circuits on this accommodation issue , and in light of the court's dismissal of the case , there will continue to be divergent views . in olmstead v. georgia , the supreme court held that title ii of the ada requires states to place individuals with mental disabilities in community settings rather than institutions when the state's treatment professionals have determined that community placement is appropriate , community placement is not opposed by the individual with a disability , and the placement can be reasonably accommodated . "unjustified isolation...is properly regarded as discrimination based on disability. the olmstead case had been closely watched by both disability groups and state governments . although disability groups have applauded the holding that undue institutionalization qualifies as discrimination by reason of disability , the supreme court did place certain limitations on this right .