table 1 . list of charges , indictments , and guilty pleas in corporate scandals since enron note: a few of these cases have also resulted in civil indictments . return to contents section of this long report . the ongoing criminal prosecutions are a complementary phase of the effort to improvecorporate accountability . many observers maintain that prosecution of individuals alleged to haveabused the public trust , together with new legal and regulatory standards for corporate behavior , iscrucial to restoring investor confidence in the fairness and transparency of the public securitiesmarkets . table 1 identifies firms and individuals associated with a number of high - profile casesagainst whom criminal charges have been filed by federal prosecutors since the collapse of enroncorp . ( although in some cases the alleged misconduct occurred before enron's fall ) . in addition tonewspaper sources , department of justice press releases have been cited where available . see http: / / www.usdoj.gov / 03press / 03_1_1.html . a few of these cases , as noted in the table , have also resulted in civil indictments . thesepost - enron criminal charges are listed in crs report rl31961 , civil charges in corporatescandals , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . the actrestricts accounting firms from performing a number of other services for the companies they auditand requires new disclosures for public companies and the officers and directors of those companies . other issues affected by the new legislation are securities fraud , criminal and civil penalties forviolating the securities laws and other laws , blackout periods for insider trades of pension fundshares , and protections for corporate whistleblowers . the act establishes a new regulator for corporate auditors , the public company accountingoversight board , which is to be supervised by the securities and exchange commission . on july 30 , 2002 , president bush signed into law the sarbanes - oxley act of 2002 , p.l.107-204 , which had its genesis early in 2002 after the declared bankruptcy of enron corporation .