the following illustrate their number , range , and diversity . seven broad types are distinguished here: 1 . councils consisting of the president , who is the chairman , the vice president , and specified department and / or agency heads , with only three in existence: the national security council , created by public law in 1947 , and the homeland security council and the usa freedom corps council , each created by executive order , in 2001 and 2002 , respectively . committees made up of department and agency heads , along with , in some cases , officials from the executive office of the president ( eop ) , including the interagency task force to monitor and combat trafficking [in people] , the principals committees of the nsc and hsc , the president's critical infrastructure protection board , and its predecessor , the critical infrastructure protection group . specially created positions or offices , with their own authority and resources , to cover a policy area that crosses a number of separate and independent agencies ( eg , council on environmental quality and the directors of the offices of national drug control policy , of homeland security , and of usa freedom corps ) . agency heads or other officers with qualified authority over other entities , particularly the director of central intelligence , the director of the secret service , and inspectors general , who can enlist the assistance of or task other organizations in carrying out specific duties and assignments . sub - cabinet boards , committees , and councils , such as the nsc and hsc deputies committees , two inspector general coordinating councils , and the chief financial officers coordinating council . transfers of personnel , resources , or units among new or existing entities , by setting up interagency partnerships , joint operational task forces , and field working groups ; by transferring specific units for temporary duty ; and by detailing and redeploying staff . ( specific examples are described in the next section ) . these are illustrated by a host of arrangements and mechanisms: u.s. coast guard transfer to the navy in times of war or other emergencies , use of military personnel and resources in law enforcement efforts , fema's multiplicity of partnerships , the secret service's membership in nearly 50 working groups , nsc's ad hoc working groups , hsc's policy coordination committees , various anti - terrorism support teams and cybersecurity operational centers , and inspector general council committees , as well as numerous staff details for particular operations and redeployments to meet crisis situations . transfers of authority between and among agencies , principally through the cross - designation of agents from one agency to another with shared jurisdiction and related responsibilities ( such as the customs service and immigration and naturalization service for border control ) and through special deputation by the u.s . marshals service for personnel without their own law enforcement authority ( such as criminal investigators in some offices of inspector general ) . examples of federal interagency coordinative mechanisms , interspersed among the seven categories , are manifold . federal interagency coordinative mechanisms have become prevalent and prominent recently , as means of fostering cooperation and support among government agencies .