the ftc did so on december 16 , 2004 . see crs report rl31636 , wireless privacy and spam: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] , for more on this topic. ) conversely , the act does not — create a "do not email registry" where consumers can place their e - mail addresses in a centralized database to indicate they do not want commercial e - mail . the law required only that the ftc develop a plan and timetable for establishing such a registry and to inform congress of any concerns it has with regard to establishing it . according to the spamlaws.com website , the maryland law prohibits sending commercial e - mail that uses a third party's domain name without permission , or that contains false or missing routing information , or with a false or misleading subject line . the law applies , inter alia , to e - mail sent from within maryland , or if the sender knows that the recipient is a maryland resident . 108-187 includes the following major provisions . commercial e - mail may be sent to recipients as long as the message conforms with the following requirements: — transmission information in the header is not false or misleading ; — subject headings are not deceptive ; — a functioning return e - mail address or comparable mechanism is included to enable recipients to indicate they do not wish to receive future commercial e - mail messages from that sender at the e - mail address where the message was received ; — the e - mail is not sent to a recipient by the sender , or anyone acting on behalf of the sender , more than 10 days after the recipient has opted - out , unless the recipient later gives affirmative consent to receive the e - mail ( i.e. , opts back in ) ; and — the e - mail must be clearly and conspicuously identified as an advertisement or solicitation ( although the legislation does not state how or where that identification must be made ) . commercial e - mail is defined as e - mail , the primary purpose of which is the commercial advertisement or promotion of a commercial product or service ( including content on an internet website operated for a commercial purpose ) . it does not include transactional or relationship messages ( see next bullet ) . the act directs the ftc to issue regulations within 12 months of enactment to define the criteria to facilitate determination of an e - mail's primary purpose .