national research council . the internet under crisis conditions: learning from september 11 . washington , dc: national academy press . pentagon renovation program web site http: / / renovation.pentagon.mil / . schulz , james , "new urgency for disaster recovery planning," washington technology , 8 october 2001 , p.18 . "special coverage: attack on america," computerworld , http: / / www.computerworld.com / news / special / pages / 0,10911,1446,00.html . "special report: september 11 , 2001," government executive magazine , http: / / www.govexec.com / 091101report.htm . it reportedlylost some of the information it was collecting on criminal suspects . ( 42 ) another example is deloitte consulting , whose primary telecommunications hub in new york city , located in the world financial center next to the world trade center towers , was put out ofservice , affecting an estimated one thousand employees in the area . as a consulting firm , deloitteconsiders its ability to share information with clients to be its core business . during the weeks ittook to rebuild its land line communication center , deloitte's new york area employees used cellphones to stay in contact with customers and fellow employees . ( 43 ) even organizations that have planned extensively can sometimes overlook small details that appear insignificant , but later prove to be important . one such example is american internationalgroup ( aig ) inc . the financial services company has offices and information technology operationsnear the world trade center site . using its backup business center in parsippany , nj , and a secondpreviously contracted emergency facility in livingston , nj , aig was able to use data from itsautomated backup system to be operational the day after the attacks . however , not all of its serverswere part of the automated backup system , and the backup tapes for these servers reportedly wereleft behind when its building was evacuated . a second major category of lessons learned concerns the decentralization of operations and theeffectiveness of distributed communications . the rise of networked computing and the internet hasprovided the opportunity to connect far - flung locations around the country and the world . manypublic and private sector organizations have used this technology to reach outward to new markets,deliver new services , and reduce communications costs . however , the lessons learned discussedbelow suggest there is also a need for organizations to turn this technology inward to reduce thevulnerabilities of internal operations and to strengthen communications links with internal , as wellas external , constituencies . the third category of lessons learned involves the institutionalization of redundancy ininformation infrastructures . redundancy , as used here , includes having computer or network systemcomponents , including hardware , software , and telecommunications links , installed and ready to useas a backup in the event primary resources fail . a related aspect of redundancy is the ability toreplace and / or reconstruct hardware and software quickly and easily when necessary to preventextended periods of downtime . although there are undoubtedly additional lessons learned from the september 11 , 2001 attacks,the lessons highlighted in the previous pages provide a broad sense of the breadth and depth of theissues facing public and private sector organizations .