congress has appropriated more than $91 billion since 1972 . the formula originally applied to the act's program of grants for constructing such projects . during the 1970s , the senate strongly favored reliance on use of population factors in the allocation formula , while the house strongly advocated a needs - based approach . during the 1980s , the period when categorical eligibilities were restricted in order to emphasize water quality benefits , the senate favored needs as the basis for grants distribution , while the house position generally was to retain formulas used in prior years , which incorporate both needs and population elements . when population has been used as a factor , differences have occurred over whether a current or future year population estimate is appropriate , but there is no clear trend on this point . second , until recently , there have been gradual increases in restrictions on types of wastewater treatment projects eligible for federal assistance . beginning with a limitation that denied use of federal funds for stormwater sewer projects in 1977 , debate over categorical eligibility has had two elements . one has been fiscal: a desire to not fund types of projects with the highest costs and often the most unreliable cost estimates . the other focus has been environmental: a desire to use federal resources to assist projects which benefit water quality protection most directly . while some of these eligibility restrictions presented congress with rather straightforward choices , others have been more complex . some continue to be debated , such as whether certain types of projects should be fully eligible for federal aid or should be the responsibility of state and local governments . the 2014 cwa amendments enacted as part of wrrda revised the list of project categories that are srf - eligible to include some that have been eligible by practice , such as stormwater management and treatment , and to identify newly - eligible categories , such as decentralized wastewater treatment systems . the following table provides a generalized summary of the components of the allocation formula since 1972 . details discussed below should be consulted , because a summary table such as this cannot fully reflect factors such as "hold harmless" or "minimum share" provisions frequently included in the state - by - state distribution scheme to protect states with small allocations or to minimize potential disruptions when formula changes were adopted . the term "total needs" refers to funding needs identified by states for all categories of projects and water quality activities eligible for assistance . the term "partial needs" refers to a subset of eligible project categories , primarily construction or upgrades to comply with the act's minimum requirement that municipalities achieve secondary treatment of wastewater . since adoption of the allocation formula that has governed distribution of clean water act assistance since 1987 , epa and the states have produced seven updated needs surveys ( in 1988 , 1992 , 1996 , 2000 , 2004 , 2008 , and 2012 ) . in addition , updated population information became available through three subsequent decennial censuses ( in 1990 , 2000 , and 2010 ) .