who should conduct the training ? the law specifies that training of federal flight deck officers was to begin within three months after enactment . following enactment , the tsa convened a task force to define the training programand address other implementation issues . the law provides that the training program may beadministered either by the under secretary or by a firearms training facility approved by the undersecretary . this leaves to the under secretary's discretion whether the training will be provided bytsa facilities and staff , by facilities and staff of other federal law enforcement agencies ororganizations , or by contractor facilities . one advantage of using tsa facilities is that doing socould maximize standardization of training for pilots and compliance with the standards andguidelines established by the under secretary . it could also improve coordination of training andprocedures between federal flight deck officers and federal air marshals who will need to coordinateand communicate effectively when dealing with in - flight situations that may arise . however , tsatraining facilities may become overburdened if large numbers of pilots wish to participate in theprogram . tsa facilities and staff may lack the ability to administer training in a timely manner thatmeets scheduling constraints of the pilots , especially given that the pilots will need to complete thistraining during their time off . one alternative that has been considered is to use federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) training facilities . in december 2001 , the fbi released its proposal for training airline pilots termed the"cockpit protection program. the advantage of this plan is that it is already well defined andincludes assessments of the facility and staff requirements needed to administer the training . thedisadvantage of this program is that it removes the training from the direct control of the tsa , whowould instead assume an oversight role to ensure that training standards established by the undersecretary are maintained . also , this arrangement may not offer the opportunity for specific trainingregarding the coordination of duties and responsibilities between federal flight deck officers andfederal air marshals . another federal entity named as possible provider of training for federal flightdeck officers is the federal law enforcement training center ( fletc ) which has facilities inglynco , georgia ; charleston , south carolina ; and artesia , new mexico . these facilities mayprovide capabilities to train larger groups of pilots at locations that may be more convenient to some,but like the fbi facilities , these facilities may have limited oversight by tsa and may not offer theopportunity for training on coordination with federal air marshals . using contractor facilities and / or contractor staff to administer training to federal flight deck officers are also options , but ones that pose several challenges . extensive oversight of contractorprovided training may be necessary to ensure that established curriculum and qualifications standardsare maintained . if multiple contracts are used to train federal flight deck officers , standardizationof training across vendors may be difficult to maintain . one advantage of using contract training forthe program might be the reduction of capital investment for facilities and personnel . a prototype training program was held in april , 2003 used fletc facilities in glynco , georgia to train an initial group of 48 pilots .