massaro , john . crs report rl31989 . supreme court appointment process: roles of the president , judiciary committee , and senate , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl32821 . the chief justice of the united states: responsibilities of the office and process for appointment , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl33247 , supreme court nominations: senate floor procedure and practice , 1789-2011 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl33225 , supreme court nominations , 1789 to the present: actions by the senate , the judiciary committee , and the president , by [author name scrubbed] and maureen bearden ( pdf ) . abraham , henry j . justices , presidents , and senators: a history of the u.s. supreme court appointments from washington to clinton , 4 th ed . ( lanham , md: rowman & littlefield , 1999 ) . ginsburg , ruth bader . "confirming supreme court justices: thoughts on the second opinion rendered by the senate. university of illinois law review , vol . 1988 , pp . greenburg , jan crawford . supreme conflict: the inside story of the struggle for control of the united states supreme court ( new york: penguin press , 2007 ) . harris , joseph p. the advice and consent of the senate: a study of the confirmation of appointments by the united states senate ( new york: greenwood press , 1968 ) . jacobstein , j. myron , and roy m. mersky . the rejected: sketches of the 26 men nominated for the supreme court but not confirmed by the senate ( milpitas , ca: toucan valley publications , 1993 ) . ( note: the authors do not include the paterson nomination. ) maltese , john anthony . the selling of supreme court nominees ( baltimore , md: the johns hopkins university press , 1995 ) . supremely political: the role of ideology and presidential management in unsuccessful supreme court nominations ( albany , ny: state university of new york press , 1990 ) . massey , calvin r. "getting there: a brief history of the politics of supreme court appointments. hastings constitutional law quarterly , vol . 19 ( fall 1991 ) , pp . sulfridge , wayne . "ideology as a factor in senate consideration of supreme court nominations. the journal of politics , vol . 2 ( may 1980 ) , pp . thorpe , james a . "the appearance of supreme court nominees before the senate judiciary committee. in the first branch of american government: the united states congress and its relations to the executive and judiciary , 1789-1989 , vol . 2 , joel sibley , ed . ( brooklyn , ny: carlson , 1991 ) , pp . tulis , jeffrey k. "the appointment power: constitutional abdication: the senate , the president , and appointments to the supreme court. case western reserve law review , vol . a list of additional relevant literature is also provided . the constitution of the united states provides for the appointment of a justice to the supreme court in article ii , section 2 .