else . crs report rs21327 . concurrent receipt of military retirement and va disability benefits: budgetary issues , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs21218 . crusader xm2001 self - propelled howitzer: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and steven r. bowman . crs report rl31456 . defense cleanup and environmental programs: authorization and appropriations for fy2003 , by david michael bearden . crs issue brief ib10062 . defense research: dod's research , development , test and evaluation program , by john dimitri moteff . crs report rl31415 . the endangered species act , migratory bird treaty act , and department of defense readiness activities: current law and legislativeproposals , by [author name scrubbed] . crs issue brief ib93103 . military medical care services: questions and answers , by richard a . best , jr. crs issue brief ib10089 . military pay and benefits: key questions and answers , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report 95-469 ( pdf ) . military retirement and veterans' compensation: concurrent receipt issues , by robert goldich and carolyn merck . crs issue brief ib85159 . military retirement: major legislative issues , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl31111 . missile defense: the current debate , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs20535 . navy ship procurement rate and the planned size of the navy: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs20643 . navy cvnx aircraft carrier program: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs21059 . navy dd ( x ) future surface combatant program: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . crs issue brief ib94040 . peacekeeping: issues of u.s. military involvement , by nina maria serafino . crs report rl31297 ( pdf ) . recruiting and retention in the active component military , by [author name scrubbed] . crs issue brief ib92115 . tactical aircraft modernization: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl31187 ( pdf ) . terrorism funding: congressional debate on emergency supplemental allocations , by [author name scrubbed] and larry q. nowels . crs report rs21133 ( pdf ) . the nuclear posture review: overview and emerging issues , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl31384 . v - 22 osprey tilt - rotor aircraft , by [author name scrubbed] . congress provides funding for national defense programs in several annualappropriations measures , the largest of which is the defense appropriations bill . congress also acts every year on a national defense authorization bill , whichauthorizes programs funded in all of the regular appropriations measures . theauthorization bill addresses defense programs in almost precisely the same level ofdetail as the defense - related appropriations , and congressional debate about majordefense policy and funding issues usually occurs mainly in action on theauthorization . because the defense authorization and appropriations bills are soclosely related , this report tracks congressional action on both measures .