these activities have often been similar to those supported under hea title vi . a revised strategy has been announced for institutional grants beginning in 2003 . this new strategy includes accelerated pursuit of a flagship language initiative — grants focused on supporting advanced study of the most critical foreign languages — initiated in 2002 and explicitly authorized by p.l . 107-306 , the intelligence authorization act for fy2003 . the national security education program ( nsep ) is intended to complement , and not duplicate , the foreign language and area studies programs authorized under hea title vi and other legislation . unique elements of the nsep , compared to other federal programs of aid to international education or exchange , include its service requirement and ( with the exception of the " gilman international scholarship program " described below ) its support of travel grants to undergraduate students . however , there may be greater potential for overlap between the nsep institutional grants and hea title vi national and language resource center grants . the nsep is administered by the department of defense's national defense university , under the guidance of a national security education board ( nseb ) . the higher education amendments of 1998 ( p.l . 105-244 ) authorized title vi at "such sums as necessary" through december 31 , 2005 . the statutory authorities in the hea expired at the end of fy2004 ; however , they have been recently extended and currently remain effective . the last specific authorization was for fy1999 , at $80 million for part a , $18 million for part b , and $10 million for part c. the hea also provides that no more than 10% of part a funds may be used for undergraduate international studies and foreign language programs . as can be seen in table 1 , while hea title vi authorizes a relatively large number of distinct activities , approximately three - fifths of the funds are used for two of these programs: national language and area centers ( nlacs ) and flas fellowships . further , since it may be impossible to predict which additional nations will generate such concern in the future , and substantial time is required to develop the necessary human capital , it is important to provide ongoing support for instruction in all of the world's major languages and cultures , and even many of the minor ones . so , the question is not whether support is important for instruction in "critical" foreign languages and cultures , typically defined as those in which there is a major security or trade interest , and especially the subset of these that are infrequently taught in the nation's colleges and universities . rather it may be questioned whether such support should be provided specifically by the federal government and if so , whether it should be focused on the nation's colleges and universities , on federally - operated institutions which are dedicated to providing instruction to government employees , or both .