the president needs help . his immediate staff assistance is entirely inadequate . he should be given a small number of executive assistants who would be his direct aides in dealing with the managerial agencies and administrative departments of the government . these assistants , probably not exceeding six in number , would be in addition to the present secretaries , who deal with the public , with the congress , and with the press and radio . these aides would have no power to make decisions or issue instructions in their own right . they would not be interposed between the president and the heads of his departments . they would not be assistant presidents in any sense . their function would be , when any matter was presented to the president for action affecting any part of the administrative work of the government , to assist him in obtaining quickly and without delay all pertinent information possessed by any of the executive departments so as to guide him in making his responsible decisions ; and then when decisions have been made , to assist him in seeing to it that every administrative department and agency affected is promptly informed . their effectiveness in assisting the president will , we think , be directly proportional to their ability to discharge their functions with restraint . they would remain in the background , issue no orders , make no decisions , emit no public statements . men for these positions should be carefully chosen by the president from within and without the government . they should be men in whom the president has personal confidence and whose character and attitude is [sic] such that they would not attempt to exercise power on their own account . they should be possessed of high competence , great physical vigor , and a passion for anonymity . they should be installed in the white house itself , directly accessible to the president . in the selection of these aides , the president should be free to call on departments from time to time for the assignment of persons who , after a tour of duty as his aides , might be restored to their old positions . in addition to the proposed addition of six assistants to the president's staff , the committee's report also recommended vesting responsibility in the president for the continuous reorganization of the executive branch . released to congress on january 12 , 1937 , the report soon became lost in high politics . three weeks after submitting the brownlow committee's report to congress , roosevelt announced he wanted to enlarge the membership of the supreme court . his "court packing" plan not only fed congressional fears of a presidential power grab , but also so preoccupied congress that the brownlow committee's recommendations were ignored . although efforts at gaining legislative approval of the brownlow committee's recommendations lay in ruin in the spring of 1938 , the president had not deserted the cause . by july , roosevelt was meeting with brownlow and the other committee members . the panel would not be officially reassembled , but he wanted each man's help with a reorganization authority proposal .