there are general restrictions under federal law and regulations against the use of federal funds for lobbying activities . the fee is disclosed in the required reports for the period "that the registrant becomes entitled to it. those properly registered under the lobbying disclosure act are exempt from registering under the foreign agents registration act . under amendments adopted in 2007 , the registrations and supplemental statements from foreign agents under fara will now be available on - line in a searchable , sortable , and downloadable format . the foreign agents registration act , as amended by the lobbying disclosure act of 1995 , and its amendments , provides that "agents of a foreign principal" must file a registration statement not with the clerk of the house or the secretary of the senate , but with the attorney general listing detailed financial and business information , must file and label all informational materials , and keep detailed books and records open to inspection by public officials . an "agent" is defined in the law as one who acts "at the order , request , or under the direction or control , of a foreign principal , or of a person any of whose activities are directly or indirectly supervised , directed , controlled , financed , or subsidized in whole or in part by a foreign principal...." the types of activities on behalf of a "foreign principal" that would subject an "agent" to coverage under the act include "political activities" ; acting as a "public relations counsel," publicity agent or political consultant ; collecting or disbursing contributions for the foreign principal ; and representing the interests of the foreign principal "before any agency or official of the government of the united states. the term "political activities" also includes activities which may generally be characterized as among those commonly considered to be "lobbying" activities: the term "political activities" means any activity that the person engaging in believes will , or that the person intends to , in any way influence any agency or official of the government of the united states or any section of the public within the united states with reference to formulating , adopting , or changing the domestic or foreign policies of the united states... . there are several exemptions to the registration and record - keeping requirements of the foreign agents registration act , including exemptions for the official activities of diplomats and consular officers and the activities of certain officials of foreign governments ; exemptions for persons engaging only in "private and nonpolitical activities in furtherance of bona fide trade or commerce" for such foreign principal ; and an exemption for certain legal representation of foreign principals by attorneys in judicial or on - the - record , formal agency proceedings . a contingency fee arrangement for "lobbying" activities before congress is one in which the payment for such activities is contingent upon the success of the lobbying efforts to influence the legislative process by having legislation adopted or defeated in the united states congress . there is no statute under federal law which expressly addresses the issue of contingency fees with respect to all lobbying activities before the congress .