second , a consumer does not have a single credit score . as noted above , creditor / lenders formulate or contract with third parties for credit score algorithms that reflect the creditor / lender's particular needs . as a consequence , consumers may have many credit scores , reflecting various algorithms that weigh factors differently . requests to block information must also be referred to other cras . victims of identity theft may request information about the alleged crime . a business entity is required , upon request and subject to verification of the victim's identity , to provide copies of application and business transaction records evidencing any transaction alleged to be a result of identity theft to the victim without charge or to any law enforcement agency investigating the theft and authorized by the victim to receive the records in question . pursuant to fact act amendments in 2003 , the federal agencies regulating the financial services industry promulgated guidelines and regulations , known as the red flags rule , requiring financial institutions and creditors to establish reasonable policies and procedures to prevent identity theft . the red flags rule had an effective date of january 1 , 2008 , and a mandatory compliance date of november 1 , 2008 , but the mandatory compliance date was delayed several times due in part to controversy over the scope of entities covered by the rule as creditors . the final mandatory compliance date was december 31 , 2010 , permitting time for congress to enact the red flag program clarification act of 2010 , clarifying that creditors covered by the rule do not include businesses that advance funds for expenses incidental to the services they offer , such as lawyers , doctors , dentists , etc . creditors subject to the rule are entities that "regularly and in the ordinary course of business" obtain credit reports in connection with credit transactions , furnish information to cras in connection with credit transactions , and extend credit based on an obligation to repay . various proposals have been made in the 113 th congress regarding regulating credit report information and use . 645 would restrict using credit report information for employment unless an employee's personal creditworthiness is relevant to employment responsibilities . 1002 / s. 471 would require cras to provide one free credit score a year to a consumer upon his or her request in addition to the free annual credit report that cras must currently provide to consumers . in addition , because lenders increasingly use credit scores as thresholds for loan eligibility as well as to determine appropriate loan terms , there has been interest in congress in regulating how credit scores are calculated . for example , s. 160 would bar including certain medical debt in credit reports on the grounds that people generally do not intentionally incur medical or health care expenses but rather incur them through "no fault of the consumer" or by an "act of god. by restricting medical debt that has been in collection and subsequently paid or settled from being included in credit reports , s. 160 would effectively exclude such medical debt from credit score calculations .