an a - z index of u.s. government departments and agencies is available at the website above . the list does not include operational or technical assistance that some agencies provide in emergency or disaster situations . this report only identifies programs frequently used to provide financial assistance in the disaster response and recovery process . for programs summarized in this report , cfda program numbers are given ( which are searchable at the "assistance listings" domain at beta.sam.gov ) . full assistance listing descriptions , updated by departments and agencies , cover authorizing legislation , objectives , and eligibility and compliance requirements . for current appropriations and additional information , users can contact crs analysts , or departments and agencies . disaster assistance.gov http: / / www.disasterassistance.gov / disasterassitance.gov provides information on how help might be obtained from the u.s. government before , during , and after a disaster . the website includes tools to find , apply for , and check the status of assistance by category or agency . the website also includes disaster - related news feeds and information on community resources . assistance listings at beta.sam.gov https: / / beta.sam.gov / official descriptions of more than 2,200 federal assistance programs , including disaster and recovery grants and loans , can be found on beta.sam.gov . the website is currently in beta , and it houses federal assistance listings previously found on the now - retired catalog of federal domestic assistance ( cfda ) . it provides brief descriptive information to help congressional offices determine which programs merit further consideration in the planning , organization , or execution of the disaster response and recovery process . most of the programs listed here are authorized as assistance programs and are listed at the general services administration ( gsa ) website beta.sam.gov . it is also not inclusive of all forms of financial disaster assistance that may be available to every jurisdiction in every circumstance , as unique factors often trigger unique forms of assistance . crs report rs22022 , disaster unemployment assistance ( dua ) , by julie m. whittaker crs report r41309 , the sba disaster loan program: overview and possible issues for congress , by bruce r. lindsay crs report rs21212 , agricultural disaster assistance , by megan stubbs crs report r42854 , emergency assistance for agricultural land rehabilitation , by megan stubbs crs in focus if10565 , federal disaster assistance for agriculture , by megan stubbs crs in focus if10730 , tax policy and disaster recovery , by molly f. sherlock crs report r44808 , federal disaster assistance: the national flood insurance program and other federal disaster assistance programs available to individuals and households after a flood , by diane p. horn crs insight in11094 , the evolving use of disaster housing assistance and the roles of the disaster housing assistance program ( dhap ) and the individuals and households program ( ihp ) , by elizabeth m. webster crs insight in11054 , disaster housing assistance: homeland security issues in the 116th congress , by elizabeth m. webster crs insight in11106 , community disaster loans: homeland security issues in the 116th congress , by michael h. cecir .