both measures are examined here . critics maintain that the average effective rate of the regular credit is too low to support levels of business investment in research commensurate with its economic benefits . to substantiate this claim , they point to another study by cox , one that focused on the efficacy of the research tax credit . is there any evidence to support these claims ? the regular credit's incentive effect appears to vary widely among firms investing in qualified research , including those that gradually but steadily increase their investment over an extended period . evidence for such variation can be found in a number of sources , including a 1996 study by economist william cox that identified the corporations from a large group of domestic corporations with sizable research budgets in 1994 that should have been able to claim the regular credit . ( the asc did not exist at that time. ) the study was based on a sample of 900 publicly traded u.s. - based companies with the largest r&d budgets , culled from a database maintained by compustat , inc . under the reasonable assumption that qres for these firms were equal to 70% of their reported r&d spending for 1994 , cox determined that 62.5% of the firms could be considered established firms for the purpose of claiming the regular credit , as they had both business revenue and qres in three of the years from 1984 to 1988 ; the remainder were treated as start - up firms . cox found that 78% of the 900 firms in the sample ( 44.4% were established firms and 33.5% start - up firms ) could have claimed the credit in 1994 , while 22% could have claimed no credit ( 18% of established firms and 4% of start - up firms ) . he also found that 34% of all firms ( 32.3% were established firms and 1.7% start - up firms ) had qres greater than their base amounts but less than twice those amounts , allowing them to claim credits with a marginal effective rate of 13% , and that 43.8% of all firms had qres greater than double their base amounts , allowing them to claim credits with a marginal effective rate of 6.5% . these rates measure the reduction in the after - tax cost of an additional dollar of qualified research as a result of taking the regular credit . in addition , cox found that some of the most research - intensive firms ( as measured by their spending on r&d as a share of revenue ) could claim either no credit or credits with a marginal effective rate half as large as the rate for the credits that could be claimed by firms with much lower propensities to invest in r&d . the results showed that the regular credit was most beneficial to firms whose research intensities had risen since their base periods , and least beneficial to firms whose research intensities had changed little or not at all , or had shrunk , since their base periods .