section 1 . short title ( h.r . ( 6 ) the act may becited as the "class actionfairness act of 2003. . this section also states that it amends title 28 of the united states code . section 2 . findings and purposes of the act . both bills set out congress' findings describing the: ( 1 ) circumstances in which class actions arevaluable to our legal system ; ( 2 ) abuses of the class action process that have harmed class memberswith legitimate claims and defendants that have acted responsibly , adversely affected interstatecommerce , and undermined public respect for our judicial system ; ( 3 ) the manner by which classmembers have been harmed by a number of actions taken by plaintiffs' lawyers , which provide littleor no benefit to class members as a whole , including ( i ) plaintiffs' lawyers receiving large fees , whileclass members are left with coupons or other awards of little or no value , ( ii ) unjustified rewardsmade to certain plaintiffs at the expense of other class members , and ( iii ) confusing published noticesthat prevent class members from being able to fully understand and effectively exercise their rights ; ( 4 ) abuses in class actions which undermine the national judicial system , the free flow of interstatecommerce , and the concept of diversity jurisdiction as intended by the framers of the united statesconstitution , in that state and local courts are ( i ) keeping cases of national importance out of federalcourt , ( ii ) sometimes acting in ways that demonstrate bias against out - of - state defendants , and ( iii ) making judgments that impose their view of the law on other states and bind the rights of theresidents of those states . section 3 . in particular , section 3 would add the following: section 1711-judicial scrutiny of coupon and other noncash settlements ( section 1712 in s. 274 / s . 1751 ) ( 7 ) this provision is aimed at certain proposed settlements of class actions , in which the plaintiffs' lawyer and the defendant work out a settlement that provides class members with essentiallyvalueless coupons while rewarding the lawyers with substantial attorneys' fees . to address thisproblem , this section provides that a judge "may approve a proposed settlement under which theclass would receive noncash benefits or would otherwise be required to expend funds in order toobtain part or all of the proposed benefits only after a hearing to determine whether , and making awritten finding that , the settlement is fair , reasonable , and adequate for class members. s. 2062 would require that attorneys fees be based either on ( a ) the proportionate value of the coupons actually redeemed by class members or ( b ) the hours actually billed inpresenting the class action . section 1712-protection against loss by class members ( section 1713 in s. 274 / s .