circuit . the accused would not be permitted to appeal an adverse interlocutory ruling . the following charts provide a comparison of the proposed military tribunals under the regulations issued by the department of defense , standard procedures for general courts - martial under the manual for courts - martial , and military tribunals as proposed by h.r . table 1 compares the legal authorities for establishing military tribunals , the jurisdiction over persons and offenses , and the structures of the tribunals . table 2 , which compares procedural safeguards incorporated in the dod regulations and the ucmj , follows the same order and format used in crs report rl31262 , selected procedural safeguards in federal , military , and international courts , in order to facilitate comparison of the proposed legislation to safeguards provided in federal court , the international military tribunals that tried world war ii crimes at nuremberg and tokyo , and contemporary ad hoc tribunals set up by the un security council to try crimes associated with hostilities in the former yugoslavia and rwanda . constitution. 6054 , s. 3886 , and s. 3861 provide that "[a]n otherwise admissible statement , including a statement allegedly obtained by coercion , shall not be admitted in evidence in a military commission under this chapter if the military judge finds that the circumstances under which the statement was made render the statement unreliable or lacking in probative value. all of the bills under discussion include provisions for the protection of classified information , generally permitting the substitution of redacted documents , unclassified summaries of documents , or statements setting forth what the classified information would tend to prove . s. 3901 contains procedures that are similar to those provided in military rule of evidence 505 for application at courts - martial . classified information is to be protected during all stages of proceedings and is privileged from disclosure for national security purposes . whenever the original classification authority or head of the agency concerned certifies in writing that particular evidence and its sources have been declassified to the maximum extent possible , the military judge may authorize , "to the extent practicable in accordance with the rules applicable in trials by court - martial," the "deletion of specified items of classified information from documents made available to the accused" ; the substitution of a "portion or summary of the information" ; or "the substitution of a statement admitting relevant facts that the classified information would tend to prove. the military judge must consider a claim of privilege and review any supporting materials in camera , and is not permitted to disclose the privileged information to the accused . proposed 10 u.s.c . ยง 949d ( c ) ( 4 ) . similar substitutions would be permissible in the context of discovery ( see infra ) . proposed 10 u.s.c . ยง 949j ( c ) . s. 3901 provides a guarantee that the accused must have the right to "examine and respond to all evidence considered by the military commission on the issue of guilt or innocence and for sentencing," and to "be present at all sessions of the military commission ( other than those for deliberations or voting ) , except when excluded under section 949d of this title.