both bills remained in committee . in an effort to reconcile the two bills , s. 1456 was modified , taking some of the house language . the rewritten bill , however , was never introduced . the bush administration offered qualified support for both bills . in president bush's initial proposal to establish a new department of homeland security , part of which proposed establishing a critical infrastructure protection function , a foia exemption was included for information held by the department . subsequently , both the house and senate bills establishing the new department ( h.r . 5005 and s. 2452 , respectively ) included more detailed language exempting critical infrastructure information from foia . the house language also offered more extensive protections: see " legislative responses ," below . in 1966 , during floor debate on passage of the freedom of information act ( foia ) , representative rumsfeld quoted james madison when he said , knowledge will forever govern ignorance . and a people who mean to be their own governors , must arm themselves with the power knowledge gives . a popular government without popular information or the means of acquiring it , is but a prologue to a farce or a tragedy , or perhaps both . the sentiments expressed by madison in 1822 are prescient today . the populace desires knowledge about the activities of its government in order to ensure accountability and oversight . the government desires information from owners and operators of critical infrastructures in order to protect persons and assets in the war on terrorism . the terrorist attacks of september 11 have prompted a reevaluation of how to balance public access to information with the need for safety and security . the federal government , since its beginnings , has delegated to agency heads the basic authority to control the papers and documents of their departments . through the housekeeping statute of 1789 , federal agencies have kept control of the disclosure of their files . the administrative procedure act ( apa ) of 1946 had a slight impact upon departmental control of agency information . instances were documented , however , where both the housekeeping statute and the administrative procedure act had been used as excuses for withholding information , and concern mounted that the apa had become a loophole for agency secrecy permitting agency heads to exercise broad , unrestrained powers of a discretionary nature . the housekeeping statute was amended to clarify that it does not authorize withholding information from the public or limiting the availability of records to the public . the amendment of the housekeeping statute did not produce the results sought by advocates of greater public access to public information . fees for search , review , or copying of materials may be imposed ; also , for some types of requesters , fees may be reduced or waived . the foia was amended in 1996 to provide for public access to information in an electronic form or format . in 2001 , agency annual reports indicated that they received approximately 1.9 million foia requests .