appendix a . measuring "bang for the buck" the rental price of capital , with an investment credit ( without a basis adjustment ) is: ( 1 ) where c is the price of capital , r is the after tax rate of return to corporate investment , u is the corporate tax rate , d is the economic depreciation rate , z is the present value of depreciation deductions and k is the investment tax credit . take logs and differentiate this expression with respect to k , assuming an initial rate of the credit of zero , the following expression for the percentage change in the cost of capital is obtained: ( 2 ) denote the elasticity of investment with respect to the price of capital as ( 3 ) , where e is the elasticity and i is investment . by substituting ( 2 ) into ( 3 ) and rearranging , obtained is: ( 4 ) this incentive can also be related to the revenue cost , which is , hence the ratio of stimulus per dollar of revenue loss is . this stimulus is bigger for shorter lived assets ( assuming the elasticities are the same ) . compare the effect of a rate reduction . differentiating ( 1 ) with respect to u we obtain , dividing by c and substituting into ( 4 ) , the effect on investment of a rate reduction is obtained: ( 5 ) how does this compare with revenue ? it expired in 2004 . the 2008 stimulus proposal ( p.l . 110 - 185 ) returned to bonus depreciation as a stimulus . historically , corporate rate changes have tended not to be used for counter - cyclical purposes . the interest in corporate tax rate cuts in 2002 appears associated with arguments about the effects of tax changes on stock markets . ( a similar argument was made for dividend and capital gains tax cuts. ) the repeal of the corporate alternative minimum tax , included in an earlier version of h.r . 3090 in 2001 , is similar to a corporate tax rate in some respects , but its effects on marginal investments are uncertain and could possibly discourage investment . a net operating loss carryback provides tax benefits in the same way as a rate cut , but does not stimulate investment , except to the extent it makes the firm able to use other stimulus provisions such as bonus depreciation . it benefits less profitable firms , while a rate reduction benefits more profitable ones ( or at least firms with tax liability ) . many economists expressed uncertainty about the desirability of an additional fiscal stimulus during the 2002-2003 period and while many economists supported a stimulus more recently in 2008 , some uncertainty remained . moreover , economists have , in general , become more skeptical of fiscal policy as a counter - cyclical tool , particularly through the mechanism of tax cuts . because of lags in decision - making and administrative lags in getting tax cuts to individuals , a fiscal stimulus enacted through a tax cut can be poorly timed .