that is , the budget deficit is equal to the interest payment . in this example , the debt would grow each year by an amount equal to the interest cost of financing the debt ; thus the growth rate of the debt would equal the interest rate . at the end of 2009 that ratio was 53% . as long as the federal debt grows faster than gdp , however , interest payments on that debt will constitute an ever - increasing share of total federal spending and of gdp . if investors should come to expect that the debt would grow faster then gdp indefinitely , and that the debt - to - gdp ratio would continue to rise , they might eventually become unwilling to buy new issues of federal debt . in that case , the federal reserve might be the only buyer and that would likely lead to an accelerating rate of inflation . in the long run , the relationship between the growth rate of the federal debt and the overall rate of economic growth is important . perpetual debt growth in excess of the rate of economic growth is an inherently unstable situation . it is likely that investors would become unwilling to buy federal debt issues long before all of gdp was accounted for by the interest payment on the federal debt , because of growing doubts about the government's ability to raise sufficient revenue to pay just the interest on that debt . whether the debt - to - gdp ratio is on such an explosive path depends on the rate of interest and the rate of growth of gdp . consider the case where the budget is in balance except for the interest payment on the debt . if the interest rate on the federal debt remained above the economic growth rate , then the debt would grow faster than gdp and the ratio of debt to national output would rise . the converse is also true ; as long as the interest rate on the debt remains below the growth rate of gdp , then the ratio of debt to income will fall . thus even with a budget deficit , the ratio of debt to national income can fall . for the united states , the previous recent peak level of the federal debt relative to gdp was reached in 1993 at 49.3% , when the budget deficit was $255 billion . in 1994 , even though the deficit was still over $200 billion , the debt fell relative to gdp . by 2001 , federal debt had fallen to a low of 32.5% of gdp . the strength or weakness of the overall economy substantially affects the levels of outlays and receipts . the budget also has significant effects on the economy , both in terms of how fast the economy grows , and also in terms of the overall allocation of resources . perhaps the most obvious effect of the federal government budget surpluses of the 1990s was a decline in the amount of federal debt .