two provisions of h.r . 5010 , the fy2003 dod appropriations , required the demilitarization of surplus firearms and made it unlawful for dod to transfer certain armor - piercing ammunition to any nongovernmental entity , unless the ammunition was rendered incapable of reuse . the senate version of the fy2002 dod appropriations bill would have , if enacted , required the demilitarization of surplus firearms . the senate - version of the fy2002 dod authorization bill would have made it unlawful for any person to possess equipment not fully demilitarized ; that legislation became a provision known as section 1062 of senate bill 1438 , the senate - version of the fy2002 national defense authorization bill . section 1062 was defeated in the conference committee . in 1998 , congress directed dod to draft proposed legislation designed to clarify the authority of the federal government to recover significant military equipment released without adequate demilitarization ; dod's legislative proposal eventually became known as section 1062 . section 1062 would have required the secretary of defense to establish regulatory standards to govern the demilitarization of equipment not covered under current demilitarization policy , and do the following: ( 1 ) define classes of military equipment requiring demilitarization before disposal , and what constitutes demilitarization for each class of significant military equipment ; ( 2 ) ensure that the demilitarized equipment would not pose a significant risk to public safety , and have no uniquely military capability or significant capability for use as a weapon ; ( 3 ) place the burden of proof of ownership of such military weapons and equipment on the person in possession of the equipment ( and not on the federal government ) ; ( 4 ) provide compensation to those persons whose property was confiscated by the federal government ; ( 5 ) grant the secretary of defense the authority to delegate broad powers to the attorney general to investigate suspected violations , including inspection and seizure of the property . according to dod , the senate armed services committee made some changes to its original legislative proposal by incorporating the recommendations of the defense science board task force . the task force studied the issue and issued a report titled "control of military excess and surplus materiel. in the report , the task force identified six sources of potential leaks of materiel requiring demilitarization and control , and found that privately - owned museums constituted the most significant source of leakage . the task force concluded that no single agency had the lead authority or responsibility for controlling such equipment , which resulted in overlaps and gaps in coverage , that law enforcement efforts were largely resource - dependent , and that the demilitarization coding process was too complicated . several policy options are available to congress to reexamine the current united states demilitarization policy . they include ( 1 ) permit selective exemption ; ( 2 ) appoint one agency as executive program agent for all federal agencies ; ( 3 ) convene an independent panel ; ( 4 ) conduct hearings ; and ( 5 ) take no action .