navy department . the idea of modernizing congressional committee structure and operations embodied in the legislative reorganization act was paralleled by an interest in developing a more modern federal administrative apparatus to supplant the one that had grown in episodic bursts to meet the challenges of the depression and world war ii . because appropriations bills continued to be organized along administrative lines , these changes in the executive branch had an impact on appropriations subcommittee structure . the four changes in party control of the house between 1947 and 1955 also contributed to an environment conducive to revision of appropriations subcommittee jurisdiction . this evolution saw the number of subcommittees fluctuate between a low of 10 and a high of 15 . despite this fluctuation , it appears that the appropriations committees generally continued the practice of each subcommittee being responsible for drafting one of the regular appropriations bills . with the creation of the transportation subcommittee by the house appropriations committee in 1967 , the total number of appropriations subcommittees in the house stabilized at 13 . the last subcommittee added in the senate was the foreign operations subcommittee in 1969 , bringing the total in that body to 14 . once the subcommittee on deficiencies in the senate was eliminated at the end of the 91 st congress ( 1970 ) , the two chambers' appropriations subcommittee structures both totaled 13 and remained parallel during this period . there were no additions , and few major changes , in the subcommittee structure of either the house or senate appropriations committees between 1971 and 2002 . the changes that did occur were primarily changes in subcommittee names to reflect changes in agency and departmental status . for example , the title of the independent offices bill evolved with the creation of the departments of housing and urban development in 1965 and veterans' affairs in 1988 , the public works bill became known as the energy and water bill after the creation of the department of energy in 1977 , and the title of the departments of labor and health education and welfare was modified to reflect the creation of a separate department of education in 1979 . however , these changes did not represent major shifts in appropriations subcommittee jurisdictions . at the beginning of the 107 th congress , the house and senate had the following 13 subcommittees: 1 . subcommittee on agriculture , rural development , and related agencies ; 2 . subcommittee on commerce , justice , state , and judiciary ; 3 . subcommittee on defense ; 4 . subcommittee on the district of columbia ; 5 . subcommittee on energy and water development ; 6 . subcommittee on foreign operations ; 7 . subcommittee on interior and related agencies ; 8 . subcommittee on labor , health and human services , education , and related agencies ; 9 . subcommittee on legislative branch ; 10 . subcommittee on military construction ; 11 . subcommittee on transportation ; 12 . reorganization can also be undertaken to adapt to changes in congressional priorities . for example , in the reorganization that occurred at the start of the 109 th congress , both the house and the senate undertook a major change in subcommittee structure .