reg . 23302 ) published in1986 by the white house office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) . one of its keyprinciples is that genetically engineered products should continue to be regulated according to theircharacteristics and unique features - - not according to their method of production . thus , if a foodproduct produced through biotechnology is determined to be substantially equivalent to oneproduced by more conventional means , that food is subject to no additional ( or no different ) regulatory processes . once approved , food products do not have to be labeled as to whether or notthey contain any genetically modified organisms ( gmos ) , except to the extent a ge food issubstantially different ( eg , contains an allergen or has a changed nutritional content ) . however,marketers are free to make such claims , one way or the other , so long as the labeling is truthful . theframework maintains that new biotechnology products are regulated under existing federal statutoryauthorities , all of which were conceived and enacted before the advent of commercial agriculturalbiotechnology . ( 3 ) the problem for u.s. agriculture is that many countries remain wary of agricultural biotechnology , including those in the european union ( eu ) , where consumer and environmentalorganizations have been vocal in expressing concerns about the safety of ge crops and animals . theeu and other important u.s. trading partners have adopted widely divergent approaches toregulating biotechnology . as a result , u.s. exporters are encountering barriers to their products inthese markets . for example , since 1998 , the eu , the fourth largest foreign market for u.s. agricultural products , has maintained a de facto moratorium on approvals of new ge crop varieties . in may2003 , the united states , canada , and argentina began a formal challenge of the eu policy in theworld trade organization ( wto ) , contending that it violates international trade agreements and alsohas fueled unwarranted concerns about the safety of agricultural biotechnology throughout the world ( see page 9 ) . the eu counters that it must protect its consumers by exercising the so - calledprecautionary approach , which says that if scientific evidence is insufficient or inconclusiveregarding a practice's or product's potential dangers to human or environmental health , it should bemore vigorously regulated or even prohibited if there are reasonable grounds for concern , thusproviding a safeguard against future unforeseen problems . under this approach - - which is alsobeing emulated somewhat in other important u.s. markets such as japan and south korea , forexample - - the products of biotechnology are deemed to be inherently different than theirconventional counterparts . even some countries that grow ge crops are imposing their own approval and labeling regulations for gmos . for example , china is planting its own ge cotton and other crops , but hasimposed a temporary gmo import regime while it develops permanent new rules for approval andlabeling of gmo farm products . this has created uncertainty about continuing access to thisimportant u.s. export market . some u.s. producers , who otherwise generally have supported biotechnology , have expressed trepidation about expansion to more ge varieties due to such foreign market uncertainties .