tanf . the welfare reform law provides fixed block grants ( $16.5 billion annually through fy2002 ) for state - designed programs of time - limitedand work - conditioned aid to families with children . ( 5 ) since its implementation , increasing amountsof tanf funding have been used for supporting child care , both through transfers to the ccdf , andby funding child care within the tanf system itself . greater child care expenditures have been fueled by reducedcash welfare caseloads through fy2000 ; will these spending trends continue if cash welfarecaseloads level off or rise ? to what extent are ccdf funds used to serve welfare ( tanf ) families ? even with respect to the funds targeted specifically for child care ( i.e. , the ccdf ) the implications for states differ depending on whether funds are provided via the mandatory ordiscretionary stream . as described earlier , the mandatory and discretionary portions of the ccdfare currently allocated among states according to different formulas , based on different factors . consequently , the same amount of funding will translate into different allocation amounts for states,depending on the funding stream from which the money is allocated . furthermore , mandatory fundsbring with them state matching requirements ( for the non - "guaranteed" portion ) . of course , whetherstates actually spend state funds in order to access the available federal mandatory funds depends oneach state's individual decision to participate in the matching program . for example , michigan hasnot always opted to access its full matching grant , but has instead applied state child careexpenditures toward meeting its tanf moe requirement . discretionary and mandatory ccdf funds also carry with them different time limits for states to obligate and spend the money . policymakers will be faced with deciding: what portion of ccdffunding should be delivered via discretionary money versus mandatory money ? should the formulasfor allocating those funds remain as they are ? should states' historical spending levels from theearly 1990s continue to serve as the basis for the fixed amount of "guaranteed" mandatory funding ? should matching requirements remain the same ? how long should states have for obligating andspending the funds ? decisions regarding states' authority to transfer funds between block grants ( i.e. , tanf funds to ccdf and ssbg ) are also expected as part of the reauthorization process . in addition to theallowable level of transfer , some critics of the status quo argue that states should be allowed totransfer tanf funds remaining from prior years , rather than only current year funds . of course , justas an economic downturn could prove to affect states' decisions to use tanf funds directly for childcare , so too could it affect their decisions to transfer funds . appendix a. fy2002 ccdf allotments , by fundingtype ( $ in millions ) source : table prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) . appendix b . transfers from tanf to ccdf , cumulatively ( fy1997-fy2000 ) and for fy2000 , by state ( with percentages of cumulative grants and fy2000tanf grant ) source : table prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) based on data provided byhhs .