 table 1 . estimates of children in economic activity , child labor , and hazardous work , 2000 ( in thousands ) source: ilo , every child counts: new global estimates on child labor table 2 . estimated number of children in worst forms of childlabor , 2000 ( in thousands ) source: ilo , every child counts: new global estimates on child labo . according to ilo estimates , the largest number of child workers under 14 years old are in theasia - pacific region . however , sub - saharan africa is estimated to have the highest proportion ofworking children , with nearly 30% of its children engaged in some form of economic activity . aboutone in three children below the age of 15 is economically active in the region . ( 6 ) the child work ratiosin other major world regions are all projected to be below 20 percent . ( 7 ) furthermore , every fourthchild in sub - saharan africa appears to start work before the age of 10 . ( 8 ) africa's relatively highpoverty rate , as well as its relatively high proportion of individuals both residing and employed inrural areas , may contribute to the large number of children at work . according to a world bankreport , child labor participation rates are much higher in rural than in urban areas , and three - quartersof working children work in family enterprises . ( 9 ) thereport further emphasizes that child labor is,and will continue to be , common in a large number of countries until poverty is substantiallyreduced . the ilo estimates that nearly half ( 48.5% ) of all economically active children were engaged in hazardous work , which it defines as "any activity or occupation which , by its nature or type has , orleads to adverse effects on the child's safety , health and moral development" . ( 10 ) much agriculturalwork is included in this category because it may involve the use of heavy machinery or exposure topesticides . an ilo report concluded that 55% of children below 12 years of age were working ina hazardous occupation or situation in 2000 . children between 12 years old and 14 years old werethe largest age group working in a hazardous occupation or situation . sixty - six percent of all childlaborers aged 12 through 14 were reported to be engaged in hazardous work . ( 11 ) the ilo chart below delineates the activity of those engaged in child labor , who comprise nearly 70% of all economically active children . an overwhelming majority ( 69.5% ) of these child laborersis engaged in hazardous work . the deceptively small percentage of child laborers ( 3.4% ) engagedin the "worst forms of child labor" represents 8.4 million children . the remaining 27% of the childlaborers were not working in either hazardous conditions or the worst forms of child labor , but theywere still engaged in forms of child labor which , according to the ilo , "must be abolished. ( 12 ) source: ilo , every child counts: new global estimates on child labor .