new 18 u.s.c . sentencing commission to review and amend the sentencingguidelines for obstruction of justice and violations of 18 u.s.c . â§â§ 1519 and 1520 to ensure that theyare sufficient to deter and punish such offenses . in addition , it directs the commission to providea specific offense characteristic sentencing enhancement under guideline 2b1.1 for a fraud offenseendangering the solvency or financial security of a substantial number of victims . further , thecommission is directed to make certain that the organizational sentencing guidelines under chapter8 of the u.s . sentencing guidelines are sufficient to deter and punish organizational criminalmisconduct . the commission must promulgate these guidelines or amendments within 180 daysof enactment of the act . section 806 adds new 18 u.s.c . â§ 1514a , which creates a civil action to protect employeesof publicly traded companies against discrimination in the terms and conditions of employment inretaliation for whistleblowing in securities fraud cases . this section covers situations where suchemployees have engaged in any lawful act to provide information , to cause information to beprovided , or otherwise to assist any investigation by a federal regulatory or law enforcement agency,a member of congress or congressional committee , or a person having supervisory authority overthe employee or investigative authority for the employer , regarding any violation of 18 u.s.c . only two members of the board shall be or have been certified public accountants . if oneof those persons is the chairperson , that person may not have been a practicing certified publicaccountant for at least five years before appointment to the board . each board member must serveon a full - time basis and may not have other employment while serving on the board . no boardmember can share in the profits of or receive payments from a public accounting firm , except forfixed continuing payments under standard retirement arrangements , subject to conditions imposedby the sec . not later than ninety days after the act's enactment , the sec , after consulting with thechairman of the board of governors of the federal reserve system and the secretary of thetreasury , shall appoint the chairperson of the board and other initial members and shall designateeach person's term of service . the term of service of each board member is five years , except that the terms of office of theinitial board members shall expire in annual increments . any board member appointed to fill avacancy occurring before the expiration of the term of the predecessor shall be appointed only forthe remainder of that term . no person may be a member or chairperson of the board for more than two terms , whetheror not consecutive . a member of the board may be removed by the sec for good cause . the board may issue rules concerning its operation and administration and other matters,subject to the approval of the sec . the board must submit an annual report to the sec ; the sec shall transmit a copy of thatreport to the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs and the house committeeon financial services .