the house passed s.j.res . 38 on july 17 , 2019 . the same day , the house also passed s.j.res . 37 , which prohibited the transfer to the uae of "defense articles , defense services , and technical data to support the integration , operation , training , testing , repair , and operational level maintenance" of the maverick agm - 65 air - to - surface guided missile and several paveway systems for use on a number of emirati - operated aircraft . the resolution also prohibited the transfer of a number of paveway munitions to the uae . president donald trump vetoed the three bills on july 24 . a july 29 senate vote failed to override these vetoes . 316 , and the sale of the sidewinder and harpoon missiles to saudi arabia proceeded . more recently , on march 10 , 2016 , the senate foreign relations committee rejected a motion to discharge a joint resolution ( s.j.res . 31 ) prohibiting the sale of several defense articles , particularly eight f - 16 block 52 aircraft . 82 was the house companion bill . on may 5 , 2016 , a state department spokesperson , noting congressional objections to using foreign military financing funds for the aircraft , told reporters that the united states had "told the pakistanis that they should put forward national funds for the purchase. in late may , the u.s. offer expired after islamabad failed to submit a letter of acceptance by the required deadline . on june 13 , 2017 , the senate voted to reject a motion to discharge from the senate foreign relations committee a joint resolution ( s.j.res . 42 ) prohibiting certain proposed defense exports to saudi arabia , such as "technical data , hardware , and defense services" to support the royal saudi air force's deployment of the joint direct attack munition and integration of the fmu - 152a / b jpb fuze system into several warhead types . this requirement applies for 10 years after the administration has notified congress of the export . according to section 36 ( b ) ( 5 ) ( c ) , the administration must , in the case of upgrades or enhancements meeting certain value thresholds , submit a new notification to congress and the export will be considered "as if it were a separate letter of offer ... subject to all of the requirements , restrictions , and conditions set forth in this subsection. the threshold values are higher for sales to nato members , japan , australia , south korea , israel , or new zealand . a congressional recess or adjournment does not stop the 30 calendar - day statutory review period . it should be emphasized that after congress receives a statutory notification required under sections 36 ( b ) or 36 ( c ) of the aeca , for example , and 30 calendar days elapse without congress having blocked the sale , the executive branch is free to proceed with the sales process .