that is very desirable . majorities need no protection . it is only minorities which need protection… . rule xxii is needed . it tends to expand the ability of the minority to convert an erroneous majority to its views . it is a wise and enlightened process and should be treated with great veneration by all men . is it merely lengthy debate or must there be an attempt to use dilatory tactics to slow or stop consideration of the matter at hand ? one indication of a filibuster is the taking of one or more cloture votes to bring debate on an issue to an end . ( there have also been filibusters where there was no cloture vote ; so , looking at cloture votes provides only a partial picture. ) the senate adopted the cloture rule in 1917 , which then for the first time provided members with a way of ending debate . after a lengthy debate in 1949 , the senate adopted a change to its rules that , in addition to many other things , allowed the senate to vote cloture on items of executive business , such as treaties and nominations . while proponents of the 1949 cloture change talked about the need to get to a final vote on treaties , they did not mention nominations or any situations they might have had in mind concerning filibusters of nominations . also , the two most comprehensive historical analyses of the senate's role in advice and consent , one published in 1938 and the other in 1953 , do not mention the word "filibuster" in conjunction with nominations . one reason could be that the other devices in place — the blue slip and senatorial courtesy — allowed senators to prevent confirmation by the full senate when they were concerned about a particular nomination . another interpretation is that senators did not previously use filibusters against nominations or , when they did , the senate used other methods other than cloture to try to bring the debate to a close , such as enforcing the senate rule which prohibits members from making more than two speeches on the same subject on any day . one historian found that president woodrow wilson's nominee to be director of the census was blocked several times in executive ( closed ) sessions in 1913 . once it became clear that a full filibuster of the nomination was a possibility , supporters of the nomination agreed to postpone consideration of the nomination until the end of the fiscal year . there are also several examples of parties in the senate blocking action on a group of nominations toward the end of a president's term , particularly when a new administration from a different party was poised to take power . at the end of the administration of president taft , for example , progressives and democrats in the senate prevented that chamber from going into executive session until congress ended , thus killing some 1,300 nominations submitted by president taft .