each effect is examined below . the discussion begins with a review of what is known about the effectiveness of the section 179 expensing and bonus depreciation allowances as policy instruments for economic stimulus . since 2003 , congress has passed eight bills that either temporarily enhanced the section 179 expensing allowance and its phaseout threshold or included a temporary or permanent extension of an already enhanced allowance . and since 2002 , 10 bills have been enacted that extend or enhance the bonus depreciation allowance . as was noted earlier , if the entire cost is expensed , then the marginal effective rate on the returns falls to zero . yet the allowance does not change the actual marginal rates at which this income is taxed . accelerated depreciation does not reduce the federal taxes paid on the stream of income earned by an asset over its useful life . rather , it delays or defers the payment of taxes on that income by enabling firms to take a larger share of depreciation deductions for the asset in its first year or two of use than would be possible under the macrs . this front loading of depreciation allowances increases the present discounted value of the tax savings from depreciation relative to other depreciation schedules such as the macrs . most assets eligible for the section 179 allowance are held by smaller firms . therefore , any gains in profits due to the allowance go to small business owners . since the tax benefits associated with capital income tend to be concentrated in upper - income households , it can be argued that the expensing allowance tilts the federal income tax away from vertical equity . the allowance lowers the effective tax burden on small business income relative to other sources of income . while this effect makes investment in qualified assets more attractive , it does not change the fact that the allowance itself has no effect on the nominal taxes paid by small business owners over time on the income from eligible assets . over the useful life of such an asset , the stream of depreciation deductions remains the same , regardless of whether its cost is expensed or not . as a result , it seems fair to conclude that the allowance has no lasting effect on the distribution of after - tax incomes . yet another policy issue raised by the section 179 and section 168 ( k ) expensing allowances concerns their impact on the cost of tax compliance for business taxpayers . most public finance economists agree that a key element of a desirable income tax system is that it imposes relatively low costs for administration and compliance . research indicates that those costs hinge on three factors: ( 1 ) the records that must be kept in order to comply with tax laws , ( 2 ) the complexity of those laws , and ( 3 ) the types of income subject to taxation . most public finance economists would also agree that the federal income tax system fails this test on all counts .