this section of the calendar is titled "privileged nominations. after the chair of the committee with jurisdiction over a nomination has notified the executive clerk that biographical and financial information on the nominee has been received , this is indicated in the calendar . after 10 days , the nomination is moved from the "privileged nominations" section of the calendar and placed on the "nominations" section with the same status as a nomination that had been reported by a committee . ( see " executive calendar " below. ) importantly , at any time that the nomination is listed in the new section of the executive calendar , any senator can request that a nomination be referred , and it is then sent to the appropriate committee of jurisdiction . in such cases , both committees must report on the nomination before the whole senate can act on it , unless the senate discharges one or both committees . if two committees have unequal jurisdictional claims , then the nomination is more likely to be sequentially referred . in this case , the first committee must report the nomination before it is sequentially referred to the second committee . the second referral often is subject to a requirement that the committee report within a certain number of days . usually , the majority leader schedules the consideration of nominations on the calendar . nominations are considered in executive session , a parliamentary form of the senate in session that has its own journal and , to some extent , its own rules of procedure . on april 3 , 2019 , the senate reinterpreted senate rule xxii to reduce , from 30 hours to 2 hours , the maximum time allowed for consideration of most nominations after cloture is invoked . the senate took this step by reversing two rulings by the presiding officer . the first vote established that "postcloture time under rule xxii for all executive branch nominations other than a position at level 1 of the executive schedule under section 5312 of title 5 of the united states code is 2 hours. on the second vote , the senate established that "postcloture time under rule xxii for all judicial nominations , other than circuit courts or supreme court of the united states , is 2 hours" ( see table 1 ) . it is uncommon for the senate to reverse a decision by the presiding officer . a regularized process facilitates quick action on thousands of government positions . the senate may approve en bloc hundreds of nominations at a time , especially military appointments and promotions . the process also allows for close scrutiny of candidates when necessary . each year , a few hundred nominees to high - level positions are regularly subject to senate investigations and public hearings . most of these are routinely approved , while a small number of nominations are disputed and receive more attention from the media and congress . judicial nominations , particularly supreme court appointees , are generally subject to greater scrutiny than nominations to executive posts , partly because judges may serve for life .