they are not intelligence centers , although both have intelligence analysts working in them . many of today's potential adversaries offerlittle in the way of traditionally observable activity . today's security environment appears to be quite different from the environment of only tenyears ago . major shifts in both the threat to our national security , and the technologies available tous and our potential adversaries , seem to have occurred . in response , the military services have plansto change their isr capabilities to meet the new environment effectively . as noted earlier , many observers believe significant transformation of isr has already occurredand has been practiced in afghanistan . the military's ability to move data from the reconnaissanceplatform to the weapon system able to take action , the so - called "sensor to shooter" sequence,generally required at least a full day in operation desert storm , as imagery from a satellite orreconnaissance aircraft had to be analyzed , identified as a target , turned into hard - copy , andintensively studied by the aircrew before a weapon could be dropped accurately . in operationenduring freedom , special operations forces personnel on the ground identified a taliban troopconcentration , called the target back to the combined air operations center in saudi arabia,received permission to call in an airstrike , determined the exact coordinates of the enemy usingglobal positioning system ( gps ) , and passed those coordinates to a loitering b - 52 bomber whichagain used gps to guide bombs onto the target within less than 20 minutes of the originalidentification of the target . ( 80 ) similarly , predatoruavs have been able to transmit live video picturesto waiting ac - 130 gunships , which were able to attack moving targets while the predator monitoredfor effectiveness , again within minutes of original target identification . ( 81 ) these examples highlightrecent gains in the precision and timely communication of intelligence , as well as interoperabilityamong weapon systems and even between services . with regard to analysis , over the past ten yearsthe growth of an intelligence - community - wide secure intranet known as intelink has significantlyincreased intelligence personnel access to intelligence data , reports of all types , and other analysts,worldwide . ( 82 ) most members of the military intelligence community say they are continuing to work hard at interoperability - they appear to have agreed that the ability to share intelligence throughout thecommunity is essential . in addition , there appear to be some significant departures from old waysof doing things which could support the other goals of transformation . the most revolutionaryconcepts being developed today appear to be the army's reconnaissance , surveillance , targetingand acquisition squadron , dia's joint intelligence virtual architecture , and the large increase inthe use of unmanned vehicles already underway in all of the services . although by no means radicalto the rest of the intelligence community , the coast guard's plan to bring classified communicationsvia siprnet onto every ship creates the possibility of a sweeping change in its use of intelligence . some outside observers , however , believe that in addition to these changes , the military intelligence community needs to establish a whole new method for analysis .