infrastructure . cne is an area of io that is not yet clearly defined within dod . before a crisis develops , dod seeks to prepare the io battlespace through intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance , and through extensive planning activities . this involves intelligence collection , that in the case of io , is usually performed through network tools that penetrate adversary systems to gain information about system vulnerabilities , or to make unauthorized copies of important files . tools used for cne are similar to those used for computer attack , but configured for intelligence collection rather than system disruption . although cne is an activity designed for data exfiltration , it is unknown whether the methods used to penetrate networks could also be used for an attack by an adversary . how strongly will u.s. military psyop be used to manipulate public opinion , or reduce opposition to unpopular decisions in the future ? ; or ( 3 ) how can the military be certain that a targeted foreign computer system has not been innocently set up to appear as an attacker by another third party attacker ? some observers have stated that success in future conflicts will depend less on the will of governments , and more on the perceptions of populations , and that perception control will be achieved and opinions shaped by the warring group that best exploits the global media . as a result of the increasingly sophisticated use of networks by terrorist groups and the potentially strong influence of messages carried by the global media , does dod now view the internet and the mainstream media as a possible threat to the success of u.s. military missions ? another emerging issue may be whether dod is legislatively authorized to engage in psyop that may also affect domestic audiences . dod joint publication 3-13 , released february 2006 , provides current doctrine for u.s. military information operations , and explains the importance of achieving information superiority . however , the dod information operations roadmap , published october 2003 , states that psyop messages intended for foreign audiences increasingly are consumed by the u.s. domestic audience , usually because they can be re - broadcast through the global media . the roadmap document states that , " ... the distinction between foreign and domestic audiences becomes more a question of usg ( u.s. government ) intent rather than information dissemination practices ( by dod ) . this may be interpreted to mean that dod has no control over who consumes psyop messages once they are re - transmitted by commercial media . appendix a. definitions information information is a resource created from two things: phenomena ( data ) that are observed , plus the instructions ( systems ) required to analyze and interpret the data to give it meaning . the value of information is enhanced by technology , such as networks and computer databases , which enables the military to ( 1 ) create a higher level of shared awareness , ( 2 ) better synchronize command , control , and intelligence , and ( 3 ) translate information superiority into combat power . dod information operations the current dod term for military information warfare is "information operations" ( io ) .