b . funding level includes a transfer of $100.040 million from foreign operations appropriations to state department appropriations for fsa and seedprograms . table 1 . state department and related agencies appropriations and proposed authorizations ( millions of dollars ) *fy2002 enacted numbers do not include funds provided in the emergency supplemental appropriation act ( p.l . 106-113 sec . 604 authorized up to $900 million for fy2000 through fy2004 . includes funding supplementals from p.l . 104-134 , sec . 405 ( appropriations legislation ) fy1997 - - p.l . house floor action occurred on july 15th and 16th . the housepassed the bill on july 16 , 2003 . the foreign relations authorization legislation provides authority for the state departmentand related foreign policy agencies to conduct foreign policy activities and programs in the comingyear . it authorizes foreign policy programs and enacts changes in u.s. foreign policy . it also servesas a vehicle for congress to influence executive branch management of foreign policy . sincecongress has not passed a foreign assistance authorization bill since 1985 , activities such asauthorization for the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , as well as u.s.economic , development , and military assistance are also typically included in the foreign relationsauthorization legislation . by law , authorization of foreign policy agencies and programs is required prior toexpenditure of foreign operations and state department appropriations . in effect , the authorizinglegislation sets spending ceilings for the foreign policy agency appropriations . ( see table 1 inappendix. ) prior to 1995 , congress had reauthorized u.s. government foreign policy agencies andactivities in the foreign relations authorization legislation every two years until 1994 ( p.l . 103-236 ,april 30 , 1994 ) . 107-228 is the first stand - alone foreign relations authorization bill thatcongress has passed since 1994 . in the intervening years , congress waived the requirement orincluded authorization in appropriation laws . ( see state department authorization history in theappendix. ) the foreign relations authorization legislation typically provides authority for statedepartment spending for such activities as salaries and other operating expenses , passport and visaprocessing , embassy and foreign service activities , as well as public diplomacy and internationalbroadcasting . in addition , the legislation often becomes a convenient vehicle for numerous foreignpolicy - related issues , such as nonproliferation , human rights , international family planning policy,and international environment issues . congress can influence u.s. foreign policy regarding specificregions or countries via this biannual legislation , as well . legislation in the 108th congress on foreign relations authorization include h.r . the senate bill provides authorization for fy2005 only and includesdivision a - - foreign relations authorization and division b - - foreign assistance authorization . 1950 has five divisions: division a is entitled , millennium challenge account ; division b is entitled peace corps expansion act of 2003 ; division c is entitled department ofstate authorization act , fiscal years 2004 and 2005 ; division d is entitled defense trade andsecurity assistance reform act of 2003 ; and division e is assistance for viet nam . authorization of state department appropriations are required by law every two years . typically , the authorization is passed in the first year of a new congress for the following even / oddyear authority .