109-365 in each title . for fy2006 , the act was funded at $1.783 billion , which overall represents a 2% reduction from the fy2005 level . this amount includes the 1% across - the - board reduction in all federal discretionary programs required by p.l . although some programs received slight increases , such as the title vii long - term care ombudsman and the elder abuse prevention programs ( increases of 6% and less than 1% , respectively ) , most programs received slight decreases . a major reduction was made in the title iv research , training , and discretionary projects program , which was reduced by 43% from the fy2005 level . this is because the fy2006 amount does not include earmarked amounts approved for specific projects required by congress for fy2005 . table 3 shows appropriations history for the act's programs for fy1999-fy2006 . appropriations amounts for previous years are available in crs report rl32437 , older americans act: history of appropriations , fy1966-fy2004 , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) . for information on fy2007 appropriations , see crs report rl33880 , older americans act ( oaa ) funding , by [author name scrubbed] . figure 1 shows the distribution of fy2006 funding by program . congress created the older americans act in 1965 in response to concern by policymakers about a lack of community social services for older persons . the original legislation established authority for grants to states for community planning and social services , research and development projects , and personnel training in the field of aging . the law also established the administration on aging ( aoa ) within the then - department of health , education , and welfare ( dhew ) to administer the newly created grant programs and to serve as the federal focal point on matters concerning older persons . although older persons may receive services under many other federal programs , today the act is considered to be the major vehicle for the organization and delivery of social and nutrition services to this group . it authorizes a wide array of service programs through a nationwide network of 57 state agencies on aging and 655 area agencies on aging , supports the sole federal job creation program benefitting low - income older workers , and funds training , research , and demonstration activities in the field of aging . prior to the creation of the act in 1965 , older persons were eligible for limited social services through some federal programs . however , with the recognition that older persons were becoming an increasing proportion of the population and that their needs were not being formally addressed through existing programs , many groups began advocating on their behalf . their actions led president truman to initiate the first national conference on aging in 1950 . conferees called for government and voluntary agencies to accept greater responsibility for the problems and welfare of older persons . further interest in the field of aging led president eisenhower to create the federal council on aging in 1956 to coordinate the activities of the various units of the federal government related to aging .