35 , remained in committee . the house in which the resolution was submitted could adopt it and send it to the other . the receiving house , however , could not act on the received resolution under the expedited procedure , because that procedure provides for such action only after the receiving house first considers its own measure . these limitations may in practice present little obstacle to successful action . nevertheless , determining how the act may most effectively be used may require taking them into account . among the special features described in the preceding sections , three appear potentially the most noteworthy in this connection . the expedited procedure in the act covers committee and floor consideration of disapproval resolutions only in the senate . committee and floor consideration in the house of representatives is to occur under its regular legislative procedures ; the act provides no special mechanisms to help ensure that the house can complete action . in mitigation of this potential obstacle , the house possesses well - established general means to expedite the consideration of measures , which can readily be used for disapprovals under the congressional review act if the leadership and the pertinent committee are supportive . specifically , the house might likely consider a disapproval resolution pursuant to the terms of a special rule . a special rule is a house resolution , which the committee on rules has jurisdiction to report , making a specified measure in order and proposing terms for its consideration . in particular , a special rule for considering a disapproval resolution might be expected to prohibit amendment on the floor . ( a special rule providing such a prohibition is often called a "closed rule." a joint resolution of disapproval , like any other proposed law , may be enacted only through being presented to the president for approval . if congress passes a joint resolution disapproving a particular rule , a president who favors the rule can veto the measure . in that case the rule will take effect , unless a two - thirds vote in each house overrides the veto . experience shows that particular circumstances may arise under which this requirement may present little obstacle to congressional action . if , in the interim between promulgation of the rule and congressional action , a new administration unsympathetic to the rule assumes office , any disapproval resolution may not likely be vetoed in the first place . congressional disapproval in 2001 of the ergonomics regulation proposed by the clinton administration in the previous year illustrates this situation . at that time , substantial congressional interest was expressed in using the congressional review act to disapprove numerous other rules promulgated in the last months of the clinton administration as well . although this interest did not result in other legislative action , some of the regulations in question were withdrawn or suspended by the new bush administration . the provisions of the congressional review act for final congressional action on disapproval resolutions presume that both houses will initially pass measures with substantively similar texts .