subsequent legislation ( p.l . 105-277 ) accelerated and increased the percentages set by hipaa . beginning in 2003 , 100% of health insurance costs can be deducted . as discussed below , hipaa also allowed self - employed taxpayers to take account of long - term care insurance premiums in making this deduction . hipaa provided that payments for personal injury or sickness through an arrangement having the effect of accident or health insurance are excluded from gross income ( that is , they are exempt from taxation ) , provided the arrangement has adequate risk shifting and is not merely a reimbursement arrangement . these numbers were far less than the 750,000 statutory ceiling . later amendments extended the deadline for new accounts to december 31 , 2003 . although no new msas may be created , with some exceptions , current owners can maintain their accounts and , provided they have a qualifying high - deductible insurance , can continue to make contributions . however , most msa owners can now have hsas , and their msa balances can be rolled over into the new accounts . for more information about msas and hsas , see crs report rs21573 , tax - advantaged accounts for health care expenses: side - by - side comparison , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] , and crs report rl32467 , health savings accounts , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and neela k. ranade . for current legislative activity on tax - advantaged accounts , see crs issue brief ib98037 , tax benefits for health insurance and expenses: current legislation , also by [author name scrubbed] . hipaa increased the portion of premiums that self - employed taxpayers may deduct from income for the purposes of determining federal taxes owed . under prior law , the deduction was 30% of health insurance costs ; hipaa increased it to 40% in 1997 ; 45% in 1998 through 2002 ; 50% in 2003 ; 60% in 2004 ; 70% in 2005 ; and 80% in 2006 and thereafter . thus with respect to taxes , payments from self - insured plans covering self - employed individuals are treated like payments from commercial insurance . hipaa established new rules regarding the tax treatment of long - term care insurance and expenses , effective january 1 , 1997 . qualified long - term care insurance is treated as accident and health insurance , and benefits are treated as amounts received for personal injuries and sickness and reimbursement for medical expenses actually incurred . as a consequence , benefits are excluded from gross income ( that is , exempt from taxation ) . the exclusion for benefits paid on a per diem or other periodic basis is limited to the greater of ( 1 ) $240 a day ( in 2005 ) or ( 2 ) the cost of long - term care services . employer contributions to the cost of qualified long - term care insurance premiums are excluded from the gross income of the employee . the exclusion does not apply to insurance provided through employer - sponsored cafeteria plans or flexible spending accounts .