abu sayyaf did not release the burnhams . the money reportedly did not go to the abu sayyaf group under abu sabaya which held the hostages . instead , it went to the jolo - based abu sayyaf faction under khaddafy janjalani , who reportedly refused to turn it over to abu sabaya . the bush administration has not disclosed what went wrong with the ransom attempt . following the failed ransom attempt , u.s. officials reportedly shifted from their pro - restraint position and advised the afp to adopt more aggressive tactics to rescue the burnhams . the report will be updated periodically . located on the big southern island of mindanao and the sulu island chain southwest of mindanao , filipino muslims , called moros , since the time of spanish rule , revolted against spanish colonizers of the philippines from the 17 th century on , the american rulers of the early 20 th century , and philippine governments since independence in 1946 . from 1899 to 1914 , the u.s. military conducted a number of campaigns to suppress muslim insurgents in the southern philippines — campaigns which were controversial because of heavy civilian casualties . muslim grievances after 1946 focused on the growing settlement of catholic filipinos on mindanao , which reduced the geographical area of a muslim majority ( there are about 7 million filipino muslims ) . muslims revolted in the 1970s under a moro national liberation front ( mnlf ) , which demanded an independent muslim state . an estimated 120,000 people were killed in the 1970s in heavy fighting between the mnlf and the philippine armed forces ( afp ) . since the late 1970s , there have been two trends in the muslim problem . the first has been negotiations between the philippine government and the mnlf . as a result , the mnlf abandoned its goal of an independent muslim state . an agreement was reached in 1996 that created an autonomous muslim region . this apparent positive trend was countered by the fragmentation of the muslim movement . a segment of the mnlf broke away in 1978 and formed the moro islamic liberation front ( milf ) . the milf demanded independence for muslim populated regions and proclaimed that a muslim state would be based on "koranic principles. the milf gained strength into the 1990s . by 1995-96 , u.s. estimates placed armed milf strength at 35,000-45,000 in seven provinces on mindanao . the milf had large base camps and functional governmental operations . its operations included attacks on the afp and planting bombs in mindanao cities . a bangsamoro peoples consultative assembly of approximately 200,000 people was held in 1996 in milf - held territory and called for an independent muslim state . stepped - up milf military operations in 1998-99 prompted philippine president joseph estrada to order an all - out military offensive against milf base camps . the afp captured the milf's main base on mindanao and damaged the milf militarily . since then , milf armed strength has fallen to an estimated 13,000 ; but it remains the largest muslim armed force . in 2001 , philippine government - milf negotiations resulted in a cease - fire .