blocked assets . according to the terrorist assets report for2000 , about $200 belonging to kahane chai has been blocked since 1995 . some middle eastern terrorist groups are guided by arab nationalism or left - wing ideologies rather than islamicfundamentalism . during the 1980s and 1990s , with the collapse of the soviet union and the loss of much oftheir backing from state sponsors , the left - wing and nationalist groups became progressively less active and werelargely eclipsed by militant islamic groups . however , some of the left - wing nationalist groups have reactivatedtheir terrorist and commando operations since the latest palestinian uprising began in september 2000 . three groups designated as ftos primarily are attempting to influence the domestic political structures or theforeign policies of their countries of origin . two of them operate against the government of turkey and the otheragainst the government of iran . u.s. officials maintain that they have made a number of gains in their efforts to reduce state sponsorship ofterrorism . five middle eastern countries are on the terrorism list - - iraq , iran , syria , sudan , and libya . ( 37 ) in thecase of libya , sudan , and , to a lesser extent , iraq , u.s. and international pressure , coupled with internaldevelopments in some of these states , have reduced their support for international terrorism long beforeseptember 11 . of the middle eastern countries on the list , sudan appears to be the closest to achieving removal . the state department openly acknowledges working with sudan to help it meet the remaining requirements forremoving it from the list , and has praised its cooperation against al qaeda after september 11 . in the case of iranand syria , however , u.s. efforts have had little success in curbing the support of these governments for terroristgroups . table 1 . near eastern foreign terrorist organizations ( ftos ) in contrast to patterns 2000 , this report analyzes the following: the palestine liberation organization ( plo ) , which has not been the subject of a separate section in patterns since patterns 1995 , is analyzed in this report because of the debate over whether plo leaderyasir arafat is taking sufficient steps to prevent terrorism by other groups in areas under the control of thepalestinian authority . since late 2000 , there has been discussion about the degree to which certain plo factionsare involved in violence against israel and whether they should be named as ftos . when the fto list was reviewed and re - issued in october 1999 , the democratic front for the liberation of palestine ( dflp ) was dropped , largely because it has reconciled with arafat . the group's pastinvolvement in terrorism , and the recent revival of its operations against israel , are discussed in this report . this report contains a section on the abu sayyaf group operating in the philippines , as well as analysis of several pakistani islamist groups that are fighting indian control of part of kashmir province . these groups are discussed in this report , even though they operate outside the near east region , because of theiralleged connections to the bin laden network and the taliban of afghanistan .