angolans deserve no less . the united states has actively supported efforts to implement the lusaka protocol , to which the united states is an observer , and has provided significant humanitarian assistance to angola ( see appendix ) . in recent years , u.s. policy toward angola has supported the government , and condemned unita's war effort , while at the same time backing political and economic reform . in early october 2001 , the new u.s . ambassador , christopher william dell , reiterated these positions , and vowed to work with government , churches , and civil organizations to build a strong democracy . in january 2002 , principal deputy assistant secretary , william bellamy , reportedly met with angolan government officials and members of civil society during a visit to angola that focused on strengthening u.s. - angolan bilateral relations ; assessing the status of current angolan political and economic reforms ; and prospects for peace in the context of the lusaka protocol . in late april 2001 , president bush reportedly sent a letter to president dos santos urging that angola implement transparent governance . u.s. assistant secretary of state for african affairs walter kansteiner recently re - emphasized president bush's call for increased transparency , according to an april 9 , 2002 reuters news report . kansteiner was quoted as stating that: the whole international community wants to see angola move to better economic policies including transparency.. . they [the angolan government] need to out all of their revenue on budget . they have a fair amount of revenue that's off budget and that's problematic... you're not going to get economic change or growth if you lose , say , 25 percent of your revenue stream . congress has long monitored developments in angola . congressional attention has focused primarily on conflict resolution and the amelioration of conflict - related humanitarian conditions in angola and the surrounding sub - region . the withdrawal was completed in late may 1991 . unavem ii ( may 1991 to february 1995 ) was established by the u.n. security council ( unsc ) to monitor a cease - fire and police activities under the bicesse accords . it was later charged with observing and verifying the 1992 presidential and legislative elections in angola . after renewed fighting in october 1992 the unavem ii mandate was altered to allow the mission to assist the two sides to agree on modalities for finalizing the peace process and to broker related national or local cease - fire agreements . after the signing of the lusaka protocol in november 1994 , unavem ii was charged with verifying the first stages of the peace agreement . it was superceded by unavem iii in february 1995 , which was to monitor and verify the implementation of the lusaka protocol . in june 1997 unavem iii was replaced by the u.n. observer mission in angola ( monua ) , which was given an enlarged , multi - sectoral mandate . its political unit monitored the implementation of the lusaka agreements and the normalization of state administration across angola , and monitored unita's integration into these institutions . it also assisted with confidence - building and the mediation of conflicts arising from these activities .