it was similar to h.r . 1310 in that it proposed to define fill material to include pollutant discharges that replace portions of the waters of the united states with dry land or which change the bottom elevation of a water body for any purpose . but it would have excluded the disposal of excess spoil material from coal surface mining and reclamation activities , as described in section 515 ( b ) ( 22 ) of the surface mining control and reclamation act , in waters of the united states . this provision appeared to allow discharges from some mining practices to be considered fill material , such as hardrock mining or mining of other minerals such as sand and gravel ( thus qualifying for a 404 permit ) , while excluding discharges from surface coal mining activities . the significance of both bills is that discharges of materials that are not eligible for a section 404 permit are regulated under cwa section 402 . as discussed in this report , because section 402 discharge requirements are more restrictive than those for section 404 , some discharges that could be permitted under section 404 cannot be authorized under section 402 . in 2009 , the senate committee on environment and public works subcommittee on water and wildlife held a hearing on the impacts of mountaintop removal mining on water quality in appalachia . no further action occurred on either proposal in the 111 th congress . the npdes permit program is administered by epa . the corps and epa have complementary roles under section 404 . landowners seeking to discharge dredged or fill material must obtain a permit to do so from the corps . epa provides environmental guidance on section 404 permitting and can veto a corps permit , based on environmental impacts of the proposed discharge activity . the act's two separate permit programs differ in nature and approach . the npdes program focuses primarily on the effects of discharges from industrial facilities and municipal sewage treatment plants on water quality and evaluates whether the discharge will adversely affect the chemical , physical , or biological integrity of the water . under that program , pollutant discharges are controlled through the imposition of effluent limitations which restrict the quantities , rates , and concentrations of discharged constituents . section 402 permits include limitations that reflect treatment with available pollution control technology , either to meet national minimum standards established by epa , or more stringent treatment levels where needed to meet state - established water quality standards . a somewhat narrower legislative approach was contained in another bill in the 111 th congress , the appalachia restoration act ( s. 696 ) . the clean water protection act was re - introduced in the 112 th and 113 th congresses ( h.r . 1837 , respectively ) . it was re - introduced in the 114 th congress as h.r . reflecting a different approach , other legislation was introduced in the 113 th congress to codify the current regulatory definition of fill material in the cwa ( h.r . also in the 113 th congress , the consolidated and further appropriations act , 2015 ( h.r .