these recommendations were not adopted . securing and expanding iraq's oil sector ( recommendations 62-63 ) . the united states has consistently prodded iraq to pass the pending oil laws , which would encourage foreign investment in iraq's energy sector . increasing economic aid to iraq and enlisting more international donations of assistance ( recommendations 64-67 ) . president bush's 2007 security plan increased aid , as discussed above , although u.s. aid is now being reduced because of improved iraqi financial capabilities . in the 110 th congress , an amendment to h.r . 2764 , the fy2008 foreign aid bill , would have revived the iraq study group ( providing $1 million for its operations ) to help assess future policy after the "troop surge. the provision was not incorporated into the consolidated appropriation ( p.l . in the senate , some senators from both parties in june 2007 proposed legislation ( s. 1545 ) to adopt the recommendations of the group as u.s. policy . the sections below discuss options that were under discussion before the iraq study group report , the troop surge , or the november 2008 u.s. presidential election . some argued that the "surge" was too limited — concentrated mainly in baghdad and anbar — and that the united states should have increased troops levels in iraq even further to prevent sunni insurgents from re - infiltrating cleared areas . this option faded during 2008 because of progress produced by the surge , and virtually no expert or official argues for this option at this time . however , some believe president obama might revisit this question if security deteriorates sharply as u.s. troops in iraq thin out , although most observers believe that the united states is not likely to send additional troops to iraq once a major drawdown has begun in earnest . the bush administration consistently opposed this option , arguing that the isf were not ready to secure iraq alone and that doing so would result in full - scale civil war , possible collapse of the elected iraqi government , revival of aq - i activities , emboldening of al qaeda more generally , and increased involvement of regional powers in the fighting in iraq . supporters of the bush administration position said that al qaeda terrorists might "follow us home" — conduct attacks in the united states — if there were a rapid withdrawal . those who advocated rapid withdrawal maintained that the decision to invade iraq was a mistake , that the large u.s. presence in iraq could reignite the insurgency , and that u.s. forces are still policing a civil war . those who supported an immediate withdrawal include most of the approximately 70 members of the "out of iraq congressional caucus," formed in june 2005 . some members of this group have criticized the obama draw - down plan as too slow , and questioned why as many as 50,000 u.s. forces would remain after august 2010 . in the 109 th congress , representative john murtha , ranking member ( now chairman ) of the defense appropriations subcommittee , introduced a resolution ( h.j.res .