generally , state policy guides these decisions . for example , state statutes concerning the eligibility of homosexuals to adopt range from florida's statutory prohibition to mississippi's statute barring adoption by same - sex couples to utah's prohibition on unmarried couples , heterosexual or homosexual , from adopting . in addition , states have different statutes regarding the rights of adopted adults , birth parents , adoptive parents , birth siblings and birth relatives to gain access to identifying and non - identifying information about the adoptee or birth relatives . for example , a few states permit adoptees to gain access to their birth and / or adoption records , but most require a court order issued for "good cause" ( usually a medical crisis or some comparably serious situation ) before unsealing such information . in the absence of a constitutional amendment providing general authority for congress to legislate in the field of domestic relations , its direct authority is limited to those areas specifically reserved for congressional action under article i , section 8 , of the constitution . however , various indirect approaches , most notably those tied to congressional authority under the commerce clause and congress's appropriations powers , have resulted in significant federal impact on a myriad of family law questions . currently , there appears to be little sentiment in favor of a national marriage and divorce law , at least one which would be imposed involuntarily by congress on the states . however , it is probable that federal involvement will continue or be forthcoming in those areas where it is argued that federal resources can be utilized more efficiently and effectively than those available at the state or local level , such as tracking down parental kidnappers or establishing and enforcing child support orders . the spending power can be used to shape state approaches to a given situation , although this option involves expenditures of federal funds ; the higher the funding level , the more likely a state is to comply with the federal directive . the nature of family law cases is such that an individualized approach to each particular case will undoubtedly continue . however , state domestic relations laws have become more uniform in recent years , and even without federal intervention this trend is likely to continue . therefore , states generally have the freedom to legislate as they see fit on these questions . however , states' freedom to legislate has led to substantial variation between the individual states on many of these topics , although more uniformity now exists than at any time in the past . thus , similarly situated spouses , parents and children may have different legal options depending on where they reside . for example , the community property concept of marital property adopted by nine states is quite different from the common law property system in the other forty - one states . while all states have some form of no - fault divorce , based either on grounds such as "irreconcilable differences" or some period of separation , many authorize divorces based on fault or consider marital fault as a factor when awarding spousal support or dividing marital property .