in a natural environment. 1350 would add to this exception: "or in a setting that is most appropriate , asdetermined by the parent and the individualized family service plan team. part d , which authorizes national activities , has been substantially revised . in brief , some of the changes are a matter of re - arranging language . for example , part d of current law providesfindings in several sections , while h.r . 1350 places all findings at the beginning of thepart - including some findings in current law and adding some new findings . 1350 continues some provisions of part d , although sometimes with substantial changes . for example,the bill would retain the state competitive grants program authorized under subpart 1 of part d. however , it would focus these grants on professional development activities even more than currentlaw does by requiring that at least 90% of the grants be used for these activities . ( current lawrequires 75% of funds be used to ensure sufficient numbers of skilled and knowledgeable specialeducation personnel. ) 1350 would continue other provisions of part d without change . for example , the bill would continue to authorize grants for community parent resource centers to help"ensure that underserved parents of children with disabilities . have the training and informationthey need to enable them to participate effectively in helping their children with disabilities . finally , h.r . 1350 would add new provisions to part d. for example , the bill would establish a national center for special education research to conduct research on improvingspecial education and related services for children with disabilities . in addition to the amendments to idea discussed above , h.r . 1350 would requirethe general accounting office ( gao ) to undertake a series of reports on idea and specialeducation . these include: a review of federal and selected state and local requirements related to idea that "result in excessive paperwork ; " a review of differences among the states in the definition and identificationof certain groups of children with disabilities - for example , those identified as "emotionallydisturbed" or specific learning disabled ; " a study of distance learning and other technological approaches for deliveringprofessional development programs for special education personnel ; a study of how limited english proficient students are served under idea ; and a study of state costs for complying with the requirements ofidea . notethat when this report refers to h.r . 1350 , it is referring to the bill as it was passed bythe house on april 30 , 2003 . in the senate , s. 1248 was reported out of committee bya unanimous vote on june 25 , 2003 ( s. rept . 108-185 ) and placed on the senate legislative calendarunder general orders on november 3 , 2003 . the committeeordered the bill favorably reported by a vote of 29 to 19 . ( 3 ) this report will discuss the major changesthat h.r . 1350 , if enacted as passed by the house , would make to current law . among these were mandatory full funding ( 4 ) and parental choice provisions . provisions relating to evaluations and assessments and the iep would be amended by h.r .