the initiatives should have a regional focus and complement bilateral efforts . the asia - pacific economic cooperation forum ( apec ) offers a ready mechanism for pursuit of such initiatives. for the 110 th congress , issues related to apec could arise in a variety of direct and indirect ways . in addition to the issue of u.s. financial support for apec , congress may choose to express its sense on different policy issues . also , there are oversight issues raised by u.s. participation in various apec activities . in the 110 th congress , one proposed bill specifically mentions apec — the united states - china diplomatic expansion act of 2007 ( h.r . introduced by representative mark kirk , and cosponsored by representatives rick larsen , steve israel , susan davis , and charles boustany , h.r . 3272 would authorize the appropriation in fy2008 of $65 million for the construction of a new consulate in china , $10 million for additional personnel for the u.s. diplomatic mission in china , $6 million for other state department personnel , $10 million for various chinese language programs , and $2 million for rule of law initiatives in china . the bill also would authorize the appropriation of $3 million for a u.s. contribution to apec . as previously mentioned , the u.s. - australia defense trade cooperation treaty signed during the apec meetings would be subject to the approval of the senate , once submitted to the senate by the president . in addition , if and when the president nominates someone to be "ambassador to asean," the appointment would be subject to senate advice and consent . china's accession to the wto , its recent efforts to negotiate btas across asia ( including the comprehensive economic partnership agreements with hong kong and macau ) , and its unilateral liberalization of its trade regime , has arguably placed china as a competitor to the united states . many argue that the united states should re - energize its involvement in asian trade discussion and elevate the importance of apec to reassert u.s. leadership . they advocate both increased financial assistance to apec , though the annual contribution and specific assistance programs , and alteration in u.s. laws and policies on key issues . others say that apec should reformulate its mission by focusing more narrowly on trade facilitation and economic integration , abandoning many of the working groups that are not central to the core goals , and strengthening the secretariat . the annual leaders' meeting continues to provide prestige and offer an opportunity for heads of state , particularly those of smaller countries , to interact with top u.s. officials . apec offers the additional benefit of including taiwan and hong kong as member economies , unlike the eas . the following table provides a brief summary of the past apec meetings . for more details about each meeting , see the official apec web page , http: / / www.apec.org / . the most direct issue would be the level of u.s. financial support for apec .