appropriation . a provision of law providing budget authority that permits federal agencies to incur obligations and to make payments , of the treasury for specifiedpurposes . annual appropriations are provided in appropriations acts ; mostpermanent appropriations are provided in substantive law . authorization . a provision in law that authorizes appropriations for a program or agency . budget authority . authority provided by law to enter into obligations that normally result in outlays . the main forms of budget authority are appropriations , borrowingauthority , and contract authority . budget resolution . a concurrent resolution passed by both houses of congress , but not requiring the signature of the president , setting forth the congressional budget forat least the next five fiscal years . the budget resolution sets forth various budgettotals and functional allocations , and may include reconciliation instructions , todesignated house or senate committees . continuing resolution . an act ( in the form of a joint resolution ) that provides budget authority to agencies or programs whose regular appropriation has not beenenacted after the new fiscal year has started . a continuing resolution usually is atemporary measure that expires on a specified date or is superseded by enactment ofthe regular appropriations act . some continuing resolutions , however , are in effectfor the remainder of the fiscal year and are the means of enacting regularappropriations . direct spending . budget authority , and the resulting outlays , provided in laws other than annual appropriations acts . appropriated entitlements are classified as directspending . direct spending is distinguished by the budget enforcement act fromdiscretionary spending and is subject to the pago rules . it is also referred to as"mandatory spending. discretionary spending . budget authority , and the resulting outlays , provided in annual appropriations acts , but not including appropriated entitlements . federal funds . all monies collected and spent by the federal government other than those designated as trust funds . federal funds include general , special , publicenterprise , and intragovernmental funds . account . a control and reporting unit for budgeting and accounting . mandatory spending . see "direct spending. obligation . a binding agreement ( such as through a contract or purchase order ) that will require payment . outlays . payments made ( generally through the issuance of checks or disbursement of cash ) to liquidate obligations . outlays during a fiscal year may be for payment ofobligations incurred in prior years or in the same year . pago ( pay - as - you - go ) process . the procedure established by the budget enforcement act to ensure that revenue and direct spending legislation does not addto the deficit or reduce the surplus . pago requires that any increase in the deficitor reduction in the surplus due to legislation be offset by other legislation orsequestration . pago is enforced by estimating the five - year budgetary effects of allnew revenue and direct spending laws . reconciliation process . a process established in the congressional budget act by which congress changes existing laws to conform tax and spending levels to thelevels set in a budget resolution . changes recommended by committees pursuant toa reconciliation instruction are incorporated into a reconciliation bill . revolving fund .