this approach is used here . a widely used measure of an industry's federal tax burden is its average effective tax rate , which is the ratio of its federal income tax liability after credits to its taxable income , expressed as a percentage . as such , the ratio reveals the net effect of the federal tax code on the industry's pre - tax returns on previous investments . some economists construe this effect as the extent to which the tax code penalizes or rewards the economic activities of the firms making up the industry . there are some limitations to the usefulness of the average effective tax rate as a measure of an industry's federal tax burden . one limitation is that the rate reflects the impact of the tax code on the returns to an industry's previous investments ; thus it may be an unreliable indicator of the federal tax burden on current or future investments . in addition , average effective tax rates do not provide a comprehensive measure of the federal tax burden for an industry because they cannot capture the influence of provisions in the tax code that accelerate the timing of tax deductions or delay the recognition of income for tax purposes . a better measure would be the marginal effective tax rate for an industry , which would capture the effect of all relevant tax provisions on its pre - tax returns on new investment . but it is difficult to compute such a rate for most industries because the value of some widely used tax benefits ( eg , expensing of r&d costs ) cannot be estimated using available financial or tax return data , and not all firms in an industry invest the same amount in the same mix of assets in a given tax year . nonetheless , if average effective tax rates are applied consistently across industries and over time , they can shed light whether their federal tax burdens differ , and if so , to what extent . table 3 shows the average effective federal tax rates for the drug industry and all major u.s. industries from 2001 to 2006 . as noted above , the rates compare the industries' federal income tax liability after all credits except the foreign tax credit with their worldwide taxable income ( as reported on their federal income tax returns ) . as such , they address neither the domestic tax burden on domestic income nor the worldwide tax burden on worldwide income for the industries . instead , the rates represent something of a hybrid of the two measures: the federal tax burden on domestic income plus foreign income that has been recognized for federal tax purposes . as noted earlier , the foreign tax credit should be excluded from an industry's net tax liability because the credit is intended to prevent the double taxation of foreign - source income . including it would understate the federal tax burden on the industries , in some cases by a significant margin . the data in the table indicate that the drug industry's federal tax burden in 2001 to 2006 was similar to the average tax burden for all industries .