b . subsequently , on july 31 , the senate too up the companion measure ( h.r . 2647 ) ,which it had received from the house , and amended it to incorporate the provisions of the senatemeasure ( s. 1172 ) . among elements that congress considered during discussions on the fy2002bill were proposals to: review public and private funds currently available forconstruction of the u.s. capitol visitors' center and determine what additional fundsare necessary to complete the project ; s. 1172 contained $1 million forthe center ; the house bill did not contain funds ; conferees approved $70 million ; merge the capitol hill , library of congress , and governmentprinting office police into a consolidated force ; senate report language containedlanguage directing the general accounting office to study the issue ; authorize and fund programs to enhance staff retention andrecruitment , such as repayment of student loans , and implementation ofperformance - based recognition and compensation proposals ; p.l . 107-68 containslanguage authorizing student loan repayments for employees of the senate andcongressional budget office ; and approve $42.5 million for repair of the capitol dome ; p.l.107-68 contains $1.6 million for painting . figure 2 . legislative branchappropriations , fy1995-fy2001 figure 3 . legislative branchappropriations , fy1995-fy200 . crs report rl30212 . legislative branch appropriations for fy2001 , by pauldwyer . crs report 98-212 . legislative branch appropriations for fy2000 , by paul dwyer . these sites contain information on the fy2001 legislative branch appropriationsrequest and legislation , and the appropriations process . house committee on appropriations http: / / www.house.gov / appropriations senate committee on appropriations http: / / www.senate.gov / ~appropriations / crs appropriations products guide http: / / www.crs.gov / products / appropriations / apppage.shtml congressional budget office http: / / www.cbo.gov general accounting office http: / / www.gao.gov office of management & budget http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb / . pursuant to p.l . 107-38 , the president has released $376.9 million in terrorist emergency funds forincreased security at the capitol . mark up was held by the full senate committee on appropriations . the president requested the release of an additional allocation forlegislative branch security of $265.1 million , which unlike the other allocations for security , requiredcongressional approval . congress approved the funds , as requested , as part of the fy2002 defensedepartment appropriations bill , which was signed into p.l . 107-117 on january 10 , 2002 . effective in fy1978 , the legislative branch appropriations bill was divided into two titles . title i , congressional operations , contains budget authorities for activities directly serving congress . included in this title are the budgets of the house , the senate , joint items ( joint house and senateactivities ) , the office of compliance , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , the architect of thecapitol ( aoc ) ( except the library of congress ( loc ) buildings and grounds ) , the congressionalresearch service ( crs ) within the library of congress , and congressional printing and bindingactivities of the government printing office ( gpo ) . title ii , related agencies , contains budgets for activities not directly supporting congress .