any attempt to reinstate the draft would require congressional approval . the draft might also be useful if congress decided to dramatically expand the size of the army over a short period of time . see also crs report rl31682 , the military draft and a possible war with iraq , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) , for a more detailed discussion of arguments for and against a draft . however , the army is having difficulty increasing its strength due to recruiting shortfalls . such a mission could demand a large numbers of military personnel who do not require the more specialized skills . this report provides short answers to commonly asked questions about military personnel and compensation issues related to these operations . at the present time , it appears unlikely that the u.s. will reinstate the draft to meet its manpower needs . while the army and some of the reserve components are having difficulty making recruiting goals , the military is meeting its retention objectives and has a large pool of trained personnel in the reserves that it can draw on to augment its active forces . additionally , while conscription is useful for producing large numbers of basically trained military personnel , it is not very useful for producing high skill specialists which the military often has the greatest need for: for example , intelligence analysts , linguists , special operations forces , civil affairs personnel , and pilots . these people need years of training and high motivation levels to become proficient in their military occupations . however , should reconstruction and counter - insurgency operations in iraq require a major u.s. presence for a prolonged period of time , the utility of a draft might become a more active consideration . the section on force structure addresses issues related to how one / oef / oif might affect the number of personnel needed by the military , and answers common questions about whether or not a return to conscription is likely under current circumstances . prior to the september 11 attacks , there was a serious debate between congress and the executive branch over whether the military was being tasked with more missions than it could realistically handle , given its manpower levels . congress was especially concerned that these missions — in bosnia , kosovo , southwest asia , the sinai , and elsewhere — might be producing personnel tempo ( perstempo ) levels high enough to have a negative effect on retention . as such , congress passed laws requiring the services to track the perstempo of every servicemember , to monitor individual perstempo levels more closely , and to pay an allowance to servicemembers assigned lengthy or numerous deployments . similar concerns about perstempo led general eric shinseki , the army chief of staff , to assert before the house armed services committee in july , 2001 , that "given today's mission profile , the army is too small for the mission load it is carrying. during that hearing , both shinseki and secretary of the army thomas white endorsed a proposal to increase the army's end strength from 480,000 to 520,000 soldiers .