appendix a . temporary extensions of the healthy marriage promotion and responsible fatherhood grant program appendix b . legislative history of federally funded responsible federal fatherhood programs beginning with the 106 th congress and with each subsequent congress , responsible fatherhood programs have received both presidential and congressional attention . what if the parent has children with more than one person ? what is the federal policy with regard to incarcerated parents and parents recently released from prison ? does the federal government support counseling , education , and supervised visitation for abusive parents so that they can reconnect with their children ? the discussion below examines three issues that will likely impact the success of congressional fatherhood initiatives . the first deals with the role of the cse agency in responsible fatherhood programs . some analysts contend that since many noncustodial parents have a negative view of and / or contentious relationship with the cse program , the use of the cse program to recruit fathers does not bode well for the success of such programs . currently , most federally funded responsible fatherhood programs are provided through competitive grants to community organizations and other groups that have experience in working with low - income men . the second issue examines father involvement in the context of the father's relationship with the child's mother . this issue is based on the premise that formal marital relationships last longer and are more conducive to long - term interaction between fathers and children than other types of relationships . the third issue examines the importance of employment programs and job supports for noncustodial parents . this issue acknowledges that economic pressures and instability , often because of unemployment or low wages , frequently contribute to nonpayment of child support and dysfunctional relationships . during the period from fy1978 to fy2016 , child support payments collected by the cse agencies increased from $1 billion to $28.8 billion . moreover , the program has made significant improvements in other program measures as well , such as the number of parents located , paternities established , and child support orders established . advocates of the cse program say that this dramatic program performance is aside from the indirect and intangible benefits of the program , such as increased personal responsibility and welfare cost - avoidance . critics of the cse program contend that even with an unprecedented array of "big brother" enforcement tools such as license ( professional , driver's , recreational ) and passport revocation ; seizure of banking accounts , retirement funds , and lottery winnings ; and automatic income withholding from pay checks , the program still collects only 20% of child support obligations for which it has responsibility and collects payments for only 60% of its caseload . information obtained from both custodial and noncustodial parents through various surveys and studies consistently tells the same story . noncustodial parents generally indicate that they ( 1 ) want more access to their children , ( 2 ) need to learn more relationship skills so they can coparent their children , and ( 3 ) need help finding and maintaining employment .