appendix a . comparison of major provisions of bills in the 107 th congress on unauthorized alien students appendix b . comparison of major provisions of bills in the 108 th congress on unauthorized alien student . other bills , h.r . on october 16 and october 23 , 2003 , the senate judiciary committee marked up s. 1545 . at the october 16 session , the committee voted in favor of an amendment in the nature of a substitute proposed by senator hatch for himself and senator durbin . s. 1545 , as reported , would have placed restrictions on eligibility for higher education assistance for beneficiaries of the bill's adjustment provisions . with respect to assistance provided under title iv , it would have made aliens who adjust to lpr status under the bill eligible only for student loans , federal work - study programs , and services ( such as counseling , tutorial services , and mentoring ) , subject to the applicable requirements . thus , aliens adjusting status under s. 1545 would not have been eligible for pell grants . 3271 , and s. 8 , as introduced , did not contain restrictions on eligibility for federal student financial aid . an alien who adjusted to lpr status under any of these bills would have been eligible , as an lpr , for federal financial aid under title iv . 1684 additionally would have extended this eligibility to unauthorized students who had applied for , but not yet been granted , cancellation of removal / adjustment of status . the substitute amended various provisions of s. 1545 , as introduced . among the substantive amendments were changes to the confidentiality of information section . for example , the bill , as introduced , stated that information furnished by applicants could not be used for any purpose other than to make a determination on the application . the substitute amended this provision to state that information furnished by applicants could not be used to initiate removal proceedings against individuals identified in the application . at the october 23 meeting , the judiciary committee considered a set of amendments to s. 1545 offered by senator charles grassley . two of these amendments were the subject of debate at the markup . the first proposed to amend a provision in the bill allowing aliens who , prior to the date of enactment , met the requirements for both conditional resident status and removal of the condition , to petition for lpr status without first becoming conditional residents . the amendment would have made these aliens subject to the same period of conditional residence as other aliens eligible for relief under the bill . the second amendment proposed to place restrictions on the availability of federal student financial aid to aliens eligible for adjustment to lpr status under the bill . under the amendment , these aliens would have been eligible only for specified student loan and work - study programs . among the other amendments in the grassley package was one that would have required beneficiaries of the bill to be registered in the student and exchange visitor information system ( sevis ) , the monitoring system for foreign students .