table 1 . foreign assistance authorizations in div . b , s.2144 ( 3 ) ( millions of dollars ) a . each account is adjusted for the 0.59% across - the - board rescission required by division h of p.l . 108-199 , the consolidated appropriations act , fy2004 . b. fy2003 supplemental includes funds appropriated in p.l . offsetting these and additions made in other parts of s. 2144 is a reduction of $500 million for the president's new foreign aid initiative , themillennium challenge account ( mca ) . the legislation , however , continues forfy2005 existing authority to use up to 10% of mca funding to assist countries thatfail , by a narrow margin , to qualify for the mca program in hopes of improving theirchances in future years . total amounts authorized in s. 2144 conform to the overall level for international affairs spending approved in the senate on march 11 in the fy2005budget resolution ( s.con.res . the senate - passed measureincreases the president's $31.6 billion foreign policy budget request to $32.33 billionin discretionary spending , largely due to floor amendments by senators lugar,durbin , and dewine adding $1.83 billion to the committee - reported level . althoughnot binding , amendment sponsors said they intended the additional funds to be usedfor higher resources for hiv / aids , aid to haiti , and more broadly to fill fundinggaps throughout the international affairs budget . title xxii of division b of s. 2144 includes 35 sections , most of which incorporate into permanent law legislative items that have been included inannual appropriations in recent years or update existing provisions that have not beenamended to reflect current circumstances . for example , provisions routinely carriedin appropriation acts concerning assistance to non - governmental organizations,authority to undertake reconstruction projects with disaster aid funds , aid to theformer soviet union , aid prohibitions for countries whose elected head ofgovernment has been deposed by a military coup , and administration of justice,demining , and debt relief programs would be added to the foreign assistance actof 1961 . presumably , similar measures would be dropped from future foreignoperations appropriation bills . the legislation also updates long - standing authorities , such as those related to the president's special waiver authority [section 614 ( a ) of the foreign assistanceact] , prohibition on aid to countries in default on debt owed to the united states,additions to war reserve stockpiles in israel , restrictions on aid to lebanon , dollarthresholds of arms sales that must be notified to congress , and several otheradministrative authorities . s. 2144 further extends an existing waiverfor pakistan aid restrictions through fy2005 . title xxiii of s. 2144 addresses the threat posed by terrorist use of radiological dispersal devices , or rdds . these devices spread radioactivematerial , whether by a chemical explosive ( "dirty bombs" ) or by spraying , scattering,or dumping it without an explosive . the united states has devoted far more resources to studying the effects of rdds and to planning responses to an rdd attack than have many other countries .