for burley . ( 6 ) one reason for increased consolidation and higher quota rental fees was the sharp decline in quota levels after 1997 , as shown in figure 3 and table 1 . the decline was due to the reversal ofpreviously rapidly growing export markets for u.s. - manufactured cigarettes . the basic quotas forflue - cured and burley tobacco declined 52% and 57% respectively after 1997 . farmers needed tomarket enough tobacco to maintain their revenue and to economically utilize their barns , equipment,and labor . this required renting more quota . along with these economic pressures to consolidate,several sources of financial aid made it possible for farmers to pay higher rental rates for quota . first , in conjunction with phase ii of the 1998 master settlement agreement , cigarette manufacturers agreed to distribute $5.15 billion to tobacco producers and quota owners over a12-year period . ( 7 ) second , to help offset decreasesin marketing quotas , congress acted to provideassistance . four separate emergency assistance laws ( p.l . 107-25 , p.l.108-7 ) included what the industry called direct "tobacco loss payments ( tlps ) " totaling $860million . third , congress directed the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) to take ownership ofall 1999 tobacco pledged as price support loan collateral and to assume all financial losses ( p.l.106-387 , as amended ) . ccc finally completed disposal of this inventory in december 2003 byburying it in landfills . according to ccc data , the total cost of acquisition , interest on principal,storage , and disposal was about $625 million . these three sources of financial assistance , rather than income from the sale of tobacco , are the primary reason active producers were able to pay higher rental rates to absentee quota owners as theybid against each other for their share of a declining national tobacco quota . ( see crs report rs20802 , tobacco farmer assistance . ) the value of tobacco marketing quota depended on several factors , including expectations aboutthe future . quota owners knew exactly how much rent they earned from active producers . whatthey did not know was how long the tobacco program would continue to operate , or the size ofnational marketing quotas in future years . survey data from kentucky revealed that the average sale price of marketing quotas was $2.58 / lb . ( see identical bills h.r . doubts about whether strong divisions in congress over proposed fda regulatory authority could be overcome encouraged sponsors of h.r . 4033 ( jenkins ; march 25 , 2004 ) toseek about $9.6 billion in funding out of the u.s. treasury , rather than from assessments onmanufacturers . the bill was cosponsored by most supporters of the so - called house consensus bill . this bill provided $1 / lb . lower quota buyout and transition payment rates ( $7 / lb . in contrast to other proposals , phase ii payments to growers would continue andprovide an additional benefit of about $2.6 billion . the jenkins bill also was included as title viiin the house - passed h.r . 4520 , a tax bill called the american jobs creation act of2004 .