an additional 10.5% were enrolled in associate degree programs . foreign students enrolled in other programs comprised 7.5% of the foreign student total . participants in optional practical training programs constituted 9.1% of the international student total in the 2007-2008 academic year . the fields of study undertaken by foreign students appear to be quite diverse , as figure 4 shows . the largest category is business and management , which is the field of study for 17.8% of foreign students . engineering along with physical and life sciences follow with 15.4% and 8.5% , respectively . mathematics and computer sciences and social sciences accounted for 7.4% of the student population . the number of students participating in optional practical training has seen a marked increase in the last couple of years and currently accounts for 9% of foreign students' major study fields . the category of other fields of study accounted for 9.8% of the foreign student population . although the ina contains specific categories for intending students , almost all classes of nonimmigrant visitors are permitted to attend schools in the united states . generally , the visa holders' course work must be incidental to their primary purpose for being in the united states . as shown in table 1 below , the principal visa holder in all classes of nonimmigrants except "b" visitors , "c" aliens in transit , and "d" crewmen may attend school . moreover , the majority of these categories also permit spouses and minor children to attend school . however , because school attendance is incidental to the visa's primary purpose , the visas may not be extended to complete a course of study . as such , all nonimmigrant categories except aliens in transit , crewmen , "k" fiancees and spouses of u.s. citizens , and "s" witnesses and informants are allowed to change status to the f , j , or m nonimmigrant categories . nonimmigrant students who are in the united states on other than f , j , or m visas may attend the school of their choice on either a part - time or full - time basis ( with exceptions noted in table 1 ) , including schools that are not approved by the ( sevp ) . provided that school enrollment and attendance does not supercede the nonimmigrant's primary intent under his or her existing visa category ( or in no other way violates the terms of the visa ) , the nonimmigrant may continue to pursue course work . investigation of student activities and the determination of visa violations are made by ice agents . ice generally encourages nonimmigrants who wish to pursue education in the united states to apply for change of status to an f , j , or m nonimmigrant visa . moreover , if the nonimmigrant wishes to pursue employment resulting from educational attainment , he or she must apply for work authorization , as well as for change of status to a qualifying nonimmigrant visa . the reporting requirements of sevis transfer to neither non - educational visa holders nor programs without enrolled f , j , or m visa holders . a foreign national enrolled on a non - educational visa is not required to submit documentation in the sevis system .