charter schools . charter schools are public schools that operate independently of traditional local public schoolsystems under a charter granted by a public entity . special education . the district's special education program has long been characterized as ineffective and inefficient . ( 8 ) the system has been plagued by problems in transporting students to specialeducation facilities and in the timely evaluation of students who may have specialneeds . delays in the period between a student's referral and assessment increase thenumber of students placed in private educational institutions , which adds to the costof special education . concern about the cost of these delays prompted congress toinclude a provision in the district of columbia appropriations act for fy1999 thatextends the time period between referral and assessment of a student with specialeducation needs , as defined by the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) ( 9 ) or the rehabilitation education act , ( 10 ) from 50 days to 120 days . ( 11 ) p.l.108-7 , the consolidated appropriations act for fy2003 , deleted the 120-day specialeducation evaluation and placement time period provision included in previousappropriations acts . in addition , the fy1999 appropriations act for the district of columbia limited the amount of compensation payable to attorneys representing disabled students whoprevailed in an action brought against the district of columbia public schools ( dcps ) under the idea . subsequent appropriations acts for fy2000 and fy2001also limited the amount of funds payable to attorneys successfully representingstudents seeking special education services . the fy1999 act limited attorneys' feesto an hourly rate of $50 and a case ceiling of $1,300 ; the fy2000 limit was $60 perhour and a case ceiling of $1,560 ; and the fy2001 rate was $125 per hour with a caseceiling of $2,500 . the district's fy2002 appropriations act lifted the ceiling , in part , in response to the argument that the ceiling placed a hardship on households with limitedfinancial resources . district officials countered that the payment of attorney's feesdiverted significant funds from the provision of special education services , but wereunable to quantify the amount . as a consequence , the fy2002 appropriationsdirected the superintendent of the dcps to provide an itemized list of attorney's feesawarded plaintiffs who had prevailed in cases brought under the idea . ( 12 ) the actalso directed the general accounting office to report to the house and senateappropriations committees on attorneys' fees awarded to prevailing plaintiffsseeking remedy under the idea in excess of the payment ceiling established in theappropriations acts for fy1999 , fy2000 , and fy2001 . ( 13 ) copies of the gaoreports cited above may be obtained at the gao website . ( 14 ) the district of columbia appropriations act for fy2003 , p.l . 108-7 , limits to $4,000 the amount of appropriated funds that may be used to pay attorney's fees foractions brought against the dcps under the idea . the $4,000 limit includes feesfor attorneys representing students and those defending the dcps . section 145 ofthe act requires attorneys in special education cases brought under the idea todisclose all financial , corporate , legal , or other interest or relationships with anyspecial education diagnostic services or schools to which the attorney may havereferred any client .