b . product is determined to be sensitive . do not distribute . the 1946 act had permitted declassification of rdonly when the aec determined that it could be published without "adversely affecting the commondefense and security ... . how will such controls affect the conduct of academic research for the federalgovernment ? how will such controls differ from the controls on proprietary researchinformation that are deemed acceptable by most academic institutions eager to receive financialsupport from industry ? will research agencies with original classification authority modify theirlong - standing policies of encouraging publication and dissemination of federally funded researchresults ? under the expanded definition of scientific and technological informationsubject to classification in executive order 13292 , will agencies classify information that might haveotherwise been categorized as sbu ? appeals process for sbu information . anothercontinuing issue is expected to be an appeals process for designating information as sbu . stephenaftergood , with the federation of american scientists ( fas ) , suggested that " ... an appeals panelthat is outside of the originating agency and that therefore does not have [the] same bureaucraticinterests at stake would significantly enhance the credibility of the deliberative process . the efficacyof such an appeals process has been repeatedly demonstrated by an executive branch body called theinteragency security classification appeals panel ( iscap ) . ( 184 ) another suggested approach is that"to solve disputes that develop out of the new category of 'sensitive but unclassified' information,one could allow the information security oversight office ( a part of the executive branch ) toreceive appeals to review disputes and challenges to executive agency decisions regarding the releaseof documents and reports the office would oversee the appeals , it would have another set of eyesthat would examine the requested information and review it in a different context that the executiveagency . the isoo might be able to work with both the agency involved and those requesting theinformation to reach a compromise that everyone could accept . it would also have the effect ofkeeping the oversight of the information in the hands of the executive branch. ( 185 ) determination of "tiered" access to sbu information . some agencies have discussed developing procedures to permit"tiered," or selective , access to qualified and pre - screened individuals for some scientific andtechnical information , that could be categorized as sbu or shsi . reportedly , epa requiresresearchers to obtain sponsorship from a senior epa official , have their requests approved inadvance and register before using the envirofacts database . ( 186 ) epa also has issued instructions toutilities to submit threat or vulnerability assessments to the agency . using a protocol issued indecember 2002 , reportedly , epa "... will keep sensitive information in the assessments secure . thedocuments will be kept in one location under lock and only individuals designated by epa will haveaccess to them. ( 187 ) epa also will release otheragency information to selected individuals only inhard copy at epa offices and libraries throughout the nation .