107-56 ) in october , 2001 . the nisacs's stated mission has been to provide new computer modeling and simulationcapabilities for critical infrastructure analysis focusing on interdependencies , vulnerabilities , andcomplexities . among other security - related provisions of p.l . 96-129 and subsequent laws , the ops requires general protection of "exposed" oil pipeline facilities from vandalism and unauthorized entry . in addition to these specific issues , congress may wish to assess how the various elements of u.s. pipeline security activity fit together in the nation's overall strategy to protect criticalinfrastructure . for example , increasing the number of pipeline security inspections by tsa couldbe of limited value if asset "criticality" is not clearly defined and federal threat information remainsambiguous . likewise , diverting pipeline resources away from safety to enhance security mightfurther reduce terror risk , but not overall pipeline risk , if safety programs become less effective asa result . u.s. pipeline security necessarily involves many groups: federal agencies , oil and gaspipeline associations , large and small pipeline operators , and critical and non - critical asset owners . reviewing how these groups work together to achieve common security goals could be an oversightchallenge for congress . the critical infrastructure assurance office ( ciao ) , created by pdd - 63 as an interagency office within the commerce department in 1998 , was charged with coordinating federal criticalinfrastructure assurance initiatives and raising industry awareness of infrastructure risks , especiallythose related to information systems . ( 95 ) amongother activities , ciao facilitated private sector ( including oil and gas ) input to the national strategy for critical infrastructure through the partnershipfor critical infrastructure security , and helped support formation of the energy information sharingand analysis center ( isac ) . ( 96 ) the national infrastructure protection center ( nipc ) within the fbi was also created by pdd - 63 in 1998 . the mission of the nipc was to detect , prevent , respond to and investigatemalicious acts against the nation's critical infrastructures . nipc was a primary source of threatinformation to the energy isac , and also worked with industry on national critical infrastructurestrategy . the nipc was viewed by industry as "a central focus for law enforcement and incidentanalysis , but not the central point for all forms of private sector cooperation. ( 97 ) the office of energy assurance ( oea ) was established within the department of energy by secretary abraham in may , 2001 to help protect the country against major energy supply disruptions . while the doe is not responsible for pipeline security , its activities under pdd - 63 as the leadagency for all other energy security has had implications for oil and gas pipelines . for example,oea co - sponsored the development of guidelines for municipal governments to respond to naturalgas supply disruptions . ( 98 ) the oea's nationalinfrastructure simulation and analysis center ( nisac ) was chartered under section 1016 of the usa patriot act ( p.l . ( 99 ) nisac has promoted , amongother capabilities , the ability to assess the propagationand escalation of minor initiating events between energy , communication and waterinfrastructures .