table 1 . net imports of petroleum , 1989-2002 ( in thousands of barrels per day ) source: u.s. energy information administration . monthly energy review , march2003 , p. 43 . secondly , as noted above , in the short term , stocks of privately held oil have declined . figure 2 shows the behavior of u.s. stocks , measured in billions ofbarrels , in the longer term , from 1973-2002 . the figure shows that non - spr crudeoil stocks have experienced a long term decline since their peak in the mid 1970's,even though in the last two decades imports and consumption have risen . figure 2also suggests some increased volatility in the level of privately held stocks since themid 1990's . this behavior might be expected if firms were optimizing theirinventory holdings . additions to stock when prices of crude oil are low and drawdowns from inventory when prices are high enhance profit opportunities . ( 9 ) trends similar to those observed in crude oil have also occurred in petroleum products . the petroleum industry research foundation , inc. calculates that finishedgasoline stocks fell from a 30 day stock in 1985 to an 18-19 day stock in 2001 . thistranslated into a 41 million barrel decline in gasoline stocks over the period . anadditional complication is that gasoline is not as fungible as it once was . differentblends of gasoline to satisfy differing air pollution standards in various parts of thecountry put further strain on a system that is reducing stocks . ( 10 ) finally , not only privately held stocks have declined , but the privately held capacity to hold stocks has also declined . in 1990 , the capacity of refineries in theu.s . to hold stocks of crude oil was 204 million barrels ; by 2002 this capacity haddeclined to 183.3 million barrels , a reduction of over 10 percent . ( 11 ) this decline incapacity , coupled with the decline in held stocks , suggests that the industry might beattempting to reduce the level of inventory as a way of managing cost . much of u.s.industry has adopted "just in time" inventory techniques as a way to lower costs andenhance efficiency . it would be consistent with this trend for the petroleum sectorto follow a similar strategy . figure 3 represents a "break even" analysis of the relationship between totalstocks of u.s. crude oil and time , assuming that the nation has a security target ofninety days of import substitution , consistent with iea targets . the iea data arebased on total stocks of crude oil which ignores the lower operational inventoryconstraint for industry and , therefore , may overstate the ability of combined stocksto actually meet emergency needs . although the iea analysis suggests a developing problem for the u.s. in terms of replacing imported oil in times of emergency , the real situation may be even morechallenging than the iea analysis suggests . energy information administration datashows that in the fall of 2002 and again in early 2003 private stocks of crude oil werereduced to the lower operational inventory levels discussed earlier . at those timesthere were no additional crude oil reserves in the private sector in a practical sense .