forests store substantial amounts of carbon . the amount stored , however , changes over time as forests grow and die . §§2341 , et seq. ) forests are enormously variable , with a broad array of plant species ( both trees and understory vegetation ) and substantial differences in the diversity of plant ( and animal ) species they contain . the myriad permutations of forest plants and soils present formidable obstacles for estimating existing carbon stocks and the carbon sequestration and release that result from forestry activities . the carbon consequences of timber harvesting have been particularly controversial . because of the scientific uncertainties , as well as differences in the types and extent of forests among nations , reaching agreement on ways to account for carbon sequestration in forests has been difficult . some argue for a broadly inclusive accounting , others for a more conservative approach . carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) is one of the nutrients essential to building the organic chemicals that comprise leaves , roots , and stems . however , the ambiguous language and terminology used by proponents contribute to the inherent difficulties of measuring baseline carbon stocks , land uses , the carbon impacts of various activities , and "leakage" ( shifting land or product uses ) . furthermore , the enormous diversity of forest types and widespread disputes over the carbon consequences of various practices ( which result at least partly from the diversity of forests ) make it difficult to generalize about the opportunities to mitigate global climate change through forest carbon sequestration . it is likely that research to reduce some of these ambiguities and uncertainties will be an ongoing element in the efforts of nations to deal with carbon sequestration — and with concerns about climate change . all parts of a plant — the stem , limbs and leaves , and roots — contain carbon , but the proportion in each part varies enormously , depending on the plant species and the individual specimen's age and growth pattern . nonetheless , as more photosynthesis occurs , more co 2 is converted into biomass , reducing carbon in the atmosphere and sequestering ( storing ) it in plant tissue ( vegetation ) above and below ground . plants also respire , using oxygen to maintain life and emitting co 2 in the process . at times ( eg , at night and during winter seasons in non - tropical climates ) , living , growing forests are net emitters of co 2 , although they are generally net carbon sinks over the life of the forest . when vegetation dies , carbon is released to the atmosphere . this can occur quickly , as in a fire , or slowly , as fallen trees , leaves , and other detritus decompose . for herbaceous plants , the above - ground biomass dies annually and begins to decompose right away , but for woody plants , some of the above - ground biomass continues to store carbon until the plant dies and decomposes . this is the essence of the carbon cycle in forests — net carbon accumulation ( sequestration ) with vegetative growth , and release of carbon when the vegetation dies .