the salinity of the sea has been increasing over time . recent studies have reported that about 4 million tons of salt enter the sea annually . this act came on the heels of a massive die - off of eared grebes ( approximately 150,000 ) from january to march 1992 as well as the issuance of a second biological opinion on the desert pupfish that limited incidental take of species when agricultural drainage areas were maintained . the death of brown pelicans was especially dramatic since it is a federally listed endangered species ( listed in 1970 ) . indeed , avian mortality was reported to be highest in and around the sea in the 1990s compared to other decades . the cause of mortality in these events was largely attributed to microbes that lead to disease in birds . the origin of these microbes was unclear , although some scientists have attributed them to contaminated fish that were eaten by birds . large fish kills are also reported in the sea , including the mass mortality of tilapia and gulf croakers ( bairdiella icistia ) . dead fish were thought to have weakened immunity because of high levels of toxins ( eg , selenium and dde ) and parasites , and low levels of dissolved oxygen in the sea . low immunity in fish will increase their chances of contracting disease and dying . high salinity levels are also thought to affect fish populations in the sea . scientists regard salinity levels of 33 - 37 ppt adequate for ocean living organisms . beyond salinity levels of 40 ppt , fish may have limited reproductive success and physiological stress . the mortality of bird and fish species in and around the salton sea is of concern because of federal and state listed endangered species that inhabit the sea . for example , the brown pelican and yuma clapper rail ( rallus longirostris yumanensis ) are federally listed endangered species , which reside in and around the sea during the year . other endangered species such as the peregrine falcon ( falco peregrinus ) and threatened species such as the bald eagle ( haliaeetus leucocephalus ) are occasionally seen at the sea as they make their way along the pacific flyway . the desert pupfish ( cyprinodon macularius ) is the only endemic fish species in the salton basin , and was listed as an endangered species in 1986 . fish and wildlife service ( fws ) issued a biological opinion for the desert pupfish . in this opinion , the fws stated that both agricultural drain maintenance activities by the imperial irrigation district and the coachella valley water authority and the introduction of sterile grass carp would not jeopardize the continued existence of desert pupfish . the opinion also allowed for unlimited incidental take of the species during drain maintenance . a subsequent biological opinion for the desert pupfish in 1992 , found again that drain maintenance would not harm the population , yet only a limited incidental take was allowed . it was found that there was a large number of desert pupfish inhabiting the drains . this opinion also covered the effects on the yuma clapper rail and california brown pelican .