it will be updated in response to major legislative developments . the national security education program ( nsep ) ( 2 ) is intended to complement , and not duplicate , other federalprograms of aid for foreign language and area studies education , such as those authorized under titlevi of the higher education act , the fulbright - hays act , and other legislation . ( 3 ) distinctive elements of thensep , compared to most other federal programs of aid to international education or exchange,include its service requirement for aid recipients , administration by the department of defense ( dod ) , rather than the departments of education ( ed ) or state , and its support for internationaltravel by american undergraduate students . the recent establishment of the nsep pilot program,the national flagship language initiative , distinguishes it even further from title vi programs . selected issues that have arisen with respect to the nsep are discussed in theremainder of this report . as noted earlier , the original intention was that the nsep would be funded via theearnings of a trust fund . an initial appropriation of $150 million was provided to the trustfund , with the possibility of additional appropriations being provided to the fund afterward . the apparent intention of using this funding mechanism was to help insulate the programfrom the uncertainties of the annual budget and appropriations processes , although funds tobe used for annual grants and administration must still be appropriated from the fund . however , the reduction of the nsetf by one - half in subsequent rescissionslegislation ( p.l . 104-6 ) , combined with a decline in interest rates mean that annual nsetfearnings have been only $2-3 million in recent years , much lower than the annualappropriations and program level of approximately $8 million per year . thus , as noted in table 2 , the fund's balance is steadily declining ; if current trends continue , the fund will bedepleted by fy2006 . if nsep activities are to be maintained at their current ( or higher ) levels , the size of the fund must be increased significantly . alternatively , the nsep'sfunding structure might be shifted totally to an annual appropriations basis , as is the case forthe majority of federal grant programs . 107-306 , discussed above , requires thesecretary of defense to study the feasibility of such a shift . an issue which arises with respect to any federal program intended to supportinstruction in "critical" foreign languages , regions , and disciplines is whether aid awards areappropriately targeted on such languages , regions , and disciplines . according to the nsea,"critical" foreign languages , regions , and disciplines are those in which there is a majornational security interest , the knowledge and skills of u.s. students and federal employeesare deficient , and they are infrequently taught in the nation's colleges and universities andinfrequently represented in other international educational exchange programs . the nseb conducts an annual survey of federal agencies to identify foreignlanguages , regions , and disciplines which the agencies deem to be critical to their operations . a wide variety of languages that are both frequently ( eg , spanish ) and infrequently ( eg,farsi ) taught are identified through this process .