several of the issues that have arisen are briefly identified below . as described earlier in this report , the standards for identifying teacher preparation programs as low - performing under title ii are set by each individual state . these may or may not involve the various criteria in the reports required from institutions and states , such as the pass rates of graduates on initial licensure exams . funding has been awarded over five fiscal years . is the interaction among the various entities engaged in partnership grants likely to have a significant impact on the quality of teacher preparation and recruitment , and , if so , should support for partnerships be expanded ? how should the congress respond to the concern expressed by various higher education associations that the title ii programs offer little or no direct support for improving teacher preparation at higher education institutions ? where should the balance be placed among investment in such activities as teacher preparation , teacher recruitment , professional development , and accountability ? how much support should be directed to alternatives to traditional teacher preparation programs and alternative routes to certification ? the general accountability provisions of title ii , part a applicable to states and higher education institutions with teacher preparation programs have generated significant debate since their inception . federal consequences for an institution identified as low - performing flow only if its state takes specified action . to date , relatively few institutions have been identified as low - performing under the title ii provisions . congress may consider whether the emphasis in the title ii accountability process on licensing exam pass rates should be constrained or expanded . the utility of the current pass rate - based system from a national perspective may be limited because the selection of certification exams and the setting of passing scores are state specific and do not easily allow for interstate comparisons . further , recent research concludes that many current licensing exams are not rigorous , measuring essentially basic skills . increased institutional pass rates on such exams may say relatively little about whether teacher preparation programs are graduating students who will be good teachers . nevertheless , the premise that teacher preparation programs should graduate students who can pass initial credentialing exams does not appear to be at issue . indeed , there is some evidence that higher education institutions may respond to low pass rates with , what one set of researchers described as , "innovative strategies to enhance the content knowledge of prospective teachers as well as their writing and reading skills. for some policymakers , the limitations of the present system may suggest that the current federal involvement is but an initial step in a multi - step process necessary to improve teacher preparation program quality . for example , consideration may be given to establishing a single , nationwide standard , although such a proposal is likely to prove politically controversial . for others , the reporting burden and difficulty in making cross - state comparisons may suggest a refocusing of these provisions , perhaps to measures of state support for teacher preparation or the alignment of state certification exams with state standards for teacher preparation program approval .