relations between the united states and nepal have traditionally been friendly . the united states also seeks to promote democracy and civil society in nepal and provide developmental assistance to its people . political instability and insurgency - related violence has undermined the country's economy . u.s. government officials have asserted that further deterioration of nepal's circumstances could destabilize the region , spur new tensions between india and china , and potentially create a new terrorist haven in south asia . on april 24 , 2006 , mounting popular resistance in support of the political parties led king gyanendra to hand over power to the seven party alliance . the seven parties have worked together through their alliance to promote a more democratic nepal in the face of direct rule by the king . with this development , nepal began a process that promises to end a period of intense political conflict between the king and the political parties , and armed struggle with the maoists . in may 2006 , six of the seven political parties formed a coalition government . on november 8 , 2006 , the seven party alliance and the maoists reached a peace agreement ending a decade - old insurgency that claimed some 13,000 lives . in it , the maoists agreed to put down their arms and postpone a decision on the future disposition of the monarchy until after the election of a constituent assembly . under the peace agreement , constituent assembly elections were to be held by the end of june 2007 . the june election date slipped to november 2007 due to difficulties in preparing for the election . the maoists favor the removal of the monarchy while the nepali congress party favors a ceremonial role for the monarchy . girija prasad koirala of the nepali congress party is currently prime minister . the seven party alliance that opposed the king in april includes the following parties as listed below . the maoists are not part of the seven party alliance though they have worked with the alliance in recent months . the nepali congress ( nc ) communist party of nepal unified marxist leninist cpn ( uml ) nepali congress ( democratic ) or nc ( d ) nepal sadbhavana party ( anandi devi ) or nsp ( a ) jana morcha nepal samyukta baam morcha ( united left front ) or ulf nepal workers and peasants party ( nwpp ) the six party government includes all of the seven party alliance members except the nwpp . the royalist rashtriya prajatantra party ( rpp ) , the third - largest party in parliament , did not oppose the king's direct rule and is outside the government . according to one source , the "maoists appear to be the most organized political force in the country" and the seven party alliance has "a history of bickering among themselves , a weakness that both the maoists and the royalists would be quick to exploit. for these reasons , as well as mounting protests in the south , nepal has yet to consolidate the significant moves towards peace and democracy that have transpired over the past year . there is also growing concern that the constituent assembly election be held as soon as possible .