poultry . as noted above , the previous rules only applied to poultry operations that have a continuous overflow watering or liquid manure handling system . the final rules included revisions , as proposed , to clarify applicability of the regulations to all types of poultry operations , regardless of the type of manure handling system . the inclusion of all poultry operations , regardless of manure handling system , brought in all large broiler and dry layer feeding operations and added an estimated 2,198 operations to the number of regulated facilities . immature animals . the final rules also regulated facilities that confine stand - alone immature animals ( swine and heifers ) , which previously were not covered separately . as a result , 488 of these operations were thus subject to regulation . operations required to apply for a permit . epa estimated that under the previous rules , 12,813 animal feeding operations were subject to regulation and should have had npdes permits . the total included 8,438 large facilities ( more than 1,000 animals ) and 4,375 medium facilities ( 300 to 999 facilities ) which either were defined as cafos by size or discharge characteristics , or had been designated as cafos by permitting authorities . by adding all poultry operations and stand - alone , immature animal operations , the final rules were estimated to cover an additional 2,554 operations ( 15,437 facilities in total , consisting of 10,754 large and 4,613 medium operations ) . the total was 34% of all large and medium animal feeding operations and about 19% of operations of all size in the united states , based on usda's 1997 census of agriculture . required performance standard . also as described above , the previous rules prohibited discharges from a cafo except in the event of wastewater or manure overflows or runoff from a 25-year , 24-hour rainfall event . the proposed and final rules retained this design criterion without change . however , under the final rules , new sources in the swine , poultry , and veal categories must meet a more stringent design standard: storage structures must be designed and maintained to contain the runoff from a 100-year , 24-hour storm event . the final rules included a provision that was not in the proposal allowing existing cafos to request permit limits based on site - specific alternative technologies established by the permitting authority , to encourage innovative technologies , according to epa . under the new rules , alternative technology limits were required to provide pollutant control equal to or better than under the baseline rules . best management practices . the revised rules included best management practices ( bmps ) for land application and animal production areas . bmps are measures or methods that have been determined to be the most effective , practical means of preventing or reducing pollution from nonpoint sources . the requirements for land application areas were to ensure the proper application of manure , litter , and other process wastes to land that the cafo controls .