the question then arises: why now ? one plausible explanation is the decline in the stock market that followed the bull market of the 1990s . as described in more detail below , an inversion is accompanied by a required payment of tax by individual shareholders on capital gains . the capital gains tax may thus serve as a brake on inversions . lower stock prices , however , may mean that capital gains are smaller and capital gains taxes less onerous . another suggestion has been that increased globalization of markets has exposed u.s. firms to more competitive pressures , leading them to more avidly pursue tax - saving strategies . and yet another reason is simply momentum: firms may have been reluctant to incorporate abroad for fear of public relations damage . once several firms undertook reorganizations , the damage potential may have been perceived to have fallen , and other firms followed . the corporate inversions apparently involve little , if any , shifts in actual economic activity from the united states abroad , at least in the near term . ( see , however , the section below on "policy issues" for a discussion of possible long - run effects. ) bermuda and the cayman islands are the location of many of the newly created parent corporations — jurisdictions that have no corporate income tax but that do have highly developed legal , institutional , and communications infrastructures . but the actual headquarters of inverted firms typically remain in the united states , and an inversion does not apparently involve the outflow of capital from the united states abroad or the shifting of corporate jobs to foreign locations . instead , the chief near - term economic impact of inversions is on u.s. federal tax revenues , which are reduced by the reorganizations , and concern has been expressed about the potential erosion of the u.s. corporate tax base . this has also led some to draw conclusions about their impact on tax equity: unless federal spending is cut or the deficit is increased , the reduction in tax revenue must be made up by tax increases on other taxpayers . some policymakers have sought a remedy within the existing u.s. system for taxing international transactions . as discussed below in the section on " alternative policy responses and proposals ," the 107 th and 108 th congresses have considered a variety of proposals aimed at stemming the growth of inversions . the proposals range from re - imposing u.s. taxes in a manner that would undo the effect of the inversion to more incremental approaches , such as denying the applicability of foreign tax credits and net operating losses to one - time u.s. "toll" taxes that may be triggered by an inversion . the latter , more incremental approach was taken by the enacted version of the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( p.l . others view inversions as symptomatic of more general problems with the u.s. tax system that have become evident as the world economy has become more integrated . rather than disallowing inversions , they recommend a more general reevaluation of the tax code "that drives them to do such a thing.