, war crimes ) . it is unclear exactly how the law of war applies to the current hostilities involving non - state terrorists , and the nature of the rights due to accused terrorist / war criminals may depend in part on their status under the geneva conventions . international law is incorporated into u.s. law . the law of war , a subset of international law , applies to cases arising from armed conflicts ( i.e. both tribunals are still operating , and employ virtually identical procedural rules . their jurisdiction is coexistent with that of national courts , but they also may assert primacy over national courts to prevent trials of the same individuals in more than one forum . the supreme court has ruled that al qaeda fighters are entitled at least to the baseline protections applicable under common article 3 of the geneva conventions , which includes protection from the "passing of sentences and the carrying out of executions without previous judgment pronounced by a regularly constituted court , affording all the judicial guarantees which are recognized as indispensable by civilized peoples. prior to the twentieth century , war crimes were generally tried , if tried at all , by belligerent states in their own national courts or special military tribunals . after world war i , the allies appointed a 15-member commission to inquire into the legal liability of those responsible for the war and the numerous breaches of the law of war that it occasioned . their jurisprudence may provide important precedent for the interpretation of common article 3 . based in the hague , netherlands , the icty has jurisdiction to try crimes conducted within the territory of the former yugoslavia , including the crime of "ethnic cleansing," whether committed in the context of an international war or a war of non - international character . it tries violations of the geneva conventions of 1949 , violations of the laws or customs of war , genocide , and crimes against humanity when committed in the context of an armed conflict . it is composed of sixteen permanent independent judges , who are elected by the un general assembly from a list of nominations provided by the security council . it has an appeals chamber consisting of seven judges , five of whom sit on a panel in any given case . the prosecutor , an independent organ of the court appointed by the un security council on the recommendation of the un secretary - general , investigates and prosecutes those responsible for covered offenses . when the prosecutor finds that sufficient evidence exists to try an individual , he issues an indictment , subject to the approval of a judge from the trial chamber . the ictr , based in arusha , tanzania , was established by the un security council in response to genocide and other systematic , widespread , and flagrant violations of humanitarian law applicable in the context of a non - international armed conflict , that is , common article 3 of the geneva conventions and additional protocol ii , genocide , and crimes against humanity . its structure and composition are similar to those of the icty .