table 1 . status of military construction appropriations , fy200 . elective quality of lifeconstruction . budget actions affect service member perceptions ofthe quality of military life through its impact on matters such as pay and benefits,health care , deployment schedules , and the like . in recent years , quality of life,including the use of military construction funds , has been a focus of the defensedebate . recent committee attention has focused on improvements to housing , workplaces , and installation infrastructure ( such as water , sewer , and electricitysystems ) , through both new construction and improved operations and maintenanceof existing facilities . subcommittee hearings have discussed at length the applicationof military construction funds to housing and workplace improvements at basesoverseas and within the continental united states . efforts to leverage appropriatedfunds through the partial privatization of military housing and installation utilityservices have also been subjected to protracted dialogue in committee hearings . foran in - depth discussion of the privatization of housing see crs report rl31039 ( pdf ) , military housing privatization initiative: background and issues , by [author name scrubbed] . requested congressional additions to the military construction budget . in recent years , some analysts have criticizedthe military construction appropriations process for being prone to the insertion ofunwanted and unnecessary undertakings . others , though , have supported theaddition of construction projects not requested by the department of defense asbeing necessary for military viability . an historical comparison shows that thedivergence between dod budget requests and congressional appropriationenactments originated relatively recently and has mainly affected the less than 20 %of military construction funding dedicated to the national guard and reserves ( see table 5 at the end of this report ) . nevertheless , until themid - 1990s , congress consistently granted significantly less budget authority to thedepartment of defense than had been requested by the administration ( see figure4 ) . this pattern of partial funding reversed with the fy1995 budget . beginning with fy1989 , regular ( i.e. , active duty ) componentfunding continued in the established pattern , but reserve component requests ( whichinclude the federal reserves and the army and air national guard ) took a sudden andsharp downturn ( see figures 1 and 2 ) . congress responded by adding morethan35% to that year's budget reserve component submission . this gap between reserveconstruction requests and appropriations has remained and widened . finally , withfy1995 , the pattern of funding for the regular forces inverted . although presidentialrequests reversed their downward direction and began to rise , congress began toappropriate more than was requested and has continued to do so to the present . environmental remediation on closed military bases . the continuing costs associated with the four completedbrac rounds , funded through the military construction appropriation , are nowreduced to covering environmental and other caretaker efforts . funding requestedand appropriated for brac fell sharply from a high of $3,898 million for fy1996to a low of $664 million for fy2000 as closure and realignment wound down . ( 4 ) thecost of environmental remediation contributed to a $1,024 million fy2001 bracappropriation , of which $865 million was dedicated to base environmental cleanup .