in addition , p.l . 109-288 stipulates that for each of six years ( fy2006-fy2011 ) $40 million of the funds are to be reserved for formula grants to states to support monthly caseworker visits of children in foster care and to provide discretionary grants to eligible applicants ( regional partnerships , which much include the state child welfare agency ) to respond to child welfare issues raised by parental / caretaker abuse of methamphetamine ( or other substances ) . program funds are authorized both on a discretionary basis ( up to $200 million annually ) and as a capped entitlement ( $345 million annually ) through fy2011 . fy2007 funding: $434 million . this report does not distinguish between these different forms of requirement . federal funds for child welfare programs under the social security act and for capta's basic state grants and community - based grants for the prevention of child abuse and neglect are administered by the children's bureau within the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) . the children's bureau at hhs also awards capta's children justice act grants but does so in consultation with the department of justice . tables 1 , 2 , and 3 list elements required of states seeking basic state grants , children's justice act grants , or community - based grants for the prevention of child abuse and neglect under capta . tables 4 , 5 , 6 , and 7 contain state plan requirements for child welfare programs authorized under the social security act . finally , table 8 contains definitions critical to understanding state plan requirements for child welfare programs under the social security act . for instance , a state is required to have a "case plan" for each child and to operate a "case review system. these and other related terms are given detailed definition in the law . terms appearing in boldface in tables 4 , 5 , 6 and 7 are defined by the statute and the term , and its definition , are included in table 8 . the information included in this report is intended as an accessible reference guide to state requirements , rather than a legal interpretation of those requirements . requirements are believed to be current through changes made by the 109 th congress . table 4 lists requirements related to funding of child welfare services authorized under title iv - b , subpart 1 of the social security act . the program provides matching grants to states ( 75% federal share ) for ( as amended by p.l . 109-288 ) five broad purposes: ( 1 ) to protect and promote the welfare of all children ; ( 2 ) to prevent the neglect , abuse , or exploitation of children ; ( 3 ) to support at - risk families through services which allow children , where appropriate to remain safely with their families or return to their families in a timely manner ; ( 4 ) to promote safety , permanence , and well - being of children in foster care and adoptive families ; and ( 5 ) to provide training , professional development and support to ensure a well - qualified child welfare workforce .