congress also has a role in prescribing intelligence and foreign policy . in meeting these responsibilities , congress expects and needs to be informed by executive branch leaders about relevant actions taken and being planned , policy developments , expenditures , and knowledge conditions . consequently , the information restrictions prescribed in president bush's october 5 memorandum drew critical reaction from various quarters of the house of representatives and the senate . although the restrictive policy was quickly suspended by the president , questions have arisen concerning the role of the executive in times of war and military conflict in informing congress regarding american involvement in such events . also , who in congress is being informed—the leadership of both houses , selected committee chairs of one or both chambers , certain members who are supportive of the president's action , or the membership of the house and the senate in joint session . whether personally or through aides , the president usually offers congress information about events that have already transpired . it is seemingly unusual for a president to include members of congress directly in his decisionmaking , although advice may be solicited ( or offered without invitation ) without any indication of its acceptability . indeed , although a president may honor the perceived obligation to inform congress about the commitment of american armed forces to a condition of overseas military conflict , members may well be dissatisfied with the manner in which the information is provided , the contents offered , the continued unilateral direction of the commitment by the president , and , in some cases , the broad expansion of a commitment made by congress in response to a specific incident . this report offers a brief review of executive - congressional relations in this regard for 1941-2001 . a number of considerations affect a president's efforts to inform congress about the commitment of american armed forces to a condition of overseas military conflict . not the least of these are the majority or minority status of the president's political party in the house and the senate ; the extent of public , congressional , and international support for the president's action ; the number of personnel committed and the conditions of harm they face ; the anticipated duration of the commitment ; and the diplomatic conditions surrounding the commitment . other important considerations are the nature of the "informing" activity—a presidential speech to the nation or a joint session of congress , informal remarks by the president at the white house , a briefing by an administration representative , testimony before a congressional committee by administration officials , proffered documents , or a conversation about a course of action . released amidst allegations of congressional leaking and complaints that executive briefings for congress had been inadequate , the new policy engendered almost universal opposition from the house and senate membership . five days after its prescription , the new policy was suspended , with an immediate effect being that members of the armed services committees and foreign affairs committees could be briefed by pentagon and state department leaders as they had been prior to the president's october 5 policy memorandum .