security is a top priority in afghanistan . there are several issues that congress couldconsider . for the united states , is the goal merely "aid - induced pacification" ( giving funds toafghanistan in order to pacify the population and reduce possible security threats fromafghanistan ) ? ( 80 ) or is the goal some form ofdevelopment , providing incentives for livelihoodsoutside the drug and war economies ? the afghan government faces a dauntingtask . reconstruction is seen as the single most important factor in sustaining peace . whether donor conferences and trust funds are the best way to fund reconstruction hasbeen questioned by some observers who also ask if the united states should give more money to thetrust funds . if not , then other potential methods must be examined . as of this fall , the pentagon announced that it was transforming its strategy from military to security and reconstruction goals . dod has been providing humanitarian assistance to afghanistansince oef began , and it seems that this role in a reconstruction framework will increase . in general,militaries worldwide are increasingly providing such assistance because humanitarian agenciesincreasingly work in war - torn areas . however , many ngos have argued that the provision ofhumanitarian assistance by militaries comes at a high cost . military provision of this assistanceassociates humanitarian agencies and actors , as well as refugees and other victims , with militaryobjectives and activities , even with particular sides in the war . it is argued that this association mayput these agencies and actors in danger . on the other hand , security remains a key factor in thedistribution of aid itself and often requires a military presence for it to be effective . it would beuseful to examine the costs and benefits of the increased humanitarian programs conducted by dodin afghanistan and elsewhere to understand better the impact of the military on non - militaryassistance programs . there is a consensus that afghanistan requires long - term international attention in order to receive adequate donor funds , have successful reconstruction , and avoid another civil war . someargue that afghanistan's situation is precarious . however , discussions and attention have turned toiraq with the possibility of war there . while a war in iraq is projected to cost many billions ofdollars , president bush has stated that the united states will continue to fund and organizereconstruction in afghanistan . how will the congress seek to reconcile these two costly programswith the rest of the foreign aid budget and the general budget ? some , including the internationalcommunity , have raised doubts about the u.s. commitment to afghanistan as the united statesfocuses on iraq and visa versa . can the united states manage maintain a central focus onafghanistan at the same time that it takes on iraq ? appendix - afghanistan assistance donor funds committed anddisbursed by country as of february 10 , 2003 source: aaca donor assistance database , feb. 10 , 2003 , http: / / aacadad.undp.org . in the case of afghanistan,the international community has sought to avoid some of these problems , such as through thecreation of the aaca aid database , which has made pledging , tracking , and monitoring moretransparent .