alternative a . which is less : the county's eligible acreage multiplied by $2.66 per acre or the county's ceiling payment based on its population ? what is the population of the county ? what were the previous year's payments , if any , for all of the eligible lands under the other payment programs of federal agencies ? does the state have any laws requiring the payments from other federal agencies to be passed through to other local government entities , such as school districts , rather than staying with the county government ? what was the increase in the consumer price index for the 12 months ending the preceding june 30 ? each of these questions is discussed below , and the following section describes how the questions are used in the computation of each county's payment . pick the lesser of these two numbers . from it , subtract the previous year's total payments for these eligible lands under specific payment or revenue - sharing programs of the federal agencies that control the eligible land . the amount to be deducted is based on an annual report from the governor of each state to doi . this option is called the standard rate . alternative b . which is less : the county's eligible acreage multiplied by $0.37 per acre or the county's ceiling payment based on its population ? pick the lesser of these two . this option is called the minimum provision and is used in counties that received relatively large payments ( more than $2.29 per acre for fy2017 ) from other federal agencies in the previous year . the county is authorized to receive whichever of the above calculations — ( a ) or ( b ) — is greater . this calculation must be made for all counties individually to determine the national authorization level . if appropriations are insufficient for full funding , each county receives a pro rata share of the appropriation . for fy2017 , the pilt appropriation of $465.0 million was 99.7% of the authorized level of $465.9 . thus , counties received 99.7% of the full formula amount . the standard rate , with its offset between agency - specific payments and pilt payments , still does not guarantee a constant level of federal payments to counties because of the time lag in determining pilt payments . federal payments for a given fiscal year generally are based on the receipts of the prior year . pilt payments of the following fiscal year are offset by these payments . the combination of specific payments and pilt in the standard rate means that reductions ( or increases ) in those other payments in the previous year could be offset exactly by increases ( or reductions ) in pilt payments . however , provided the county's population is not so low as to affect the outcome , pilt payments could not fall below $0.37 per acre for fy2017 ( see alternative b , above ) , so the full offset occurs only when the other federal payments in the previous year total less than $2.29 per acre ( i.e. , the maximum payment of $2.64 per acre minus the $0.37 per acre minimum payment from pilt ) .