table 1 . non - state groups with shoulder - fired sams:1996-2001 ( 20 ) note: ( c ) is possession confirmed through intelligence sources or actual events ; ( r ) is reported butnot confirmed . recent u.s. military encounters with shoulder - fired missiles in iraq and afghanistan canprovide some useful operational insights which could be benefit government , industry , and civilaviation officials involved in the protection of civil aviation . in december 2003 an unidentifiedshoulder - fired sam struck an engine of a u.s. air force c - 17 globemaster iii cargo aircraft thathad just departed baghdad international airport . ( 21 ) the aircraft , which was outfitted with missile defenses , made anemergency landing at baghdad international airport . ( 22 ) in january 2004 , a c - 5 galaxy transport aircraft - also havingan antimissile system - was hit by a shoulder - fired sam and the aircraft was able to andsuccessfully . ( 23 ) one senior air force official reportedly stated that "for whatever reason , the [defensive] systems on theairplanes didn't counter [the attacks] . we don't have any indications that it was a systemmalfunction. ( 24 ) theofficial speculated that sensor placement , and aircraft altitude and maneuvering played a role in thesesystems not functioning as they were intended . ( 25 ) according to one report , from october 25 , 2003 to january 2004 , nine military helicopterswere shot down or crashed landed in iraq after having been hit by hostile ground fire , resulting inthe deaths of 39 service members . ( 26 ) an army study , commissioned after these incidents , reportedlyrevealed a number of findings . the study team reportedly concluded that rpgs , ( 27 ) and sa - 7 , sa - 14 , andsa - 16 shoulder - fired sams were used in the attacks against the helicopters . ( 28 ) another study findingrevealed that the iraqis had studied the helicopter flight patterns and had developed effectivetechniques to engage the aircraft . ( 29 ) according to the chief of the u.s. transportation command ( ustranscom ) , u.s.military cargo aircraft take ground fire in afghanistan and iraq from shoulder - fired sams,anti - aircraft artillery and small arms on almost a daily basis . ( 30 ) uscentcom officialswere unable to provide an unclassified update on shoulder - fired missiles attacks against u.s. militaryaircraft in afghanistan and iraq as of september 2004 , although classified data of this nature isbeing tracked by uscentcom and dod . ( 31 ) some analysts believe that the u.s. has significantly improvedaircraft countermeasures and defenses and modified aircraft operating procedures , resulting in fewersuccessful attacks , but others suggest that attacks with shoulder - fired sams have become socommonplace that they no longer garner the attention that they once did . estimates vary , but the most widely reported statistics on civilian aircraft experience withshoulder - fired missiles indicate that , over the past 26 years , 35 aircraft have come under attack fromthese weapons . ( 32 ) ofthose 35 , 24 were shot down resulting in more than 500 deaths .