in the 107th congress , h.r . 2782 was introduced that would require u.s. companies in foreign countries toimplement corporate codes of conduct , while labor rights and corporate codes of conduct werehighlighted in three bills criticizing china's human rights record . ( 1 ) in 2002 , the cecc held twohearings on labor rights and working conditions in china and made a number of recommendationsin its annual report , including expanding rule of law and legal aid programs for workers andpromoting work health and safety councils , raising awareness among export companies in china ofthe importance of legal and fair working conditions to u.s. consumers , and raising the profile oflabor issues in the u.s. - china bilateral dialogue . the multi - stakeholder codes - - sa8000 , eti , fla , and wrc - - and some company codes in this sample assert the rights of workers to join or form trade unions of their own choosing and tobargain collectively without fear of retribution . the sa8000 code provides that where the lawprohibits these freedoms , the employer shall facilitate the development of parallel means forindependent and free association and bargaining . mattel and reebok also require that grievanceprocedures be set up . some company codes surveyed either do not address these rights or state thatworkers may join any legally - sanctioned labor organization , which in china is the acftu . in theprc , workers in most private and foreign invested enterprises lack any union representation whileindependent organization is not tolerated by the government . in some enterprises where unions exist,workers reportedly are not aware of them . according to the prc labor law , collective contractsmay be negotiated between the enterprise management and enterprise trade union or workers'congress . however , collective contracts apply mostly to large , state - owned enterprises , anddecisions about workers' pay , working hours , health , welfare , and other issues are largelynon - negotiable . in 2001 and 2002 , reebok was successful in urging two taiwanese - owned suppliersin china to hold free elections for representatives of the official trade union , touted as first of its kindin china . excessive work hours is one of the most common labor abuses and causes of sickness and accidents in chinese factories . many codes prescribe a maximum of 60 hours per week , includinga maximum of 48 hours of regular time and voluntary overtime not to exceed 12 hours , or the legalmaximum if it is lower . all codes require one day off per week . some codes apply restrictions "ona regular basis" rather than unconditionally . others provide an exception to maximum workinghours under "extraordinary circumstances. ( 25 ) thesa8000 code allows mandatory overtime if it ispart of a collective bargaining agreement . mattel , wal - mart , and icti state that working hours shallcomply with local laws . china's labor law mandates an average work week of 40 hours with oneday off every seven days . it prohibits overtime work in excess of 3 hours per day or 36 hours permonth , and stipulates that it must be voluntary .