these data are presented in table 1 . these shares are substantially lower than one might expect from a sector that dominates the domestic economy . table 1 also shows that the united states continually realizes surpluses in services trade which have partially offset large trade deficits in goods trade in the u.s. current account . these figures only measure trade in services that take place across borders as presented in the u.s. official balance of payments data . because most services require direct contact between supplier and consumer , many service providers prefer to establish or must establish a presence in the country of the consumer . for example , hotel and restaurant services by their very nature require a presence in the country of the consumer . this report will be updated as events warrant . "services" encompass a very broad and widening range of economic activities . according to one definition , services are "... a diverse group of economic activities not directly associated with the manufacture of goods , mining or agriculture . they typically involve the provision of human value - added in the form of labor , advice , managerial skill , entertainment , training intermediation , and the like. services differ from manufactured goods primarily in that they are intangible , so they cannot be stored and must be consumed at the point of production ( trips to the doctor , enjoying a meal at the restaurant ) . however , rapid changes in technology are reducing even these restrictions on services ( computer software that can be stored online , on disks , tape , etc. ) illustrative examples of services include wholesale and retail trade ; transportation and warehousing ; information ; finance and insurance ; professional , scientific , and technical services ; education ; arts and entertainment ; health care and social assistance ; food and accommodation services ; construction ; communication ; and public administration . services are an increasingly significant sector of the u.s. economy . in 1977 , they accounted for 55% of u.s. gdp . in 2007 they accounted for 69% of u.s. gdp . in 2008 , workers in the services sector accounted for 85% of the total civilian workforce . the significance of services to a national economy and to the global economy go beyond what can be measured by data . many services not only have intrinsic value but are also critical to running other parts of large economies . for example , financial services ( banking , investment , insurance ) are the means by which capital flows throughout an economy from those who have it ( savers , investors ) to those who need it ( borrowers ) . financial services are often called the lifeblood of an economy . there is a symbiotic relationship between many services providers and manufacturers — demand for one creates demand for the other . many manufacturers are dependent on transportation , communication and distribution services networks to ensure that inputs are available for the production of goods and to deliver final goods to consumers . for example , car manufacturers depend on transportation services ( trucking , rail , etc. )