moteff . crs report rs21140 , electronic congress: proposals and issues , by jeffrey w.seifert and r. ericpetersen . crs report rl30745 , electronic government: a conceptual overview , by haroldc . relyea . crs report rl31088 , electronic government: major proposals and initiatives , byharold c.relyea . crs report rs20344 , electronic signatures: technology developments and legislative issues , by[author name scrubbed] . crs report rl30914 , federal chief information officer ( cio ) : opportunities and challenges ,by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl30661 ( pdf ) , government information technology management: past and future issues ( the clinger - cohen act ) , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl31103 ( pdf ) , house of representatives information technology management issues: an overview of the effects on institutional operations , the legislative process , and futureplanning , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . crs report 98-67 stm , internet: an overview of key technology policy issues affecting its use and growth , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed],and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl30590 ( pdf ) , paperwork reduction act reauthorization and government information management issues , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl30824 , the privacy act: emerging issues and related legislation , by harold c.relyea . the provisions of this section are similar to the language in h.r . 3832 , the services acquisition reform act of 2002 . section 211 amends section 502 of title 40 , u.s.c . section201 focuses on definitions used . it also stipulates thereporting requirements agencies have to the director of omb regarding these issues . section 504 stipulates the limitations and effects this title would have on other federal and statelaws and regulations . subtitle a includes sections 511-513 , which covers information protection requirements . ( 49 ) section 511 contains the findings and purpose of the subtitle , which include to ensure that theconfidentiality of personally identifiable information , used by the federal government for statisticalpurposes , is maintained . section 512 details the limitations on use and disclosure of data and information agencies needto follow . this includes barring agencies from disclosing personally identifiable information foruses other than statistical purposes , without the informed consent of the respondent . section 202 covers federal agency responsibilities asthey relateto the director of omb . some of these responsibilities include participating in the cio council,developing performance measures for e - government initiatives , and submitting annual agencye - government status reports to the director of omb . ( 50 ) section 521 contains the findings and purposes of the subtitle , which include authorizing thesharing of business data between relevant agencies , and improving the comparability and accuracyof federal economic statistics . they can crosscut both the various sectors and stages of e - governmentdevelopment . however , they also share a number of recurring themes often associated withprevious , less technologically - dependent approaches to improving government such as jurisdictionalauthority , procedures for the appropriate handling of information , building and maintaininginfrastructures , providing services , and citizens' rights .