in other ways , it is less . for example , some studies have defined a price stability goal as enhancing independence , and there has been periodic congressional interest in giving the fed such a goal . if cbi proponents are correct , the fed's independence could be enhanced at little cost and much benefit to the u.s. economy . the basic methodology of the academic studies involves the use of linear regression which is a statistical technique that attempts to estimate mathematically how important central bank independence and various parameters of that independence are to such important indicators of economic performance as the rate of inflation , the variability of inflation , the growth rate of output , the variability of the growth rate of output , and real interest rates . to make such computations , the above definitions of central bank independence must be turned into something that can be measured . the value of the slope of that line then gives the effect of the independent variable ( or variables ) on the dependent variable . while the calculated value of the slope of the line may be positive or negative ( or even zero ) , it's true value may not be statistically significantly different from zero . because this is so , it will be necessary to briefly discuss what is meant by a calculated value being "statistically significant. to understand statistical significance , let us say that the calculated effect of the independent variable on the dependent variable is .10 . thus , changes in the independent variable by one unit change the dependent variable by .10 . this assumes , of course , that the value .10 is really different from zero . recall , that it was calculated , not from the universe of the independent variable , but from a sample taken from that universe . thus , it is possible that our assumption that the true value of the effect of this variable on the dependent variable is different from zero is wrong . it is , however , possible to control for making this type of error — that is , for accepting as true a relationship that is , in fact , not true . it is common to set the control factor at 1 to 5 chances in 100 of accepting the hypothesis that the variable is different from zero when it is not . if the calculated value of the independent variable lies within a range that limits the error to 1% to 5% , it is said to be statistically significant ( or statistically significantly different from zero ) . since the purpose of this study is to establish the importance of central bank independence as a factor affecting a range of variables by which we judge economic performance , one other summary statistic must be explained: goodness of fit or r 2 . the r 2 is designed to measure the fraction of the variation of the dependent variable that is explained by the variation of the independent variable ( s ) .