appendix a . background on selected policy issues digital "must carry" under the "must carry" provisions of the cable television consumer protection and competition act of 1992 , cable tv providers are required to transmit local analog programs to their customers . this decision was based on the reasoning that since cable tv has a predominant position in the market , "without mandatory carriage provisions , the economic viability of local broadcast television and its ability to produce quality local programming would be jeopardized. the commercial broadcasters ( primarily the smaller networks and independent stations , represented by the association of local television stations , but also the national association of broadcasters ) believe that the same principles and conclusions of the 1992 act should apply to dtv services , leading to mandatory carriage of the dtv programming by cable operators . broadcasters argue that because most americans receive their tv via cable , the carriage of dtv programming by cable providers is essential for consumers to purchase dtv receivers . should such assistance be provided to low - income households exclusively or to all households ? should subsidies , if warranted , be financed by proceeds garnered by auctioning the analog spectrum ? and finally , how much funding would a subsidy program require , and how much revenue is likely to be raised by auctioning the commercial portion of the reclaimed analog spectrum ? at the request of the house committee on energy and commerce , the government accountability office ( gao ) conducted a television characteristics survey involving 2,471 randomly selected american households . based on the survey , gao found that 19% or 21 million households rely exclusively on over - the - air television ; 57% or 64 million households rely on cable ; and 19% or 22 million have a subscription to dbs ( satellite ) television . additionally , gao found that low - income , non - white , and hispanic households are more likely to rely on over - the - air television broadcasting . gao estimated that if a subsidy were needed only for over - the - air households , the cost could range from about $460 million to $2 billion , depending on the cost of the set - top box ( from $50 to $100 per box ) and whether subsidy recipients are limited to low - income households . under this scenario , gao is assuming that cable and satellite providers would convert broadcasters' digital signals to analog at the "head - end," such that cable and satellite tv consumers with analog sets would be able to receive the signal without a converter box . under a different scenario , gao assumed that cable and satellite providers would deliver high - definition signals to the home , thereby requiring consumers with analog sets to purchase converter boxes . gao estimated that if subsidies were available to cable and satellite subscribers as well as to over - the - air households , the cost would range from $1.8 billion to over $10 billion , again depending on the cost of the converter box and the use of means testing .