it has been estimated that approximately 100lbs . of anthrax spores efficiently and uniformly disseminated by airplane under ideal conditions ina metropolitan area could cause 150,000 casualties . ( 38 ) terrorist groups have shown interest in biological weapons , but few examples of their successful use , and none as a weapon of mass destruction , exist . one well - known example ofbiological - weapon use within the united states was by the rajneeshee cult in 1984 . there,salmonella bacteria was disseminated through intentional contamination of salad bars . severalhundred people were made ill over a number of weeks . ( 39 ) the aum shinrikyo cult also attemptedto develop biological weapons . while more well - known for their chemical weapon attack in thetokyo subway system in 1995 , they cultured and attempted to disseminate bacillus anthracis byaerosolizing a liquid slurry of anthrax culture . the anthrax disseminated was an avirulent strain andconsequently no casualties occurred . ( 40 ) whether terrorist groups would choose biological weapons is unclear . some have asserted that such use would be incompatible with political goals that terrorist groups have , e.g . formation of anation - state . others claim that a new stage of superterrorism has begun , with the attacks ofseptember 11th being indicative of a greater willingness of terrorist groups to intentionally causemass casualties . for more information on the motivation of terrorist groups with respect tobiological and chemical weapons , see crs report rl31831 , terrorist motivations for chemicaland biological weapons use: placing the threat in context by [author name scrubbed] . weapons of terror , in contrast to weapons of mass destruction , may cause few casualties but rather instill panic because of frightening aspects of their use . some argue that the use of biologicalagents as weapons of terror would require little infrastructure and be an effective use of even limitedsupplies of pathogen . they claim that release of small amounts of biological agent might cause alevel of panic disproportionate to the actual amount released , and point to the anxieties raised afterthe mailings of the anthrax letters of 2001 as emblematic of the type of response that can begenerated by small - scale use of biological weapons . others assert that the significant investment oftime , money , and trained personnel which would be required to develop even small amounts ofpathogen provides a serious disincentive to terrorist groups . they state that terrorist groups are muchmore likely to use conventional weapons than any weapon of mass destruction . the anthrax mailings of 2001 highlighted the vulnerability of the united states to biological attack , and reignited public interest in bioterrorism and domestic preparedness . a series of letterscontaining freeze - dried anthrax of varying coarseness were sent through the u.s . postal service totwo u.s . senators and two news outlets . the anthrax spores contaminated postal equipment duringmail processing and subsequently infected postal workers with inhalation anthrax . questionsregarding the identity of the mailer , the motivations of the mailer , and the origin of the anthraxspores remain unanswered . for more information on the anthrax mailings and the us postalservices response , see crs report rl31280 ( pdf ) , the u.s .