compensation of the president . the president's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $450,000 , whichincludes an expense allowance of $50,000 . this is the same amount as wasappropriated in fy2003 . the salary of the president is $400,000 per annum ,effective january 20 , 2001 . the house and senate committees on appropriationsrecommended , the house and senate passed , and the law provides the same amountas the president requested . the law also amends 3 u.s.c . 102 to provide that anyunused amount of the expense allowance shall revert to the treasury pursuant to 31u.s.c . 1552 and that no amount of the allowance shall be included in the president'sgross income . white house office ( who ) . this account provides the president with staff assistance and administrative services . thepresident's fy2004 budget proposed an appropriation of $70.3 million , an increaseof 39.5% over the $50.4 million appropriated in fy2003 . the house committee on appropriations recommended and the house passed an appropriation of $66.057 million , of which $8.65 million would be forreimbursements to the white house communications agency . the amount is $4.2million less than the president's request . the reduction is taken from the office ofhomeland security funding which is included in the white house officeappropriation ( see below ) . the committee again requests that the executive officeof the president , within 30 days of the act's enactment , provide "a detailed report onthe status of efforts to safely resume public tours of the white house. such a reporthad been requested in the 2003 appropriations bill , but the committee reportaccompanying h.r . 2989 states that the eop "provided a cursory,four - sentence 'report' that said very little about the status of efforts in this regard. ( 27 ) ( this provision is not included in the conference agreement as the report has beensubmitted. ) the committee also directs that both the house and senate committees on appropriations receive a report on the renovations of the eisenhower executiveoffice building no later than november 15 , 2003 . according to the committee reportaccompanying h.r . 2989 : on repeated occasions , the committee has sought specific answers to questions about the use of non - federal funds forrenovating and furnishing gsa facilities occupied by agencies of the executiveoffice of the president . in particular , the committee believes more information isneeded on the use of non - federal funding for renovation and furnishing efforts for theeisenhower executive office building [eeob] , for which $65,757,000 is includedin this bill . the committee directs eop to review and report on the use ofnon - federal funds for renovation and furnishings in the [eeob] .... should identifythe federal agency that coordinated the work funded by non - federal sources , thespecific sources and amounts of non - federal funding used , a description of eachproject , and an explanation of why non - federal funds were used in each specificinstance . finally , the report should determine which agency's gift authority was usedto accept the contribution of non - federal funds and whether this authority was usedproperly .