putin is expected to meet with him there . continued russian nuclear reactor and missile technology transfers to iran could become a critical test of putin's policy of cooperation with the united states . on the one hand , moscow seesteheran as a stable , friendly regional power and a vitally important market for its cash - strappednuclear power and defense industries . in the joint declaration , bush pledged to encourage u.s. investment to further developand modernize russia's fuel energy and sector and expand its oil and gas production . ( 81 ) he alsopledged cooperation with russia's energy transportation infrastructure . in august 1999 , the paris club of official government creditors ( of which the united states is an influential member ) , provided a "framework agreement" reducing russian interest payments onits soviet - era debt ( of over $50 billion ) and deferring payment of principal until after 2001 . infebruary 2000 , russia reached an agreement with the london club of commercial creditors , writingoff 36.5% of russia's $32.8 billion soviet - era commercial debt outright , with the remainder to beconverted into 30-year eurobonds with lower interest rates and an 8-year grace period . this amountsto a total of 52% debt forgiveness in current net value terms . "comprehensive" paris clubnegotiations have begun , to determine whether western government creditors will grant russia morelarge - scale debt forgiveness , or offer debt rescheduling without forgiveness . germany , which holds48% of that debt , is calling for full repayment . some of moscow's critics contend that russia'srecent economic upturn and its substantial increases in defense spending should be taken intoaccount by western governments considering further debt forgiveness for russia . the united states holds about 5% of russia's paris club debt , about $3 billion . some members of congress have expressed interest in helping russia reduce its paris club debt as a way ofaccelerating economic recovery , or for more targeted aims , such as funneling more money intorussian nonproliferation activities . in december 2001 , the senate unanimously passed the russianfederation debt reduction for nonproliferation act of 2001 ( s. 1803 ) , sponsored bysen . biden , and sent it to the house , where it is being considered as part of the state departmentauthorization bill ( h.r . this bill would link u.s. debt forgiveness for russiato russian efforts in wmd nonproliferation . the bush administration is believed to have beenleaning toward supporting russia's quest for debt forgiveness . the house international relationscommittee held hearings on this bill july 25 , 2002 . political support for this idea , however , mightbe adversely affected by russia's reported plan to build more nuclear reactors in iran . as noted above , implicit in putin's strategic decision to seek integration of russia with the west is a rejection of the primakov vision of a russian - chinese axis of cooperation against theunited states as the core of russia's national security strategy . beijing and moscow continue toproclaim good will and harmonious relations between them . indeed , both countries want and needcalm , friendly , stable bilateral relations . and the cold war - era , triangular , zero - sum game ofu.s. - soviet - chinese relations no longer holds sway .