this group , which is chaired by the u.s . secretaries of defense and state and russia's ministers of defense and foreign affairs , held its first meeting in september 2002 . the challenge for u.s. nuclear policy has been to make this threat credible . many analysts have argued that the overwhelming destructive power of nuclear weapons could have undermined the threat to use them — because the soviet union and russia could have responded to a u.s. retaliatory attack with equally destructive attacks against the united states , the united states might not have launched its nuclear forces . other nations might not be able to threaten the united states with massive destruction , but they also might not believe that the united states would cross the nuclear threshold unless its own survival were at risk . hence , the united states has sought , on many occasions in the past 50 years , to modify and adjust its forces and targeting strategy so that potential adversaries would believe and heed the u.s. threat to retaliate with nuclear weapons , adding more limited attack options and seeking greater flexibility in the timing and size of potential nuclear attacks . the u.s. department of energy's ( doe ) nuclear weapons complex provides warheads required by the department of defense for its strategic and non - strategic nuclear weapons . the complex is an integrated network of facilities that conduct research and development ; produce nuclear and other materials ; produce , maintain and test nuclear weapons ; and dismantle retired warheads . they also argue that , if russia adopts a similar posture , the threat of nuclear terrorism could increase because russia's stored warheads might be vulnerable to theft or sale to nations seeking their own nuclear weapons . the administration has countered by noting that the united states has never destroyed warheads removed from delivery vehicles under past arms control agreements ; it has always retained an active stockpile of warheads for spares and testing purposes . but some members questioned whether the clinton administration might reduce u.s. forces too far if congress lifted the prohibition . hence , the senate retained the prohibition in the fy2001 bill and stated that the next president could only reduce u.s. forces after conducting a new nuclear posture review . although the house had not included similar language in its bill , the conference committee supported the call for a new nuclear posture review . these two factors — the congressional mandate and the presidential commitment — established the framework for the bush administration's review of u.s. nuclear posture . the administration completed its review and sent a classified report to congress at the end of december 2001 ; it provided the public with a summary of its results in early january 2002 . the results of the administration's review generated a significant amount of debate in january , and then again in march , when a copy of the classified report leaked to the press . many contend that the united states should focus , instead , on measures to improve security at russia's nuclear weapons storage facilities and to enhance transparency and openness so that both sides can remain confident in the safety and security of russia's stockpile .