laws. ( 81 ) congressional oversight of u.s. - pakistan relations in a march 2003 hearing of thesubcommittee on asia and the pacific of the house international relations committee includedmember expressions of concern about possible links between al qaeda and pakistan's largestislamic party ; about musharraf's possibly continuing support for "kashmiri terrorists ; " about thepossibility that "lower - level operatives within the isi" may be assisting al qaeda and talibanfugitives ; about possible isi involvement in regional heroin trafficking ; about pakistan's possiblenuclear weapons proliferation activities and "contradictions" in u.s. nonproliferation policy towardthe region ; about the role madrassas play in raising levels of islamic radicalism in pakistan ; andabout problems with pakistani democratization and the danger of the united states "giving fullrecognition to a military coup" through continuous waivers of democracy - related aidrestrictions . ( 82 ) pakistan - u.s. anti - terrorism cooperation has been broad in both scale and scope , and hasrealized tangible successes since october 2001 . yet the wide range of u.s. concerns about relationswith pakistan indicate that such partnership between the two countries may be undermined . areduction of u.s. cooperative efforts could result from increased indications of suboptimal levelsof pakistani commitment or from exacerbated pakistan - india tensions that are linked to infiltrationin kashmir . differences over weapons proliferation and human rights violations could triggerfar - reaching restrictions on future u.s. aid to pakistan . the islamabad government , for its part , maycome under increasing pressure to adjust its foreign policy to more accurately reflect the sentimentsof pakistan's opposition parties , especially the virulently anti - western islamists . this could erodepakistani cooperative efforts and is made even more likely as domestic violence and publicdisturbances in pakistan continue . given such numerous and substantial potential disruptions topresent levels of pakistan - u.s. anti - terrorism cooperation , it may be unwise to assume that suchcooperation is sustainable in the middle - and long - term . figure 1 . map of pakistan note: boundary representations not necessarily authoritative . officials from theu.s . departments of state and justice met with pakistani counterparts in islamabad in september2002 , and another full meeting of the u.s. - pakistan joint working group on counterterrorism andlaw enforcement is slated to take place in washington in april 2003 . ( 30 ) in november 2002 , then - u.s. treasury secretary o'neill met with top officials in islamabadto discuss pakistan's ongoing efforts to halt terrorist financing . he stated that pakistan was "leadingthe world" in the fight to eradicate money - laundering , but some officials are more pessimistic . ( 31 ) islamabad has taken actionagainst at least 185 of the 247 u.s. - designated entities operating on pakistani territory , and has takenits own initiative to detain operatives and designate active groups suspected of financing terroristactivities . yet pakistan's legal and regulatory structures remain insufficient for a fully effectiveanti - terrorism financing regime , especially with an inability to monitor the activities of foreigncharities , and the newly seated assembly has yet to enact a proposed money laundering bill . u.s.officials continue to encourage stricter oversight and regulation , and the united states has agreedto provide technical assistance and training to pakistani customs and finance officials as part of thiseffort .