sec . definition and policy . ( a ) the term "individual subject to this order" shall mean any individual who is not a united statescitizen with respect to whom i determine from time to time in writing that: ( 1 ) there is reason to believe that such individual , at the relevant times , ( i ) is or was a member of the organization known as al qaida ; ( ii ) has engaged in , aided or abetted , or conspired to commit , acts of international terrorism , or actsin preparation therefor , that have caused , threaten to cause , or have as their aim to cause , injury toor adverse effects on the united states , its citizens , national security , foreign policy , or economy ; or ( iii ) has knowingly harbored one or more individuals described in subparagraphs ( i ) or ( ii ) ofsubsection 2 ( a ) ( 1 ) of this order ; and ( 2 ) it is in the interest of the united states that such individual be subject to this order . ( b ) it is the policy of the united states that the secretary of defense shall take all necessarymeasures to ensure that any individual subject to this order is detained in accordance with section3 , and , if the individual is to be tried , that such individual is tried only in accordance with section4 . ( c ) it is further the policy of the united states that any individual subject to this order who is notalready under the control of the secretary of defense but who is under the control of any other officeror agent of the united states or any state shall , upon delivery of a copy of such written determinationto such officer or agent , forthwith be placed under the control of the secretary of defense . sec . detention authority of the secretary of defense . any individual subject to this order shall be - - ( a ) detained at an appropriate location designated by the secretary of defense outside or within theunited states ; ( b ) treated humanely , without any adverse distinction based on race , color , religion , gender , birth,wealth , or any similar criteria ; ( c ) afforded adequate food , drinking water , shelter , clothing , and medical treatment ; ( d ) allowed the free exercise of religion consistent with the requirements of such detention ; and ( e ) detained in accordance with such other conditions as the secretary of defense may prescribe . sec . authority of the secretary of defense regarding trials of individuals subject to thisorder . ( a ) any individual subject to this order shall , when tried , be tried by military commission for anyand all offenses triable by military commission that such individual is alleged to have committed,and may be punished in accordance with the penalties provided under applicable law , including lifeimprisonment or death .