figure 1 . oda performance 2002 the united states defends its record as a development aid provider , arguing that contributions to global poverty reduction should not be measured simply in terms ofaid transfers as a percent of gnp . ( 39 ) u.s. officialsnote that in dollar terms , americanoda has remained substantial , and is programmed on more favorable terms than thatof other donors . what are thebudgetary implications on the mca ? as congress considered mca authorizing legislation and funding recommendations in 2003,and will later debate the confirmation of the mcc chief officer , followed by continuing oversightof program implementation , several key elements of the initiative have been , and will continue tobe closely examined . these will include matters that have already been decided within the executivebranch , as well as issues that remain under discussion . throughout this report , congressional recommendations to alter key elements of the president's mca initiativeare discussed . the table belowsummarizes these changes . performance indicators and selection process : will the indicators and the methodology proposed by the administration identify the "best performers" ? implications for other u.s. development aid programs : how will the mca affect global and country aid programs not part of the new initiative ? u.s. organizational structures: is the proposed millennium challenge corporation , with a staff of 100 , the most appropriate structural model for managing the mca ? what are the implications for the u.s. agency for international development , the primarygovernment bilateral aid agency ? program development and selection: what types of activities should the mca fund and how will these programs be designed ? legislative and funding matters: what should be the relationship between mca authorizing legislation and current foreign aid laws and legislative practice ? the status of the senate bill is based on s. 925 , the foreign affairs act , fiscal year 2004 , as amended during debate on july 9 and 10 . s. 925 remains pending in the senate . previously , the senate foreign relations committee had approvedlegislation authorizing themillennium challenge account in s. 1160 . a modified text of s. 1160 was subsequently incorporatedinto s. 925 as division c on july 9 . the house bill , h.r . 1950 , is also a combined foreign policy authorization measureto which earlier mcaauthorizing text was added . the house international relations committee had reported h.r . 2441 , whichwas incorporated , withmodifications , to h.r . 1950 , and passed by the house on july 16 . for many years , the united states has been criticized by other nations andinternational development organizations for not contributing enough to fight globalpoverty and promote economic growth . although the united states was the largestprovider of official development assistance ( oda ) ( 38 ) until the early 1990s and wassecond to japan in most years since until 2001 , its contribution has been at or nearthe bottom of the list of international donors when measured as a proportion ofnational wealth . the united states , they emphasize , was a leading voice over thepast several years in the heavily indebted poor country ( hipc ) debt initiative , beingthe first government to advocate 100% cancellation of bilateral debt owed by theworld's poorest nations .