these are described below . the u.s. department of agriculture — mostly through the forest service — administers numerous programs to support the management of state and private forestlands . several programs provide financial and / or technical assistance through the states for planning and implementing forest management practices ( eg , tree planting , site preparation for reforestation , thinning , pruning , fertilizing , prescribed burning , and other activities ) and sometimes practices to enhance other resources ( eg , restoring watersheds , improving wildlife habitat , and other activities ) . some programs have been combined through the appropriations process . additional programs provide financial and technical support for protecting nonfederal forests from wildfire , insects , diseases , and clearing for non - forest uses . these programs cover many continuing threats to forests , although global climate change could exacerbate the effects of these threats . furthermore , for the forest health program , more funds are used to protect federal lands than cooperative lands . forest legacy can help prevent forest clearing . the community fire protection program can assist communities to prepare for wildfires , while the two emergency programs can help landowners restore forests after the disaster . these programs , as well as many of the forest management programs noted above , can help to protect and restore state and private forestlands from catastrophic wildfires and other damaging agents . appropriations for forestry assistance programs have fluctuated greatly since fy2000 . in response to the severe wildfires in the summer of 2000 , funding more than doubled from $213.3 million in fy2000 to a peak of $493.8 million the next year in fy2001 . however , since fy2008 , overall forestry assistance funding has averaged around $367 million , with $354 million appropriated in fy2013 post - sequester funds . most forestry assistance programs , with the exception of the forest stewardship and international forestry programs , were reduced in fy2013 appropriations for the third year in a row . the largest sustained levels of funding have been for the forest protection programs — forest health ( for insect and disease identification and control ) , wildfire assistance , and forest legacy ( for easements to prevent forest clearing ) . however , funding for all of those programs has been declining since fy2010 . in particular , funding for rural fire protection is 30% below fy2010 levels , despite the severe wildfire seasons of 2011 and 2012 . in comparison , forest management assistance funding has remained relatively constant . both the forest stewardship and urban and community forestry programs have received appropriations around $30 million since fy2009 . in total , these forestry assistance programs make up less than 10% of the forest service's total $4.9 billion in discretionary appropriations . overall forest service funding has also been declining , although at a slower rate than the decline in forestry assistance funds . however , the number , extent , and severity of wildfires continue to exceed historical levels , as does the reported incidence of forest insect and disease infestations on both federal and nonfederal forests .