introduction . [[author name scrubbed] , specialistin international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] the bush administration is negotiating or isproposing to negotiate an unprecedented number of trade agreements . the negotiations includebilateral , regional , and multilateral trade liberalizing agreements . bilaterally , the united states hascompleted negotiations on an agreement to establish a free trade area ( fta ) with chile , and hasreached an agreement in principle with singapore for a free trade agreement . while the larger agreements offer greater market opening opportunities for u.s.exporters and service providers , they also would require the united states to cut farm subsidies , andopen up still - protected sectors , such as textiles , faster . the american public's reaction to some freetrade agreements , such as nafta , has been chilly . the bush administration maintains that ftas support larger foreign policy goals , such as bolstering democratic regimes . the administration also views bilateral fta's as springboards forconcluding more ambitious regional and global pacts . agreements with chile and central americaare seen putting pressure on south american countries , particularly brazil , to negotiate on the freetrade area of the americas . progress in the ftaa , in turn , is seen pressuring the european unionand others to make progress in the wto trade negotiations . congressional role in trade agreements . [[author name scrubbed] , specialist in international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] through its constitutionalresponsibility for the conduct of foreign commerce , congress has an important role in whether andhow the united states participates in these and other trade negotiations . it decides whether or notchanges under trade agreements , which are negotiated by the executive branch , will be implementedin domestic law . in 2002 , the 107th congress passed and the president signed the trade act of 2002 ( p.l . 107-210 ) , which , among other things , granted the president so - called trade promotion authority ( tpa ) , previously known as fast - track authority . tpa allows the president to submit certain tradeagreements for a limited time period to congress for approval under special legislative procedures . these provide that the congress must accept or reject the total results of a trade agreement understrict timetables and without amendment provided that the administration follows rules set out bycongress regarding negotiating objectives , consultations , and other matters . by increasing thelikelihood that congress will approve trade agreements as negotiated , tpa bolsters the negotiatingleverage and credibility of u.s. trade negotiators . if congress determines that the executive branch is not observing the provisions of the trade legislation that it approved last year , it could consider several responses . it could withdraw expeditedprocedures for implementing legislation for trade agreements reached in the wto negotiations , thusallowing amendment of the legislation . members also might insist on more active participationthrough access to negotiating documents and as observers at negotiating sessions . the executivebranch probably would oppose both of these responses . implementing legislation for the chile and singapore fta agreements is likely to be submitted to congress this year . implementing legislation for other bilateral agreements could be submitted in 2004 .