the work was monitored by the u.s . fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , which observed no adverse effects on fish and wildlife from geological field operations such as collection of rock samples and mapping . the goal of the field work was to collect rock or outcrop data to better understand the rocks that could be potential reservoir and source rocks . however , the data to determine rock type and distribution in the area were from outcrops covering only 4.0% of the 1002 area . seismic operations were permitted during the winters of 1983-1984 and 1984-1985 , when most wildlife species were absent or present in smaller numbers . as seismic surveys are the only exploration technique involving mechanized surface transportation , it posed the greatest possibility of adverse environmental effects . to avoid significant adverse impacts , access was limited to one seismic contractor and activities in acutely environmentally sensitive areas were restricted . the total distance in straight and parallel tracks called line - miles in the 2-d seismic survey was restricted to approximately 1,300 line - miles , which the fws believed was sufficient to identify potential areas for the purpose of the fleis report . full - time fws monitors accompanied each seismic crew . the fws effectively limited short - term adverse environmental effects , but followup studies were planned to determine the long - term impacts . it is unclear if such studies were carried out or published . petroleum geology anwr's 1002 area is between two known petroleum provinces , the u.s. north slope to the west and the canadian beaufort sea and mackenzie delta province to the east . interpretation of the regional geological data collected during the summers of 1983-1985 and more recent nearby well data by the bureau of land management ( blm ) in 1991 and the u.s. geological survey in 1998 indicate that the rocks of both provinces may extend into the 1002 area ( figure 2 ) . the approximate 1,300 line - miles of seismic data were reprocessed and reinterpreted between 1987 and 1998 . these data , in addition to the geological data , were used in the 1991 petroleum assessments of anwr by blm and by the usgs in 1998 . in its 1998 study , the usgs divided the 1002 area into two areas based on the type of geological structures or potential hydrocarbon traps . the first is a structurally simple area called the undeformed area , and the second a more structurally complex , more stressed area called the deformed area . the geological sequence in the northwestern portion of the 1002 area , the undeformed area , is similar to the sequence encountered within the north slope , which includes the prudhoe bay , kuparuk river , and alpine fields . the southeastern deformed region of the 1002 area is more like the canadian beaufort and mackenzie delta , which include more than 36 hydrocarbon fields totaling 740 million barrels of oil and 10 trillion cubic feet of gas . because of the geologic complexity , selection , acquisition , and interpretation of data in the deformed area is difficult compared with acquiring and interpreting data from the undeformed area .