bothdevices were successfully disarmed . ( 58 ) in 2002,italian police arrested four moroccan men possessingpotassium ferrocyanide . it was reported that the men arrested planned to poison the water supplyusing the potassium ferrocyanide . it is questionable how effective this would have been , consideringthe volume of the water supply and the amount of potassium ferrocyanide found in their possession . ( 59 ) a group calling itself september 11 threatened the use of cyanide to disrupt the america's cup boatrace in new zealand . ( 60 ) it is believed that the al qaeda terrorist group has produced and developed plans for the employment of chemical weapons , including hydrogen cyanide . osama bin laden has stated thatal qaeda has a chemical capability . ( 61 ) ahmedressam , convicted in a plot to bomb the los angelesairport , testified he had received training in the use of hydrogen cyanide in afghanistan at an alqaeda training camp . ( 62 ) the training describedincluded the production of hydrogen cyanide usingcyanide salts and acids , demonstrations of the effectiveness of the agent by exposing dogs to it , andintroducing the agent into building ventilation systems by placing a source near the air intakes . ( 63 ) cnn also located and retrieved videotapes from afghanistan which portray the results of testing ofunknown chemical agents on dogs . it has been suggested that the chemical agent used in thosevideotapes was a blood agent , most likely hydrogen cyanide . there are several areas where policymakers may wish to further address the danger posed byterrorist acquisition and use of high - threat chemical agents: the availability of such chemical agents ; the availability of chemical detectors , their sensitivity , and their use ; the ability of first respondersand diagnostic laboratories to detect , respond to , and resolve a chemical attack ; the development ofnew treatments and prophylaxis ; and determining whether an appropriate amount of funds andfederal attention is being given to this topic . crs report rl31332 , weapons of mass destruction: the terrorist threat , by stevebowman . crs report rl31831 , terrorist motivations for chemical and biological weapons use: placing the threat in context , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl31669 , terrorism: background on chemical , biological , and toxin weapons and options for lessening their impact , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl31475 , first responder initiative: policy issues and options , by ben canada . crs report rl31853 , food safety issues in the 108th congress , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl31791 , emergency management funding for the department of homeland security: information and issues for fy2004 , by [author name scrubbed] , coordinator , rob buschmann , ben canada,wayne morrissey , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl31530 , chemical plant security , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl30169 , export administration act of 1979 reauthorization , coordinated by ian f.fergusson . crs issue brief ib94029 , chemical weapons convention: issues for congress , by steven r.bowman . crs report rl31559 , proliferation control regimes: background and status , by sharon a.squassoni , coordinator , steven r. bowman , and , [author name scrubbed] .