§1001 et seq. ) on the other hand , many of these statutory and executive order provisions provide the agencies substantial discretion regarding when and how the rulemaking requirements are to be applied . other rules are exempt from umra if they are conditions of federal financial assistance or enforce constitutional rights . in addition , information regarding a variety of regulatory issues is available at the following websites: center for progressive regulation http: / / www.progressiveregulation.org center for regulatory effectiveness http: / / www.thecre.com competitive enterprise institute http: / / www.cei.org government accountability office ( gao , formerly the general accounting office ) http: / / www.gao.gov government printing office ( gpo ) http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / search / home.action office of management and budget http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb center for effective government ( formerly omb watch ) http: / / www.foreffectivegov.org / regulations.gov http: / / www.regulations.gov regulatory information service center http: / / www.reginfo.go . congress may also play a role at other stages in the process through its oversight and appropriations responsibilities . implicit within the steps depicted in figure 1 is an elaborate set of procedures and requirements that congress and various presidents have developed during the past 60 to 70 years to guide the federal rulemaking process . some of these rulemaking requirements apply to virtually all federal agencies , some apply only to certain types of agencies , and others are agency - specific . collectively , these rulemaking provisions are voluminous and require a wide range of procedural , consultative , and analytical actions on the part of rulemaking agencies . some observers contend that the requirements have resulted in the "ossification" of the rulemaking process , causing agencies to take years to develop final rules . for example , the national advisory committee on occupational safety and health noted that it takes the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) within the department of labor an average of 10 years to develop and promulgate a health or safety standard . on the other hand , while these congressional and presidential rulemaking requirements are numerous , it is not clear whether they or some other factors ( eg , lack of data , congressionally imposed delays , court challenges , etc. ) are the primary cause of the long time - frames that are sometimes required to develop and publish final rules . statutory rulemaking requirements can be generally categorized into two groups — those that are specific to an individual agency or program and those that are more cross - cutting in nature and therefore apply to a wider range of agencies or programs . agency - or program - specific rulemaking requirements may be in authorizing or appropriating statutes , and can have a significant or even determinative effect on an agency's rules and rulemaking procedures . as noted previously , these statutes sometimes specifically delineate what the agency's rules should require . for example , the employee retirement income security act ( 29 u.s.c . gives the pension benefit guaranty corporation no discretion in drafting rules that establish minimum pension insurance premium rates , specifying to the dollar what those rates should be .