table 1 . comparison of proposed , revised , and final peer review bulletin . some of the individuals' and organizations'comments are summarized below . as noted previously , on december 15 , 2004 , omb released its final bulletin on peer review . omb said that it had made "minor revisions" to the april version of the bulletin that were"responsive to the public's comments. ( 67 ) perhaps most notably , omb said that the final bulletin: requires that agencies disclose to the public the names of peer reviewers forboth "influential scientific information" and "highly influential scientific assessments. however,the bulletin does not require agencies to disclose which reviewers made whichcomments . adds an annual reporting requirement to address concerns about the lack of anenforcement mechanism , thereby allowing omb to "track how agencies are using the bulletin,including provisions for waivers and exceptions. omb also said it expects the public to monitoragencies' actions under the bulletin . requires agencies to designate at the time they plan a peer review whether itshould be considered "influential scientific information" or a "highly influential scientificassessment. provides additional criteria for what constitutes a "highly influential scientificassessment. specifically , the term now includes influential assessments that are "novel,controversial , or precedent setting or have significant interagency interest. omb also clarified thatthe $500 million impact test covers all impacts ( public or private sector ) that occur in any year . broadened the applicability of the exemption for time - sensitive health or safetyinformation , noting that it is not restricted to medical data from clinical trials that were subject toadequate peer review before the start of the trial . requires agencies to adopt or adapt the national academy of sciences policyfor committee selection with respect to evaluating conflicts of interests of peer reviewers who arenot federal employees . omb also reportedly made a number of what appear to be less significant changes to the finalbulletin . for example , omb said that the final version of the bulletin: retains a substantial degree of discretion for the agencies , but also clarifies theintent of its language concerning the "adequacy of prior peer review" and the use of deferrals andwaivers to address concerns that the revised draft was too discretionary . encourages agencies to provide public participation opportunities for reviewsof "highly influential assessments," but avoids a strict mandate for public participation and addslanguage "to stress that agencies should avoid open - ended comment periods. "reinstate[s]" instructions that peer reviewers are to comment on scientific andtechnical questions , and not to provide opinions on the policy implications . provides a "rare exception" to allow a premier government scientist from thedepartment or agency that prepared an assessment to participate in a peer review ( under certaincircumstances ) . omb's peer review bulletin is likely to have a significant effect on federal rulemaking andother forms of information dissemination and public policy . that effect is likely to be both direct ( through agencies' and omb's enforcement of the bulletin's requirements ) and indirect ( throughreferences to the bulletin by others ) . for example , section 402 of the specialty cropscompetitiveness act of 2004 ( p.l .