june 2006 . department of homeland security . national infrastructure protection plan . dhs and the directorate have been tasked with a very complex problem . security oriented risk management is typically done at the site or facility level or at the corporate level . the directorate is being asked to do this at the national level , assessing and comparing perhaps thousands of disparate sites and facilities it has judged as being nationally important . the directorate is to consider not only economic impacts and loss of life , but also the possible impact on national morale and the ability of state and local governments to maintain order and deliver essential services . none of these are easy to measure and all are difficult to trade off one against the other , should the analysis come down to that . to determine the economic impact of the loss of an asset is more difficult than determining the effect on a company's bottom line . the directorate has been instructed to determine economic impacts two to three levels through the supply chain . it is not clear how the directorate can or intends to measure the impact on national morale associated with the loss of an asset , especially a cultural icon . comparing the potential loss of life in one scenario with the potential loss of life in another scenario , while sensitive , presents a direct comparison . however , comparing the importance of an asset whose loss may result in a relatively small loss of life with another asset the loss of which might result in a large economic impact is much harder . the exercise will be less than perfect and probably less than objective . the bush administration and congress are allocating resources in any event , so these choices are getting made implicitly . if such processes were more transparent , congress could better oversee them and offer guidance if necessary . 126 , july 1 , 2003 , pp 39240-39250 . american petroleum institute and the national petrochemical & refiners association , security vulnerability assessment methodology for the petroleum and petrochemical industries , may 2003 . u.s. department of energy , office of energy assurance , vulnerability assessment methodology , electric power infrastructure ( draft ) , september 30 , 2002 . national communications systems , office of the manager , public switched network security assessment guidelines , september 2000 . association of metropolitan sewerage agencies , protecting wastewater infrastructure assets: asset based vulnerability checklist for wastewater utilities , 2002 . government accountability office , homeland security: key elements of a risk management approach , gao - 02-150t , october 12 , 2001 . american chemistry council , the chlorine institute , and the synthetic organic chemical manufacturers association , in their site security guidelines for the u.s. chemistry industry . argonne national laboratory , et al. , prepared for the office of energy assurance , u.s. department of energy , energy infrastructure vulnerability survey checklists , february 22 , 2002 .