the person having a majority of electoral votes for each office is elected . if no candidate for president gains a majority , then the house votes "immediately , by ballot" for president ( contingent election ) , choosing from among the three candidates who received the most electoral votes . a quorum of at least one representative from two - thirds of the states ( 34 at present ) is necessary for the purposes of contingent election . the vote is taken by states , with each state casting a single vote . the electors cast separate ballots for president and vice president . the votes are opened and counted in a joint session of congress presided over by the president of the senate ( the vice president or the president pro tempore ) . the votes of a majority of states ( 26 at present ) are necessary to elect the president . if the house is unable to elect prior to expiration of the presidential term ( january 20 since ratification of the 20 th amendment ) , then the vice president , assuming one has been elected , serves as acting president until a president is chosen . if no candidate for vice president receives a majority of electoral votes , then the senate elects , choosing between the two candidates receiving the most electoral votes . as noted previously , the 12 th amendment established what has become known as contingent election as a "fall - back" procedure that takes place only when no candidate wins an electoral college majority . a quorum of two - thirds of the senate ( 67 members at present ) is necessary for the purposes of contingent election of the vice president each senator casts a single vote . the votes of a majority of the whole senate ( 51 or more at present ) are necessary to elect the vice president . contingent election could occur as a result of several series of events: ( 1 ) three or more candidates split the electoral vote so that no one receives a majority ; ( 2 ) a sufficient number of "faithless" electors cast blank ballots or vote for candidates other than those to whom they are pledged , thus denying a majority to any candidate ; or ( 3 ) the electoral college could tie at 269 votes each for two candidates . contingent elections have been conducted only twice since ratification of the 12 th amendment: for the president in 1825 , following the election of 1824 ; and for the vice president in 1837 , following the election of 1836 . the contingent election process was modified in the 20 th century by the 20 th amendment to the constitution , and the presidential succession act of 1947 ( 61 stat . section 1 of the amendment set new expiration dates for congressional and presidential terms , changing the former to january 3 and the latter to january 20 . previously , both terms had expired on march 4 . the primary purpose of this change was to eliminate the historical anomaly of lame duck congressional sessions , while also shortening the period between election and inauguration of the president and vice president by six weeks .