remediation is an additional cost , after clean - up . decontamination procedures: for walls , furniture , ventilation systems , varietyof surfaces ; waste characterization and disposal . confirmation of decontamination: decontamination standards ; samplingmethods ; laboratory analytical testing . ( 37 ) after various reviews and approval by namsdl's board of directors , the model would bedistributed to alliance contacts in the states , including governors and attorneys general . the modelalso would be posted on namsdl's website ( http: / / www.natlalliance.org ) . in the 109th congress , 11 bills authorize funds to help local and state governments pay forcleaning former meth production sites . one bill provides for research and development ofremediation standards and other related activities . 4763 , the methamphetamine eradication act , authorizes funds for thecops program , the byrne formula grant program , dea , epa local governments reimbursementprogram , and department of transportation , for remediation actions , equipment , and training . 3324 and s. 430 , the arrest methamphetamine act of2005 , authorizes funds for the cops program and provides authority to the attorney general,through the bureau of justice assistance , to make grants to states to undertake meth clandestine labenvironmental clean - ups . 3889 , the metheamphetamine epidemic elimination act , authorizesfunds to reimburse dea for remediation activities . 3199 , the usa patriot improvement and reauthorization act of2005 , became p.l . 109-177 on march 9 , 2006 . authorized to be appropriated each fiscal year 2006through 2010 are $99 million to reimburse dea for remediation work and to support state and localenvironmental meth - related activities , among other things . 1446 , the methamphetamine abuse prevention act of 2005 , expandsauthority to include the hiring of personnel and the purchasing of equipment for cleaning stls . 314 and s. 103 , the combat meth act of 2005 , wouldamend the omnibus crime control and safe streets act of 1968 to authorize the use of grant fundsto hire personnel and purchase equipment to assist in cleaning methamphetamine - affected areas . 13 , the clean , learn , educate , abolish , neutralize , and undermineproduction ( clean - up ) of methamphetamines act , authorizes funds for grants , through thesecretary of labor and occupational safety and health administration , to state and local lawenforcement for training and equipment acquisition for cleaning former meth lab sites ; funds for theunited states department of agriculture to clean former stls ; and funds , through dea , for meth - related training activities . s. 2118 , to amend the usa patriot act , extends certain provisions of theact to march 31 , 2006 , and authorizes funds to reimburse dea for clean - up expenses . s. 259 , the federal emergency meth lab cleanup funding act of 2005 ,would make funding available from the department of the treasury forfeiture fund for payment todesignated state , local , or tribal law enforcement , environmental , or health entities for experts andconsultants needed to clean areas formerly used as meth labs .