appendix a . it will not be updated . congress delayed action on the u.s. - panama fta for nearly four years because of numerous concerns . many issues were addressed by changes to the fta based on principles outlined in the bipartisan agreement of may 10 , 2007 , crafted jointly by leadership in the 110 th congress and the bush administration . these changes included adoption as fully enforceable commitments , the five basic labor rights defined in the international labor organization's ( ilo's ) fundamental principles and rights at work and its follow - up ( 1998 ) declaration , compulsory adherence to select multilateral environmental agreements , new pharmaceutical intellectual property rights provisions intended to facilitate panama's access to generic drugs , and language on the investor - state issue clarifying that foreign investors will have no greater rights than u.s. domestic investors with respect to dispute resolution under the fta . other issues , however , cropped up that further hindered congressional action on the agreement , all falling outside the scope of the fta . soon after the may 10 th understanding was agreed to , the election of pedro miguel gonz치lez pinz칩n as president of panama's national assembly on september 3 , 2007 , contributed to another year of delay . although a deputy in the national assembly since 1999 , his election to the head of the national assembly raised his profile and drew the attention of congress to his alleged role in the june 1992 murder of a u.s. serviceman in panama . a panamanian court acquitted him of the charge in 1997 , but the united states does not recognize the verdict and maintains an outstanding warrant for his arrest . this issue was effectively resolved with respect to the fta on september 1 , 2008 , when gonz치lez pinz칩n declined to run for a second term as president of the national assembly . the united states and panama have entered into many agreements over the past 150 years , the most prominent ones defining their relative stakes in the canal that traverses the central american isthmus , bisecting panamanian territory . the canal has been a critical factor influencing panamanian domestic and foreign affairs , and like earlier u.s. - panama agreements , the fta's significance is tied to a panamanian economy that has formed largely around the canal . panama is a country of 3.5 million people with a stable , diversified economy that has experienced strong growth despite the 2007-2008 global economic downturn . panama's gross domestic product ( gdp ) expanded by an annual average of over 8% for the five years ending 2010 . the economy grew by an robust 10.5% in 2011 ( see appendix b for selected macroeconomic data ) . panama has the highest per capita income in the central american region , but income distribution is highly skewed ; poverty remains a nagging problem , especially in rural areas ; and the unemployment rate has been moderately high . inflation rose significantly in 2007-2008 , but retreated in the following years .