appendix a . part of a $45 million agreement between the united states and the people of rongelap forpurposes of resettlement , signed on september 19 , 1996 . appendix b . comparison of radiation compensationamounts sources : radiation exposure compensation program ( reca ) , department of justice http: / / www.usdoj.gov / civil / torts / const / reca / ; nuclear claims tribunal http: / / www.nuclearclaimstribunal.com / . the nct methodology . the methodology usedby the nct to estimate the value of the loss - of - use of lands belonging to the people of enewetak andbikini attempts to calculate the fair market rental value of those portions of the enewetak and bikiniatolls that the people were unable to use , as a result of their evacuation and use ( appropriation ) bythe u.s. government . according to the nct , this rental value represents an estimate of the rents thatthe u.s. government should have paid ( but were not fully paid , according to the claimants ) to theatoll residents , as proprietors , for the use of their land . compensation is based on estimated rentalvalues , in lieu of land asset values , because the underlying assumption is that the u.s. governmentdid not "take" or purchase the land but instead used it , with the consequence that the inhabitants wereunable to use it . there is generally a close mathematical relationship between rentals and landvalues . loss - of - use includes not only the period when the united states tested the nuclear bombs - - roughly the period from 1946 to 1958 - - but the period during which the islands remain unsafe dueto continued dangerous levels of radiation contamination , which , for some of the islands at least , isroughly the period from 1958 to 2027 . ( 56 ) more specifically , the estimate of total loss - of - use is the sum of two components: pastloss - of - use , which is the present value of rents that should have been paid from the time ofevacuation to the date of the appraisal reports' publication , and future loss - of - use , which is thepresent value of estimated rents from the reports' publication dates to that estimated date in the future ( as described below ) when the lands are decontaminated and usable . in addition , as part of the pastloss - of - use estimates , the nct also awarded what it called a "prejudgment interest," which is theinterest income earned on the original judgements from the time they were determined to the timethey were awarded . see table 1 . description of past loss - of - use methodology . for enewetak , past loss - of - use consists of the estimated rents on the entire atoll ( 1,952.6 acres ) fromthe onset of evacuation ( december 21 , 1947 ) to the date of return on october 1 , 1980 . however,when the enewetak people were allowed to return on october 1 , 1980 , they were allowed to safelyuse only 646.82 acres of the atoll - - 1,305.78 acres continued to be off limits due to dangerous levelsof radioactive contamination .