the united states did not comply by this date . instead of agreeing to an extension of the deadline or , alternatively , requesting authorization to retaliate , the eu entered into an agreement with the united states regarding rights and procedures involving any future eu retaliation request . the eu agreed not to request authorization from the dsb to suspend concessions for the time being , but pledged to notify and consult with the united states before making any such request in the future . for its part , the united states agreed not to block any retaliation request by the eu on the ground that the request is outside the 30-day window provided for in article 22.6 of the dsu . the united states also retained the right to object to a proposed retaliation request and to refer the matter to arbitration . the eu , cuba , and other wto members continue to raise the issue of u.s. noncompliance at dsb meetings , while the united states has reported to the dsb that legislative proposals that would implement the wto ruling have been introduced in the house and senate and that it will work with congress on legislative vehicles to resolve this matter . a hearing on possible changes to u.s. law in light of the wto decision was held by the house judiciary committee on march 3 , 2010 . in the 112 th congress , h.r . such agreements have been entered into in many of the cases discussed below . the dsu provides that any suspension of concessions or other obligations is temporary and may only be applied by the prevailing member until the wto - inconsistent measure is removed , the defending member provides a solution to any trade injury at issue , or a mutually satisfactory resolution of the dispute is reached . moreover , if a prevailing member is ultimately authorized to impose countermeasures , the member is not required to implement them . as evident from some of the cases discussed in this report , wto members may manage disputes in a variety of ways at the compliance phase , short of imposing sanctions . the legal effect of uruguay round agreements and wto dispute settlement results in the united states is comprehensively dealt with in the uruguay round agreements act ( uraa ) , p.l . 103-465 , which addresses the relationship of wto agreements to federal and state law and prohibits private remedies based on alleged violations of wto agreements . the statute also requires the united states trade representative ( ustr ) to keep congress informed of disputes challenging u.s. laws once a dispute panel is established , any u.s. appeal is filed , and a panel or appellate body report is circulated to wto members . the original compliance period , as agreed upon by the united states and the eu , expired december 31 , 2002 ; it was extended four times , also by agreement , most recently to june 30 , 2005 . 255 ( serrano ) and h.r . 1887 ( rangel ) would repeal section 211 , remove the current trade embargo on cuba , and make other statutory changes involving u.s. - cuba relations .