this report will be updated occasionally . 104-104 ) provided that initial eligibility for dtv licenses issued by the federal communications commission ( fcc ) would be limited to existing broadcasters . broadband internet access gives users the ability to send and receive data at speeds far greater than conventional "dial up" internet access over existing telephone lines . broadband technologies — cable modem , digital subscriber line ( dsl ) , fiber , satellite , and wireless internet — are currently being deployed nationwide primarily by the private sector . while the number of new broadband subscribers continue to grow , some areas of the nation , particularly rural and low - income communities , continue to lack sufficient access to high - speed broadband internet service . in order to address this problem , the 110 th congress is considering the scope and effect of federal broadband financia1assistance programs ( including universal service and the broadband loan and grant programs at the u.s. department of agriculture ) , and the impact of telecommunications regulation and new technologies on broadband deployment . some policymakers , believing that disparities in broadband access across american society could have adverse economic and social consequences on those left behind , assert that the federal government should play a more active role to avoid a "digital divide" in broadband access . one approach is for the federal government to collect better broadband deployment data and to provide financial assistance to support broadband in underserved areas . others , however , question the reality of the "digital divide," and argue that federal intervention in the broadband marketplace would be premature and , in some cases , counterproductive . the regulatory treatment of broadband technologies , whether offered by traditional or emerging providers , or incumbents or new entrants , has also become a major focal point in the debate . whether present laws and subsequent regulatory policies are necessary to ensure the development of competition and its subsequent consumer benefits , or are overly burdensome and only discourage needed investment in and deployment of broadband services , continues to be at issue . the policy debate focuses on a number of issues including the extent to which legacy regulations should be applied to traditional providers as they enter new markets ; the extent to which legacy regulations should be imposed on new entrants as they compete with traditional providers in their markets ; and , the appropriate treatment of new and converging technologies . what , if any , role regulators should play to ensure the internet remains open to all , often referred to as "open access" requirements or "net neutrality" is a major and contentious part of the dialogue . finally , emerging broadband technologies — such as fiber , wireless ( including "3g" , "wi - fi" and "wimax" ) and broadband over power lines ( bpl ) — continue to be developed and / or deployed and have the potential to affect the regulatory and market landscape of broadband deployment . congress and the fcc will likely consider policies to address the emergence of these and other new broadband technologies .