he signed p.l . 101-168 after insisting that congress include language prohibiting the use of district revenues to pay for abortion services except in cases where the mother's life was endangered . the district successfully sought the removal of the provision limiting district funding of abortion services when congress considered and passed the district of columbia appropriations act for fy1994 , p.l . the fy1994 act also reinstated rape and incest as qualifying circumstances allowing for the public funding of abortion services . the district's success was short - lived , however ; the district of columbia appropriations act for fy1996 , p.l . 104-134 , and subsequent district of columbia appropriations acts limited the use of district and federal funds for abortion services to cases where the mother's life was endangered or cases where the pregnancy was the result of rape or incest . the house , senate , and conference versions of the tthud appropriations act for fy2006 , p.l . 109-115 , included a provision that continues to prohibit the use of both district and federal funds for abortion services , except in instances of rape or incest , or when pregnancy endangers the life of the mother . 107-96 included a provision lifting the congressional prohibition on the use of district funds to implement its health care benefits expansion act . the provision permits unmarried heterosexual and homosexual couples to register as domestic partners . under the health care benefits expansion act , which was approved by the city's elected leadership in 1992 , an unmarried person who registers as a domestic partner of a district employee hired after 1987 may be added to the district employee's health care policy for an additional charge . the act was not implemented until 2002 because of a congressional prohibition first included in the general provisions of district of columbia appropriations act for fy1994 . the city's health care benefits expansion act allows two cohabiting , unmarried , and unrelated individuals to register as domestic partners with the district for the purpose of securing certain health and family — related benefits , including hospital visiting rights . under the law , a district government employee enrolled in the district of columbia employees health benefits program is allowed to purchase family health insurance coverage that would cover the employee's family members , including a domestic partner . opponents of the act maintain that it devalues the institution of marriage , and that the act grants unmarried gay and heterosexual couples the same standing as married couples . at least one bill , h.r . 72 , would define marriage in the district of columbia as a union between a man and a woman . congressional proponents of lifting the ban on the use of district funds argue that the implementation of the act is a question of home rule and local autonomy . supporters of health care benefits for domestic partners note that as of 2004 , 11 states and the district of columbia , 185 local governments , and more than 8,000 companies , colleges , and universities offered health insurance benefits to domestic partners .