2985 , was signed into p.l . 109-55 by president bush on august 2 , 2005 . prior to house and senate consideration of the fy2006 funding bill , congress agreed to a fy2005 supplemental containing funds for salaries and expenses of the capitol police and for an interim congressional off - site delivery and screening facility and design of a permanent facility , funded within the budget of the architect of the capitol . the annual legislative branch appropriations bill usually contains two titles . house committee on appropriations http: / / appropriations.house.gov / senate committee on appropriations http: / / appropriations.senate.gov / crs appropriations products guide http: / / www.crs.gov / products / appropriations / apppage.shtml congressional budget office http: / / www.cbo.gov government accountability office http: / / www.gao.gov office of management & budget http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb / . appropriations for legislative branch agencies are contained in title i . these entities , as they appear in the annual appropriations bill , are the senate ; house of representatives ; joint items ; capitol police ; office of compliance ; congressional budget office ; architect of the capitol , including the capitol visitor center ; library of congress , including the congressional research service ; government printing office ; government accountability office ; and open world leadership program . title ii contains general administrative provisions and , from time to time , appropriations for legislative branch entities . these sites contain information on the fy2004 and fy2005 legislative branch appropriations requests and legislation , and the appropriations process . for example , title ii of the fy2003 act contained funds for the john c. stennis center for public service training and development and the congressional award act . on occasion the bill may contain a third title for out of the ordinary legislation . for example , the pending house - passed version of the fy2006 legislative branch appropriations bill contains language providing for the continuity of congressional representation in the event of an emergency . crs report rl32312 , appropriations for fy2005: legislative branch , by [author name scrubbed] . the fy2006 legislative funding bill , h.r .