table 1 . epa estimates of regional nox and so2 caps and percentage reduction ( million tons ) source: proposed interstate air quality rule ( 69 federal register 4566-4650 ) based on the cost - effectiveness methodology , each of the affected states is assigned a statewide "emissions budget. each covered state would be required to submit a revised state implementationplan ( sip ) identifying measures it intended to implement to achieve its emissions budget . stateswould be free to choose whatever means they deemed appropriate , subject to epa approval . however , epa strongly believes that the regional emissions cap can be most cost - effectivelyachieved through a regional cap - and - trade program focused on electric generators and intends onissuing a proposed cap - and - trade model program rule to encourage that option . the 60 day public comment period for the proposed rule ends on march 30th . with much of the public focus on the accompanying proposed mercury rule , theinterstate air quality rule has not received much attention . however , ifpromulgated , the proposed rule would have far - reaching effects in terms ofeconomics , environmental impact , and policy . in terms of economics , there are different perspectives at work . the economic perspective embodied in the proposed rule may best be described as a cost - effectiveness approach . cost curves areconstructed and compared with an eyetoward finding the most cost - effective reduction level - - the "knee" in the cost curve . at this point , the proposed rule is maximizing the reductions achieved per dollarspent . accordingly , the proposed rule sets its reduction targets in this vicinity . toincrease the likelihood that reductions will be economically efficient , the proposedrule includes several market mechanisms , such as trading and banking , to encourageaffected parties to seek the most efficient solution to their compliance problem.likewise , deadlines are set with cost considerations in mind . implementingenvironmental goals through market mechanisms , thereby allowing polluters tochoose their lowest cost abatement actions , represents a general elevation ofeconomic "efficiency" as the guiding principle of decision - making . this focus ismore evident when one considers the interaction between the proposed interstate airquality rule with the proposed mercury rule . a second economic perspective on setting reduction targets under the proposed rule would be to base it on cost - benefit analysis . the difference between the costsand benefits of the proposed rule is an order of magnitude in favor of the benefits . this number is based primarily on one benefit - - reduced premature fatalities amongadults resulting from reduced pm 2.5 . ( 39 ) other potential categories of benefits are notassessed . ( 40 ) if one were to adopt the classiceconomic perspective of setting themarginal cost of control at the marginal benefit received , it is highly likely that thereductions mandated by the proposed rule would be higher . likewise , deadlinesmight be advanced to achieve the benefits quicker . this approach of defining "highlycost - effective" reductions is not discussed in the proposed rule . economics appearsto be defined in the proposed rule as costs to the electric utility industry . alternativeperspectives are not addressed .