there are two aspects for legal admission under each of these categories . first , an alien must fulfill the substantive requirements for admission under a specified category . for example , in order to enter the united states as a nonimmigrant student , an alien must demonstrate that he is a bona fide student at an approved school . second , aliens who fulfill substantive requirements for admission may nevertheless be denied admission if they fall within a class of inadmissable aliens listed under ina § 212 . once admitted , aliens remain subject to removal if they fall within a class of deportable aliens listed under ina § 237 . the ina contains bars for admission and grounds for deportation based on criminal conduct . this report discusses the potential immigration consequences of criminal activity . "criminal activity" generally refers to conduct for which an alien has been found or plead guilty before a court of law , though in limited circumstances consequences may attach to the commission of a crime or admission of acts constituting the essential elements of a crime . consequences may flow from violations of either federal , state or , in many circumstances , foreign criminal law . some federal crimes are set out in the ina itself — alien smuggling , for example . however , not all violations of immigration law are crimes . notably , being in the united states without legal permission — i.e. , being an "illegal alien" — is not a crime in and of itself . thus , for example , an alien who overstays a student visa may be an "illegal alien," in that the alien may be subject to removal from the united states , but such an alien is not a "criminal alien. the ina lists a number of criminal grounds for designating an alien as inadmissible or deportable . most crimes included under these grounds are not specifically mentioned , but instead fall under a broad category of crimes , such as crimes involving moral turpitude or aggravated felonies . in addition , certain criminal conduct precludes a finding of good moral character under the ina , thereby preventing an alien from becoming either a naturalized u.s. citizen or a candidate for certain types of relief . the class of crimes involving moral turpitude , the class of aggravated felonies , and the class of crimes that preclude a finding of good moral character are overlapping , but no two classes are coextensive . the types of crimes constituting crimes of moral turpitude are determined by case law . crimes that are aggravated felonies are listed in statute , with case law illuminating the bounds of certain listed crimes . crimes precluding a finding of good moral character are determined by a combination of case law and statutory law . these criminal classes are further modified for the purposes of specific ina provisions . the following sections will describe these criminal categories in more detail . certain criminal conduct may have a substantial impact upon an alien's ability to enter or remain in the united states , and it may also affect the availability of discretionary forms of immigration relief and the ability of an alien to become a u.s. citizen .