house report on h.r . 110-197 ) required the administration to report on "the use of aerial assets to include fixed and rotary wing aircraft in coordination with and in support of drug enforcement administration ( dea ) counternarcotics operations," and , "the extradition status of afghan drug kingpins and narco terrorists , the destruction of afghan heroin laboratories , local afghan prosecutions of heroin - related crimes , and illegal border crossings by foreign nationals from pakistan into afghanistan. the national defense authorization act , 2008 ( section 1230 , p.l . 110-181 ) requires the executive branch to submit a report on the comprehensive strategy of the united states for security and stability in afghanistan every 180 days through fy2010 . the reports issued to date have included sections devoted to counternarcotics policy as well as other issues such as police training and judicial reform relevant to u.s. and afghan counternarcotics goals . the fy2009 duncan hunter national defense authorization act ( p.l . 110-417 ) extended the requirement for annual defense department reporting on its overseas counterdrug activities through 2009 , and section 1026 of the act requires the secretary of defense to submit by june 30 , 2009 , "a comprehensive strategy of the department of the defense with regard to counternarcotics efforts in the south and central asian regions , including the countries of afghanistan , turkmenistan , tajikistan , kyrgyzstan , kazakhstan , pakistan , and india , as well as the countries of armenia , azerbaijan , and china. the fy2010 defense authorization act ( p.l . 111-84 ) requires the submission of a counter - drug plan for each fiscal year that defense department support is provided . striking such a balance may continue to create challenges for the united states and its allies . debate over the role of the u.s. military and coalition forces in the international security assistance force has shifted as the roles and missions of those forces have changed . the initial focus on counterterrorism ( ct ) led military forces to view the narcotics trade as a contingent priority , while the shift toward a counterinsurgency ( coin ) approach has dictated an increased role for the military in eliminating narcotics targets providing support for the taliban and other anti - government forces . for years , some observers argued that u.s. , coalition , and nato military forces should play an active , direct role in targeting the leaders and infrastructure of the opiate trade . for example , following the announcement of record poppy cultivation and opium production in 2005-2006 , unodc director antonio maria costa called for direct nato military involvement in counternarcotics enforcement operations in afghanistan . arguments in favor of coalition involvement in counternarcotics enforcement activities often cited the limited capabilities of afghan security forces and held that coalition forces able to take action against narcotics traffickers should do so in the interest of afghanistan's national security and coalition goals .