title ii of p.l . 109-54 provided $7.73 billion for the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , subject to an across - the - board rescission of 0.476% . the president signed the department of defense appropriations act for fy2006 ( p.l . 2863 ) on december 30 , 2005 , which included a 1% government - wide rescission , further reducing epa's final appropriation . even after both rescissions , the fy2006 appropriation for epa is an increase above the administration's request of $7.52 billion , but a decrease below the fy2005 appropriation of $8.03 billion . there were varying degrees of interest in specific programs and activities funded within epa's appropriation . among the prominent issues in the debate over the interior bill were the adequacy of funding for wastewater infrastructure , cleanup of hazardous waste sites under the superfund program , cleanup of commercial and industrial sites referred to as brownfields , epa's homeland security activities , and "congressional project priorities" or earmarks . in addition to funding , another issue receiving significant attention was epa's use and consideration of intentional human dosing studies for determining potential human health risks from exposure to pesticides . the following sections explain the methodology used in this report for funding comparisons , provide background information on the history and mission of epa , include a brief overview of the president's fy2006 budget request for epa , discuss congressional action on appropriations in the first session of the 109 th congress , and examine funding levels and relevant issues for selected programs and activities by epa appropriations account . ( for a discussion of broader issues relevant to the statutes and programs that epa administers , see crs issue brief ib10146 , environmental protection issues in the 109 th congress . for a discussion of fy2005 funding , see crs report rl32441 , environmental protection agency: appropriations for fy2005 ( pdf ) . ) in general , the term appropriations used in this report refers to total funds available , including regular annual and supplemental appropriations , as well as rescissions , transfers , and deferrals , but excludes permanent budget authorities . fy2006 appropriations presented in this report have not been adjusted to account for the 0.476% rescission required in p.l . 109-54 , nor for the 1% government - wide rescission required in p.l . the white house's office of management and budget ( omb ) is responsible for applying rescissions to the budgets of affected agencies , including epa , adjusting the amounts that congress indicates in final appropriations bills and accompanying reports . funding increases and decreases noted in this report are generally calculated based on comparisons among final fy2006 funding levels prior to the two rescissions above , house and senate amounts prior to conference , the administration's fy2006 request , and appropriations enacted for fy2005 . requested and appropriated funding amounts presented throughout this report have not been adjusted for inflation . in some cases , small increases above the previous year funding may actually reflect a decrease when adjusted for inflation . fy2006 appropriations amounts indicated in this report are from the final bill and conference report on h.r .