( comm . print , sept. 17 , 1970 ) , as cited in 3 deschler ' s ch . 14 , ยง 3.13 , the subcommittee suggested two "concepts" related to this question for the committee to consider . these concepts shared some common ground . as the subcommittee observed: both concepts would allow a judge to be impeached for acts which occur in the exercise of judicial office that ( 1 ) involved criminal conduct in violation of law , or ( 2 ) that involved serious dereliction from public duty , but not necessarily in violation of positive statutory law or forbidden by the common law . sloth , drunkenness on the bench , or unwarranted and unreasonable impartiality [sic] manifest for a prolonged period are examples of misconduct , not necessarily criminal in nature , that would support impeachment . when such misbehavior occurs in connection with the federal office , actual criminal conduct should not be a requisite to impeachment of a judge or any other federal official . while such conduct need not be criminal , it nonetheless must be sufficiently serious to be offenses against good morals and injurious to the social body . both concepts would allow a judge to be impeached for conduct not connected with the duties and responsibilities of the judicial office which involve [sic] criminal acts in violation of law . thus it would appear that this common ground represented those general principles which the subcommittee deemed fundamental to conduct upon which impeachment of a federal judge could be based . the administration refused to comply . during the confirmation hearing , two senators presented for the record evidence of seven instances in which prior administrations had provided requested documents for nominees related to prior service in the department of justice ( doj ) which were claimed to be analogous to those being sought about estrada . they involved the nominations judge frank easterbook to the seventh circuit , judge robert bork and chief justice william rehnquist to the supreme court , benjamin civiletti to be attorney general , william bradford reynolds to be associate attorney general , judge stephen trott to the ninth circuit , and jeffrey holmes to be assistant administrator at the environmental protection agency . in a response from the doj office of legislative affairs ( doj - ola ) , dated october 8 , 2002 , it was contended that disclosure of the memoranda demanded , which were asserted to be confidential and privileged , would have the effect of "undermin[ing] the integrity of the decisionmaking process" of the solicitor general's office ( sg ) .