legislation . the emergency supplementalappropriations act for defense , the global war on terror , and tsunami relief , 2005 ( p.l . required regulations . section 1092 requires themilitary to implement , within 150 days of the passage of the act , a policy to ensure detainees aretreated in accordance with the obligations set forth in section 1091 . the required dod regulationsare to contain , at a minimum , the following elements: ( 1 ) commanding officers of detention and interrogationfacilities must educate their troops , including military personnel and civilian contractors , about thegeneva convention relative to the treatment of prisoners ofwar . ( 2 ) dod contracts in which civilian contract personnelwill be required to interact with detainees must include a requirement that such personnel havereceived training regarding the international obligations and applicable u.s. law . ( 3 ) detainees must be informed in their own languagesof their rights under the geneva convention . ( 4 ) the department of defense must provide forperiodic inspections , both announced and unannounced , of detention and interrogationfacilities . ( 5 ) guard - detainee contact must be same - sex exceptunder exigent circumstances . the first two requirements of section 1092 codify the gpw , art . 127 requirements that statesparties provide for education in the requirements of the geneva conventions , except that it is limitedto military personnel and civilian contractors working at detention and interrogation facilitiesoperated under dod . the third requirement also corresponds to an obligation under the gpw . ( 118 ) with respect to thefourth requirement , the gpw does not specifically require inspections by the military chain ofcommand . however , subparagraph 3 would provide a means to satisfy the obligation to preventabuse . the fifth requirement also echoes an obligation under the gpw , at least as the conventionapplies to women prisoners . ( sec . the senate is alsoconsidering amendments to that bill to require the defense department to adhere to the army'sinterrogation manual ( sa 1557 ) , to prohibit cruel , inhumane and degrading treatment of prisonersin u.s. custody no matter where they are held ( sa 1556 ) , to authorize the combatant status reviewtribunals to determine detainees' status ( sa 1505 ) , and to establish an independent commission toinvestigate detainee abuse ( sa 1494 ) . ( 123 ) after the white house reportedly threatened to veto the billif it includes measures that would impede the president's ability to conduct the war onterrorism , ( 124 ) the billwas returned to committee and further action on it was postponed . the senate version of the defense department fy2006 appropriations bill ( h.r . 2863 ) contains a provision , introduced as an amendment by senator mccain , thatwould prohibit the "cruel , inhuman and degrading treatment" of detainees . ( 125 ) section 8154 of thebill , as amended , would limit interrogation techniques used by the department of defense to thosedefined in u.s. army field manual ( fm ) 34-52 , intelligence interrogation ( 126 ) ( "fm 34-52" ) . thisrequirement would not apply with respect to persons detained under criminal or immigration laws .