these questions are addressed in the following pages . many proponents of growth models for school / lea ayp see them as being more fair — to both pupils and school staff — and accurate than status or improvement models , primarily because they can be designed to take into consideration the currently widely varying levels of achievement of different pupil groups . growth models generally recognize the reality that different schools and pupils have very different starting points in their achievement levels and recognize progress being made at all levels ( eg , from below basic to basic , or from proficient to advanced ) , giving credit for all improvements over previous performance . growth models would likely increase the ability to attribute pupil achievement to their current school , as opposed to their past schools or background characteristics , especially ( but not only ) if controls ( and / or predicted growth elements ) are included in the model . they more directly measure the effect of schools on the specific pupils they serve over a period of years , attempting to track the movement of pupils between schools and leas , rather than applying a single standard to all pupils in each state . they have the ability to focus on the specific effectiveness of schools and teachers with pupils whom they have actually taught for multiple years , rather than the change in performance of pupil groups among whom there has usually been a substantial amount of mobility . they can directly ( as well as indirectly ) adjust for non - school influences on achievement , comparing the same students across years and reducing errors due to student mobility . proponents of growth models often argue that status models of ayp in particular make schools and leas accountable for factors over which they have little control , and that status models focus insufficiently on pupil achievement gains , especially if those gains are below the threshold for proficient performance , or gains from a proficient to an advanced level . status models , such as the current primary model of ayp under nclb , might even create an undesirable incentive for teachers and schools to focus their attention , at least in the short run , on pupils who are only marginally below a proficient level of achievement , in hopes of bringing them above that sole key threshold , rather than focusing on the most disadvantaged pupils whose achievement is well below the proficient level . the current status model of ayp also confers no credit for achievement increases above the proficient level , that is , bringing pupils from the proficient to the advanced level . at the same time , growth models of ayp have the significant disadvantage of implicitly setting lower thresholds or expectations for some pupil groups and / or schools .