the slowdown in the housing market could negatively affect the fhlbs . in addition to any delinquent loans that may be in the fhlb system , a general decline in house prices would reduce the value of the collateral that backs the banks making up the system . declining collateral value hurts bank balance sheets even while the loans perform . estimating the likely effect on the fhlb system is difficult because there has not been a national decline in house prices since the system was created , although regional house prices have declined . refinancing represents another channel through which troubles in mortgage markets could affect the fhlbs . large lenders with affiliates that are members of a regional fhlb could use the system to access liquidity to refinance troubled loans . for example , the cost of borrowing funds to finance mortgage - backed securities increased in august 2007 . mortgage lending generally decreased as expected ; however , the volume of fhlb advances to its members increased . it is possible that these advances are being used to refinance troubled borrowers out of resetting loans and into the fhlb system . on the one hand , refinances could help hold down foreclosure rates . on the other hand , refinances could move loans likely to default from private investors to the fhlb system , which some believe has an implicit government guarantee . the major issue before congress concerning the fhlb system is gse regulatory reform . the proposed replacement of the current system regulator accompanies a basic move to restructure and strengthen regulation of fannie mae and freddie mac . 1427 and s. 1100 would fold the fhfb and the office of federal housing enterprise oversight ( ofheo ) — the current regulator of fannie mae and freddie mac — into a single overseer for all three housing - related gses . s. 1100 was referred to the senate banking committee on april 12 , 2007 , but no further action has been taken as of the date of this writing . the major reason behind such legislation is the widely understood weakness in the powers and authorities granted to ofheo by congress . legislation would grant greater power and independence to the new regulator than to ofheo , while nearly matching the authority and independence of the current fhfb . unlike the current fhfb board , however , the new regulator would be a single agency director . table 1 summarizes the differences , as they relate to combined supervision , between the gses ( as they are currently regulated ) . some of the legislative discussion has also suggested that commercial bank - style regulatory controls and powers may be appropriate for a new gse regulator . table 2 presents a comparison of the current authorities of bank regulators , ofheo , and the fhfb over their regulated financial institutions . it summarizes the essential control mechanisms set forth in law , regulation , and practice to control risk , self - dealing , and certain other undesirable characteristics . agency - to - agency variations exist , especially between ofheo , the fhfb , and the banking regulators .