the report will be updated as events warrant . in october 2003 , the world bank and united nations development group ( undg ) , in conjunction with the coalition provisional authority ( cpa ) , estimated that the potential cost of iraqi reconstruction needs would amount to $55 billion over a four year period from 2003 through 2007 . this figure reflected the sum total of a joint world bank / undg needs assessment of 14 sectors of the iraqi government and economy — $36 billion — combined with a $19.4 billion coalition provisional authority ( cpa ) projection for security , oil , and other sectors not covered by the world bank / undg assessment . these amounts , calculated in mid - 2003 , did not take into account the significant costs created by the instability and security disruptions that have occurred since that time . shortly after the passage of un security council resolution 1511 in october 2003 , an international donors' conference for iraq was held in madrid , spain . at that event , members of the international community , excluding the united states , pledged approximately $13.5 billion for reconstruction assistance to iraq , including roughly $10 billion in loan pledges . as of october 2007 , roughly $2.9 billion in additional pledges had been made , bringing the pledge total to approximately $16.4 billion . loan pledges represent $10.8 billion of this total , and iraq has accepted $2.2 billion in pledged loan assistance to date . of the $5.6 billion pledged for grants , iraq has received $4.8 billion . according to the international reconstruction fund facility for iraq , $1.766 billion of the pledged assistance has been channeled to the world bank iraq trust fund and undg iraq trust fund . the undg fund had committed close to $800 million for planned projects by the end of october 2007 . to date , the united states congress has appropriated nearly $43 billion for reconstruction programs in iraq . many observers credit persistent security problems and iraqi government capacity deficiencies for the slow rate at which pledged international assistance has been committed and disbursed . iraq's ministry of planning has established a donor assistance database "to record donor assistance , analyze donor activities , and monitor the implementation of donor - funded projects. iraq also has pursued debt relief through negotiations with members of the paris club as well as in the context of the international compact with iraq ( ici ) , which was launched at a summit in sharm al - sheikh , egypt , on may 3 , 2007 . as of december 2006 , iraq's government owed its international creditors $89 billion . during 2007 , roughly $28.9 billion in further loan forgiveness has been pledged . four countries participated directly and openly in the major combat phase of operations in iraq: the united states , the united kingdom , australia and poland . dozens of other coalition partners sent troops to iraq in the immediate aftermath of major combat operations , and total troop contribution numbers reached their zenith in the early stabilization phase .