b . this amount includes a $63 million rescission of fy2004 funds previously appropriated by p.l.108-11 . c. there is $400 million difference in tsa offsetting fee collections reported by the administration,and the house and senate . the administration included in its request a proposal to increasethe aviation security fee . both the house and senate denied this request and thus reflect $400million less than the request in offsetting fee collections for tsa . in its final report , the 9 / 11 commission makes several recommendations relating to border andtransportation security . ( 28 ) many of theserecommendations would have funding implications shouldthey be adopted . however , it is important to note that in none of the recommendations does thecommission suggest specific funding increases , decreases , or allocations . instead , the commissionpoints out the following broad areas that it believes need more attention and resources: current transportation security efforts do not reflect a forward - looking comprehensive strategic plan that systematically evaluates all aspects of transportation security . anational plan for transportation security , as the commission conceives it , would identify the assetsthat need to be protected , create risk - based priorities for their defense , select the most efficient andcost - effective methods for securing them , and establish a budget and funding streams . the tsa is focused on aviation security at the expense of other transportation modes . the commission notes that while commercial aviation remains a potential target,"opportunities to do harm are as great , or greater , in maritime or surface transportation. in theabsence of the aforementioned national plan , the commission concludes that transportation securityfunding may be better allocated between all transportation modes . investment should be made in technologies that have applications across transportation modes . these technologies include , but are not limited to: eds and etd systemscurrently used by tsa to screen passengers and their baggage for explosives ; non - intrusiveinspection ( nii ) systems , which are large scale x - ray and gamma - ray imaging systems used by cbpat points of entry to inspect incoming vehicles , trains , and seacraft ; and radiological detectionequipment ( rde ) , used by cbp to detect traces of nuclear isotopes on vehicles , cargo , and people . the commission calls for an expansion of current screening programs . the u.s. border security system should be expanded and integrated into a larger network of screeningpoints . this network should include the transportation system and access to vital facilities such asnuclear reactors . dhs should design this comprehensive screening system and set common standardsthat can be applied system wide . additionally , dhs should complete its implementation of abiometric entry / exit screening system as quickly as possible and expand the screening of passengersand baggage for explosives . these recommendations are broad in nature and as such difficult to quantify . moreover , the 9 / 11 commission makes no concrete estimates of the funding implications involved withimplementing their recommendations . table 2 . summary of border and transportation security appropriations , functional presentation ( $ in millions ) source: p.l . 4567 passed by the house june 18 , 2004 ; s.rept . 108-280 to s. 2537 reported by the senate june 17 , 2004 .