99-198 , tit . §152 , the vsta also prohibits the importation of any virus , serum , toxin , or analogous product except under a permit from the secretary of agriculture . the secretary of agriculture is also authorized to make and promulgate rules and regulations as may be necessary to prevent the preparation , sale , barter , exchange , or shipment of a dangerous virus , serum , toxin , or analogous product for use in the treatment of domestic animals or otherwise to carry out the vsta . pursuant to this authority , the usda , through the animal and plant health protection service ( aphis ) , has promulgated a comprehensive set of regulations governing the licensing of viruses , serums , toxins , or analogous products ( see 9 c.f.r . subchapter e , pts . regulations for the vsta broadly categorize viruses , serums , toxins , or analogous products as "biological products" at any stage of production intended for use in the treatment of animals and which act primarily through the direct stimulation , supplementation , enhancement , or modulation of the immune system or immune response . a "biological product" includes but is not limited to: vaccines , bacterins , allergens , antibodies , antitoxins , toxoids , immunostimulants , certain cytokines , antigenic or immunizing components of live organisms , and diagnostic components , that are of natural or synthetic origin , or that are derived from synthesizing or altering various substances or components of substances such as microorganisms , genes or genetic sequences , carbohydrates , proteins , antigens , allergens , or antibodies . ( italics added ) "treatment" under the regulations means the prevention , diagnosis , management , or cure of diseases of animals . "prepare" or "preparation" is generally referred to as the manufacture or production of a biological product and has been defined as the steps and procedures used in the processing , testing , packaging , labeling , and storing of a biological product . with respect to licensing , the regulations require every person who "prepares" biological products subject to the vsta to have a valid u.s. veterinary biologics establishment license and at least one valid u.s. veterinary biological product license . a usda permit is also required for every person importing a biological product . although the vsta explicitly addresses the preparation , sale , barter , exchange and shipment only , usda regulations ( discussed below ) authorize "use" and "distribution" restrictions in the public interest or for the protection of animals . the usda's rejection of creekstone's request to privately test all of its cattle for bse with rapid test kits has sparked a considerable amount of controversy . at issue is whether the usda's decision to reject creekstone's request to test all of its animals for bse was a valid agency action . as such , we first examine how a rapid test kit might fall within aphis's regulatory purview . next , we address aphis's purported authority over private companies intending to conduct voluntary rapid tests for bse . finally , we discuss the validity of the usda's decision in the creekstone case .