the potential exists for significant repercussions . indescribing the senate , most modern congressional scholars now refer to it as a "unanimous consentbody. by far the greatest share of the chamber's business is conducted , one way or another , byagreement among all senators . in part , the reason is that senators have learned to agree on how toproceed , knowing that such procedural agreement does not necessarily predetermine the outcomeof policy decisions . limiting senators to two speeches during the consideration of anynomination , regardless of how many session days the nomination was pending , would bring abouta vote on a nomination without the need to invoke cloture , or to consider amendments to the cloturerule . another alternative might be to require senators who wish to filibuster a measure or matter ( such as a nomination ) to hold the floor and talk to maintain their filibuster . in addition , even if a "constitutional" or "nuclear" option were used , opponents still mightbe able to delay a final vote on whatever measure or matter was pending . existing senate precedentswould seem to allow an endless series of amendments to a proposed rules change , even if no debatewere allowed . the senate routinely does this each year when it considers the annual budgetresolution . therefore , it is unclear that the "constitutional" or "nuclear" option by itself could bringabout a vote on a rule change . further , even if the use of this option resulted in a lower cloture votethreshold , other portions of the rule would presumably remain untouched , in which case thepost - cloture process still would provide delaying possibilities for opponents . additional questions arise if the senate used an opening day gambit . would successfulaction in this form change the understanding of the senate as a continuing body ? would this changemean that the senate would have to elect its officers and adopt its rules at the start of each congress ? one potential alternative would be to modify other senate practices ( instead of changing thecloture rule ) or to enforce existing senate rules more stringently . a number of possible approachescould be used to bring debate to a close absent any formal change to rule xxii . for example , the two - speech rule does not apply to executive business in the same way itdoes to legislative business . in the modern senate,such displays are rare . instead , the senate routinely permits senators to "suggest the absence of aquorum" as a means to delay action without the need to debate . the senate , by precedent , has ruledsuch quorum calls dilatory , after cloture . by precedent , the senate could make such quorum callsdilatory at any time , if no substantive business had intervened since a quorum had been previouslyestablished . the two - track system allows other business to come before the senate even as the pendingbusiness remains unresolved . as a result , time on the senate floor is more often used to conductbusiness on which there has already been agreement , rather than to debate or amend measures , orfilibuster them .