they could be few in number . while an all - out nuclear attack on the soviet union would have struck thousands of targets , the option of an attack on a rogue state might involvea handful of targets . according to the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , ( 8 ) "the administrationbelieves the broader range of capabilities of a nuclear stockpile with these weapons will serve as amore credible , and hence more effective , deterrent than the cold war stockpile we have today . if the perpetrator is unknown , or is known but has no knownaddress , what targets would be attacked , and would new weapons offer any advantage for suchattacks ? are any assets of sufficient value to terrorists that holding them at risk might deter terroristattacks ? if so , would current u.s. nuclear and conventional forces suffice for that purpose ? couldthe united states perhaps deter terrorist use of wmd by threatening to overthrow ( usingconventional forces ) regimes that support terrorism , or by threatening to destroy ( using nuclear orother forces ) facilities that these regimes see as critical ? there is a more fundamental deterrence issue . deterrence depends on holding at risk assets of great value to the leadership . at issue for the administration is deciding whether the benefits of resolving this ambiguity outweighthe costs . will the new weapons deter ? the administration , expressing concern about the terrorist wmd threat , discusses a purpose of new ormodified nuclear weapons as being to counter wmd facilities . the administration may wish toclarify how the nuclear initiatives - - or any military means , for that matter - - could deter or retaliateagainst a terrorist wmd threat . yet there are plausible arguments that testing would not be needed . the b61-11 penetrator was converted from a b61-7 bomb without testing , and the rnep conversion anticipates converting anexisting b61 or b83 without testing . those warheads are available in a number of yields ; it may bethat a lower - yield option exists that would eliminate the need to develop a new - design epw . theadministration has enough confidence in nonnuclear interceptors to withdraw from the abm treatyin order to deploy a system using them . nuclear weapons tailored to destroy chemical and biologicalagents may not be needed . the ability to destroy these agents is arguably much more dependent onprecise intelligence than on weapon characteristics , some doubt the efficacy of nuclear weapons todestroy such targets , and some doubt that the advantages of avoiding contamination by chemical orbiological agents outweigh the disadvantages of contaminating an area with radiation . beyond that,whether enhancing nuclear test readiness will lead to testing depends on policy rather than technicaljudgments on future weapons r&d . some critics of the administration's nuclear initiatives fear that studying nuclear weapon concepts or new weapons will lead to their use , but that result is far from inevitable , supporters reply . nuclear weapons are an option available to the united states , but so are conventional forces,diplomacy , and economic leverage .