we do not offer a conclusion on this subject here . further , it can be argued that federal budget deficits must ultimately be offset by a surplus at some point in the future , so this effect , too , may be temporary . in the preceding section we saw how taxes can have an impact on the overall level and composition of trade , though not the trade balance ; they can also alter the type of outsourcing that consists of overseas production by u.s. firms . we do not provide a detailed assessment here of the impact of the current tax system on the level and composition of trade ( again , the system does not have a direct impact on the balance of trade ) . we can note , however , that the existing system may well reduce the level of trade by virtue of its use of a "classical" system for taxing corporate income . under such as system , income from corporate investment is taxed twice , once at the corporate level and once when it is received by stockholders as capital gains or dividends . in contrast , the principal types of non - corporate investment , owner - occupied housing and non - corporate business , are taxed only once , if at all . given that goods and services in the "tradables" sector consist more frequently of corporate rather than non - corporate products , the double - taxation of corporate investment may shift resources from tradables to non - tradables , thus reducing the level of trade . we look at the impact of the existing u.s. system on investment flows in more detail . again , the key factor for taxes' impact on investment is how the tax burden on foreign investment compares with that on domestic projects . other crs products provide more detailed descriptions of the u.s. international tax system and how it affects the relative tax burden on foreign and domestic investment . here , however , we note only its essential features . in general , the u.s. system produces no single , overall impact on investment flows that is readily discernable ; different parts of the system , viewed in isolation , produce different results . the so - called "deferral" principle , for example , permits an indefinite postponement of u.s. tax for overseas operations conducted through foreign subsidiary corporations rather than branches of u.s. parent firms . deferral poses a tax incentive for investment in countries with low tax rates , resulting in more u.s. investment in those locations than would otherwise occur . the u.s. tax system also permits its investors to claim a foreign tax credit for foreign taxes they pay , a feature that reduces double - taxation of overseas income ; in some cases the foreign tax credit can result in even tax treatment of foreign and domestic investment , producing tax neutrality . the foreign tax credit , however , is limited to u.s. tax on foreign and not domestic income , a feature that poses a disincentive for investment in countries with high tax rates , resulting in less u.s. investment in those locations than would otherwise occur .