the results of the sii process are mixed . on the one hand , it focused attention of policymakers of both sides on fundamental causes of problems that cut across many sectors and economic activities . the sii is also credited with placing enough pressure on japan to change its large - retail store law . some observers also argued that by selecting policies and practices that many japanese themselves wanted changed , the united states lessened the unilateral thrust of previous negotiations . on the other hand , many of the problems that had plagued the u.s. - japan relationship before the sii remain , such as the trade imbalances . the clinton administration negotiated its own bilateral framework with japan . the "united states - japan framework for a new economic partnership" borrowed elements from the moss and the sii processes by including some sector - specific goals along with overall structural and macroeconomic issues . these goals were included in five "baskets. this framework departed from the others in several important ways . it obligated the president and the prime minister to meet at least twice a year to review progress under the framework . at the insistence of the clinton administration , "objective criteria" were to use to determine whether japan was fulfilling its obligations under the framework . this element proved highly controversial , and the two countries never agreed on the role the "objective criteria" would play or , for that matter , what they would be . the united states argued the criteria were to be targets japan was to meet while japan did not want to be bound by such criteria and argued that the criteria were to be guidelines . the differences over "objective criteria" reached the summit level and strained u.s. - japan relations . the united states and japan reached agreements in most of the areas , including medical equipment procurement , intellectual property rights protection , financial services , insurance , and flat glass , among others , but not without some acrimony . for example , the united states was on the brink of imposing tariff - sanctions on japan , and both countries were poised to take one another to the wto before they reached agreement on japanese imports of autos and auto parts . u.s. - japanese trade friction reached its peak during the period of that framework that roughly corresponds to the first clinton administration . the friction was due in part to the long - running frustration that u.s. exporters and investors were experiencing with the same obstacles that previous agreements were supposed to have addressed . the "results - oriented" strategy was intended to provide a clear indicator of whether japan had removed the barriers . but japan resisted such objective indicators , because , it argued , the problems in u.s. - japan trade stemmed from private sector practices and not government policies . the framework raised the issues to the summit level to ensure that both sides took the issues seriously . by doing so , however , the framework increased the risk that failure to achieve results would sour the entire relationship .