, economic efficiency ) . if labor markets are competitive , increasing the bargaining power of workers may reduce economic output and consumer satisfaction , but may increase equality . on the other hand , if labor markets are not competitive , increasing the bargaining power of workers may improve the allocation of resources as well as increase equality . one of these reasons is to improve competition . according to standard economic theory , competitive markets generally result in the most efficient allocation of resources , where resources consist of individuals with different skills , capital goods ( i.e. , buildings and equipment and associated technology ) , and natural resources . ( see table 3 . ) the nlra gives private sector workers the right to organize and bargain collectively over wages , hours , and other working conditions . it also requires employers to bargain in good faith with a union chosen by a majority of employees . the act says that the purpose of the law is to improve the bargaining power of workers . this section considers whether there is an economic rationale for protecting the rights of workers to organize and bargain collectively . governments may intervene in labor markets for a number of reasons . this report begins with a brief overview of the nlra . it then describes the basic procedures that employees and employers must follow during a unionizing campaign . the report describes different types of mediation and arbitration that can be used to resolve bargaining disputes . the report describes the jurisdictional standards that an employer must meet before the nlrb will exert jurisdiction over a question of union representation ( eg , for a small business ) . finally , the report discusses some potential effects of changing union certification procedures . the nlra , as amended , provides the basic framework governing labor - management relations in the private sector . the act begins by stating that the purpose of the law is to improve the bargaining power of workers: the inequality of bargaining power between employees ... and employers ... substantially burdens and affects the flow of commerce , and tends to aggravate recurrent business depressions by depressing wage rates and the purchasing power of wage earners ... and by preventing the stabilization of competitive wage rates and working conditions within and between industries... . it is hereby declared to be the policy of the united states to eliminate the causes of certain substantial obstructions to the free flow of commerce and to mitigate and eliminate these obstructions when they have occurred by encouraging the practice and procedure of collective bargaining... . the nlra gives workers the right to join or form a labor union and to bargain collectively over wages , hours , and other conditions of employment . under the act , workers also have the right not to join a union . the act requires an employer to bargain in good faith with a union chosen by a majority of employees . to protect the rights of employers and workers , the act defines certain activities as unfair labor practices .