there are at leastthree possible variations to these proposals . ( 14 ) first , there are proposals which , by limiting inferiorfederal court jurisdiction , would , in effect , cause a particular class of constitutional decisions to beheard in state courts , with appeal to the supreme court . ( 15 ) second , there are proposals to vest theexclusive jurisdiction to hear such constitutional cases in the state courts without appeal to thesupreme court . ( 16 ) third , the congress might actto exclude any judicial review over a particular classof constitutional cases from any court , whether state or federal . it should be noted that there are also proposals , not examined in depth here , that would limit the methods available to the various courts to remedy constitutional injury . ( 17 ) to the extent that theseremedy limitations actually prevent the vindication of established constitutional injury , they wouldappear to fall under the same category as proposals that limit the jurisdiction of particular courts.thus , for instance , the amendment noted above which would prohibit the use of funds forenforcement of a particular district court decision , ( 18 ) would seem likely to be analyzed similarly toan amendment limiting lower court jurisdiction over constitutional cases . however , in situationswhere other sufficient remedies are left unchanged , a court might determine that the constitutionalright could be effectuated despite limits on a particular remedy . as noted previously , the congress considers and passes many laws that are exercises of itscontrol over judicial power under article iii . there appears , however , to be no direct legislativeprecedent for the types of "court - stripping" proposals noted above . while federal court jurisdictionor remedies have occasionally been varied by congress to affect a particular judicial result , theassociated case law is of only limited applicability to the modern proposals . thus , an analysis ofthese proposals will principally concern a textual analysis of the extent and limit of congress'spower under article iii , a scholarly discussion on that subject , and related case law . it should be noted , however , that various commentators have suggested that the constitutional problems with "court - stripping" provisions are more fundamental than an analysis of congress'article iii powers . ( 20 ) the most significant issueis whether congress , by attempting to changeconstitutional law by statute rather than constitutional amendment , is in violation of the doctrine ofseparation of powers . further , when specific constitutional rights are singled out for disparatetreatment , a question arises as to whether that class of litigants is being treated in a mannerinconsistent with the equal protection clause . ultimately , an evaluation of a particular piece of"court - stripping" legislation may vary depending on what jurisdiction , remedies or procedures areaffected , and what ultimate impact this is likely to have on the specified constitutional rights . the argument has been made that because the congress has the authority to decide whether or not to create inferior federal courts , it also has authority to determine which issues these courts mayconsider . there appears to be significant historical support for this position .