in september 2006 , u.s . diplomatic relations were restored in 1969 . beginning in 1969 , the united states conducted a four - year , sustained , large scale bombing campaign in cambodia aimed at north vietnamese troops in the country . according to some historians , the american bombing helped the cambodian communists to gain followers and recruit soldiers . in march 1970 , the military forces of pro - american general lon nol overthrew the government of prince sihanouk in a coup . the prince fled to beijing and reluctantly formed an alliance with the cambodian communists against the lon nol government . a civil war followed , culminating in the defeat of lon nol in april 1975 by the communist party of kampuchea ( also known as the khmer rouge ) . the prince returned to phnom penh from beijing only to be placed under house arrest . during the khmer rouge's brutal three - year reign – which included forced depopulation of the cities and the establishment of rural communes – nearly two million out of a population of eight million cambodians died from execution , torture , overwork , starvation , and disease . urban cambodians with wealth and education were particularly targeted . in january 1979 , an invasion by vietnamese forces drove the khmer rouge from phnom penh . sihanouk then sought refuge in china and north korea . a 13-year civil war ensued , in which khmer rouge , cambodian nationalist ( kpnlf ) , and royalist ( ans ) insurgents fought the vietnamese - backed regime . following the vietnamese withdrawal from cambodia in 1989 , a united nations ( u.n. ) - brokered peace settlement officially ended the war in october 1991 and led to elections for a 120-seat constituent assembly in may 1993 . prince sihanouk returned to cambodia as king . although the royalist funcinpec party ( national united front for an independent , neutral , peaceful , and cooperative cambodia ) won a 58-seat plurality , it agreed to form a coalition government with the cambodian people's party ( cpp ) , with 51 seats , after the cpp threatened that it would not accept the election . the establishment of the coalition government with prince norodom ranariddh , head of funcinpec , and hun sen , head of the cpp , as co - prime ministers brought fragile political stability to cambodia . the united states congress passed several measures supporting non - communist resistance forces and humanitarian assistance in cambodia and prohibiting assistance for the khmer rouge . in 1997 , after rising tensions between the coalition partners , hun sen staged an armed takeover of the government . an estimated 80-100 cambodians , including many funcinpec leaders , were killed , and prince ranariddh and other politicians fled cambodia . in the face of considerable international pressure and the withholding of foreign aid , hun sen allowed prince ranariddh to return and held new parliamentary elections in july 1998 , which the cpp narrowly won . despite charges of election irregularities and post - election violence , the two parties again agreed to form a coalition government , with hun sen as prime minister and prince ranariddh as president of the national assembly .