three are on appeal , however . 2008 ) , environmental intervenors urged the south dakota public utilities commission to deny a permit to build a coal - fired energy conversion facility , in light of the substantial co 2 it would emit . notwithstanding , the commission granted the permit , and the state supreme court sustained . the commission , it held , was not clearly erroneous in finding that the added co 2 threatened no "serious" injury to the environment , the state's statutory standard . deference to the commission was particularly appropriate , it said , because the co 2 from the facility would increase national co 2 emissions by only .07% , and neither congress nor the state had chosen to regulate co 2 emissions . by contrast , the permit was initially denied in kansas . after applying for a psd construction permit for two 700-megawatt coal - fired power plants , the sunflower electric power corp. initially received a favorable response from the state agency , which asserted it would not consider co 2 in connection with the application owing to the national and international character of climate change . later , however , the agency invoked a state law providing it with emergency powers when emissions present a substantial endangerment to the health of persons or the environment . using this authority , and specifically citing the large volume of co 2 from the proposed plants , the agency denied the permit in 2007 . three times in 2008 and once in 2009 the kansas legislature passed laws that would have required sunflower's application to be evaluated without taking co 2 emissions into account , but each was vetoed by governor sebelius . in response to the 2008 vetoes , sunflower filed several suits now pending in state and federal court . in federal court , in sunflower electric power corp. v. sebelius , no . 08-2575 ( d. kan. filed november 17 , 2008 ) , sunflower alleged first that the permit denial violates equal protection because it prohibits co 2 emissions from the proposed plants when the state has authorized , and continues to authorize , other co 2 sources in kansas . second , sunflower claims a violation of the dormant commerce clause in that the permit denial was allegedly motivated by the fact that much of the electricity to be generated by the proposed plants would be sold out of state . with the arrival of a new governor , however , a deal was struck on may 4 , 2009 , allowing one 895-megawatt coal - fired power plant to be built . reportedly the deal includes sunflower's dismissal of the federal suit . research reveals only one lawsuit contesting insurance policy coverage of injuries or liability arising from climate change , though the future is likely to see more . one of the energy companies sued in tort by the village of kivalina ( see section v ) is now being sued by the insurance company holding its commercial general liability policy . steadfast insurance co. v. the aes corporation , no . 2008-858 ( va. county ct. filed july 9 , 2008 ) .