it was identical to s.con.res . 106 , except that it added two clauses that "stronglyencourage" the president to fully employ u.s. government resources to ensure a free and fair electionand to stress to the ukrainian government that the conduct of the elections would be "a central factorin determining the future relationship between the two countries. on november 18 , 2004 , justbefore the second round of the election , the senate passed s.res . 473 by unanimousconsent . as in the case of h.con.res . 415 , it warned ukrainian leaders againstconducting a fraudulent election . however , it went further than h.con.res . 415 in thatit "strongly encourages" the administration to impose sanctions against persons encouraging orparticipating in fraud . senator richard lugar , chairman of the senate foreign relations committee , monitored thenovember 21 , 2004 runoff at the request of president bush . he said after the vote that "it is nowapparent that there was a concerted and forceful program of election day fraud and abuse enactedwith the leadership or cooperation of the authorities. senator lugar said that he had carried a letterfrom president bush to president kuchma that warned that a "tarnished election" will cause theunited states to "review" its relations with ukraine . senator lugar stressed that kuchma "has theresponsibility and the opportunity for producing even at this point an outcome which is fair andresponsible. ( 10 ) the 109th congress passed resolutions after president yushchenko was inaugurated . onjanuary 25 , 2005 , the house passed h.con.res . 16 , and the senate passed s.con.res . the identical resolutions include clauses congratulatingukraine for its commitment to democracy and its resolution of its political crisis in a peacefulmanner ; congratulating yushchenko on his victory ; applauding the candidates , the eu and othereuropean organizations and the u.s. government for helping to find that peaceful solution ; andpledging u.s. help for ukraine's efforts to develop democracy , a free market economy , and integrateinto the international community of democracies . if the "orange revolution" continues to show progress , congress could consider furtherlegislation on ukraine , including ending the application of the jackson - vanik amendment toukraine . the jackson - vanik amendment bars permanent normal trade relations ( pntr ) status forcountries with non - market economies that do not permit freedom of emigration . the amendmentwas originally intended to pressure the soviet union to permit jewish emigration . the success oflegislation on granting permanent ntr status may depend on issues not directly related to theprovisions of jackson - vanik , such as the assessment of ukraine's efforts in fighting anti - semitismand returning communal property to jewish groups . ukraine currently enjoys ntr status , subjectto annual determinations by the president that it permits free emigration . 885 , introduced by representative hyde ; and s. 410 ( identical to h.r . 885 ) , offered by senator mccain - - would authorize the president to determine that jackson - vanikwould no longer apply to ukraine and to grant permanent normal trade relations status to ukraine . s. 46 , sponsored by senator levin , and h.r .