as stated in s.rept . 109-177 , due to requirements under hipaa , va must wait until the veteran actually enrolls for care at a va facility before requesting that dod send the veteran's medical records from active duty service . this delay hinders the seamless transition from active duty to veterans status . this provision would require va to expand the total number of personnel employed by the department as part of the readjustment counseling service's global war on terrorism ( gwot ) outreach program . it also requires va to ensure that all appropriate health , education , and benefits information is available to returning members of the national guard . this provision would require va to expand the number of vet centers capable of providing health services and counseling through telehealth linkages . according to s.rept . 109-177 , the committee believes that it will allow va to reach more veterans in rural areas and provide more services in a setting closer to veterans' homes . this provision would require va to submit a report to the senate and house committees on veterans' affairs describing the mental health data maintained by va . the report must include a comprehensive list of the sources of all such data , including the geographic locations of va facilities maintaining such data ; an assessment of the limitations or advantages of maintaining the current data configurations and locations ; and any recommendations for improving the collection , use , and location of mental health data maintained by va . this provision would require va to publish a strategic plan for long - term care . the plan must include policies and strategies for the delivery of care in many different settings such as domiciliaries , residential treatment facilities , and nursing homes . it must also include policies to maximize the use of state veterans nursing homes , locate domiciliary units as close to patient populations as feasible , and identify freestanding nursing homes as an acceptable model for care . the plan must also include data on the care of catastrophically disabled veterans , and the geographic distribution of catastrophically disabled veterans . furthermore , the plan must address the full spectrum of noninstitutional long - term care options , including respite care , home - based primary care , geriatric evaluation , adult day health care , skilled home health care , and community residential care . the strategic plan must provide an analysis on cost and quality among all the different levels of care , detailed information about geographic distribution of services and gaps in care , and specific plans for working with medicare , medicaid , and private insurance companies to expand care . this provision directs va to employ 35 new blind rehabilitation outpatient specialists at va facilities over the next three years . this provision would authorize va to treat any veteran from one of the affected states in the gulf coast in any va facility , regardless of whether the veteran is enrolled in the va health care system or eligible to enroll . this authority also waives any applicable copayments or fees . this authority would expire on january 31 , 2006 . the bill is awaiting house action .