how stringent should the emission caps be ? what is an appropriate schedule for their introduction ? how should they relate to existing caa provisions ? should carbon dioxide be included with so 2 , nox , and mercury control programs ? should requirements be limited to the electric utility industry ? should epa be provided with the authority to implement cair or other cost - based , market - oriented approaches to address naaqs ? should there be comprehensive revision to the caa to address the full scope of ozone and pm 2.5 naaqs nonattainment and related issues , as well as other pollutant emissions from coal - fired power plants , and emerging environmental issues such as climate change ? these questions and related issues related to the cair were at the center of discussion during a july 29 , 2008 , hearing held by the senate committee on environment and public works subcommittee on clean air and nuclear safety , and on july 22 , 2010 , the committee held a hearing on epa's proposed alternative transport rule . congress could consider a more surgical legislative vehicle aimed specifically at providing epa with the authority to implement some form of cair or other cost - based , market - oriented approaches to address naaqs . the court's december 23 , 2008 , ruling and epa's subsequent august 2010 proposed alternative transport rule seem to have lessened interest in such an approach . at the other extreme , congress might consider a more comprehensive revision to the caa to address not only ozone and pm 2.5 naaqs nonattainment , but also other pollutant emissions and emerging environmental issues such as climate change . implementation of the 1997 pm 2.5 naaqs impacts a number of counties throughout the united states . epa's final nonattainment designations included 39 areas , comprising 205 counties within 20 states ( and the district of columbia ) nationwide , with a combined population of almost 90 million . a number of concerns have been raised regarding the potential impacts , and numerous questions have been triggered regarding the specifics of the implementation process for the 1997 standards . similar concerns are likely to stimulate debate as epa and states encounter issues in the initial stages of implementing the pm 2.5 naaqs as revised in october 2006 and as the agency proceeds with its current review of the particulates naaqs . already delayed considerably , implementation of the 1997 pm 2.5 naaqs faced further uncertainty as a result of the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c . circuit's july 11 , 2008 , decision ( north carolina v. epa ) that would have vacated the clean air interstate rule ( cair ) . epa projected that cair , in conjunction with other federal measures such as recent auto and truck emission standards , would be sufficient to demonstrate attainment in a large portion of monitored nonattainment counties by 2015 , prior to the development and implementation of local measures . however , the court's subsequent december 23 , 2008 , ruling temporarily reinstating cair until epa promulgates a replacement rule , allowed implementation of the 1997 pm 2.5 naaqs to continue in the interim .