appendix a . background: federal involvement in wastewater treatment the water pollution control act of 1948 ( p.l . 80-845 ) was the first comprehensive statement of federal interest in clean water programs . while it contained no federally required goals , limits , or even guidelines , it started the trickle of federal aid to municipal wastewater treatment authorities that grew in subsequent years . it established a grant program to assist localities with planning and design work and authorized loans for treatment plant construction . with each of the four successive amending statutes in the 1950s and 1960s , federal assistance to municipal treatment agencies increased . a construction grant program replaced the loan program ; the amount of authorized funding went up ; the percentage of total costs covered by federal funds was raised ; and the types of project costs deemed grant - eligible expanded . in the federal water pollution control act amendments of 1972 ( p.l . 92-500 , popularly known as the clean water act ( cwa ) ) , congress revised the existing federal clean water law , including provisions related to wastewater systems . in the 1972 law , congress strengthened the federal role in clean water and established the first national standards for sewage treatment . a number of new conditions were attached to projects constructed with grants ( such as comprehensive planning requirements ) . in order to assist communities in meeting the ambitious water quality improvement goals of the new law , federal funds increased dramatically , and the federal share was raised from 55% to 75% . the grant program was reauthorized in 1977 ( p.l . efforts began focusing on use of federal funds for projects with clear environmental benefits , out of concern that the program's wide scope was not well focused on key goals . especially reflected in the 1981 amendments were budgetary pressures and a desire to reduce federal spending . annual authorizations were reduced from $5 billion to $2.4 billion , the federal share was again set at 55% , and project eligibilities were limited . the most recent comprehensive cwa amendments were enacted in 1987 ( p.l . that legislation authorized $18 billion over nine years for wastewater treatment plant construction , through a combination of the traditional grant program and a new state water pollution control revolving funds ( srf ) program . under the new program , federal capitalization grants are provided as seed money for state - administered loans to build sewage treatment plants and other water quality projects . local communities , in turn , repay loans to the state , a process intended by congress to enable a phaseout of federal involvement after states build up a source of capital for future investments . under the amendments , the srf program was phased in beginning in fy1989 and entirely replaced the previous grant program in fy1991 . the intention was that states would have greater flexibility to set priorities and administer funding , while federal aid would end after fy1994 . as a general matter , states and cities supported the program changes and the shift to a loan program that was intended to provide long - term funding for water quality and wastewater construction activities .