figure 2 . national defense outlays percentage of gdp,fy1950-fy2010 even with the recent increases , however , defense spending as a share of the economy hascontinued to decline over time . figure 2 shows national defense outlays as a share of gdp sincefy1950 . in more recent years , the decline reflects , in part , real reductions in the defense budgetbetween fy1986 and fy1998 . for the most part , however , the trend is due simply to continuinggrowth in the u.s. economy that progressively reduced the economic burden of maintaining the coldwar and post - cold war military establishment . in testimony before the senate armed services committee on february 10 , 2005 , the outgoing chiefof naval operations , admiral vernon clark , said that costs of the major types of ships had grownby as much as 400% beyond inflation over the past thirty years , that greater capabilities explain onlypart of the increase , that so few ships are being built that overhead costs are spread too narrowly , andthat the navy cannot afford more than 250 ships in the long run unless costs are brought undercontrol . ( 14 ) in hisprepared statement for the hearing , admiral clark said: among the greatest risks we face is the spiraling costof procurement for modern military systems , and shipbuilding is no exception . when adjusted forinflation , for example , the real cost increase in every class of ship that we have bought since i wasan ensign , united states navy , has been truly incredible . it becomes more so when taken incomparison to other capital goods like automobiles , where the inflation - adjusted cost growth hasbeen relatively flat over the same period of time . shipbuilding cost increases have grown beyond ourability to control as compared to decades prior . as we seek greater combat capability and greateroperational efficiencies through upgraded power , propulsion , and computing technologies , we finda ratio of cost growth beyond our seeming control , which may not be fully explainable solely byreduced economies of scale . ( 15 ) in recent years , the pace of growth in shipbuilding costs has not abated . for the past severalyears , the navy has requested additional appropriations to cover cost growth in ships already underconstruction . in the fy2006 budget , the navy is requesting $394.5 million for "completion of prioryear shipbuilding programs," and the navy's long - term program includes and additional $449.8million in fy2007 and $502.5 million for cost growth . moreover , the navy is now beginning toreestimate future shipbuilding costs in light of recent experience . the president of northropgumman's newport news shipbuilding division recently acknowledged that the cvn - 21 , thenext - generation carrier , will likely cost more $13 billion , compared to last year's estimate of $11.7billion . ( 16 ) and navyofficials are beginning to increase estimates of dd ( x ) destroyer costs substantially . as recently as2003 , the navy estimated costs of $1.5-1.8 billion per ship after the initial design models of the shipwere built , but more recently has said $2.2-2.6 billion . now it appears the cost of later ships in theproduction run could exceed $3 billion each .