sanctions . thus , included in patterns are detailed data on the seven countries currently on the"terrorism list": cuba , iran , iraq , libya , north korea , sudan and syria . u.s. administrationofficials maintain that the practice of designating and reporting on the activities of the state sponsorsof terrorism list and concomitant sanctions policy has contributed significantly to a reduction in theovert - - and apparently overall - - activity level of states supporting terrorism in the past decade . libya and sudan are frequently cited as examples of such success . countries designated as state sponsors of terrorism are subject to severe u.s. export controls - - particularly of dual use technology . the anti - terrorism and arms export amendments act of1989 ( p.l . 101-222 ) prohibits export of dual use items , as well sales of military items and foreigneconomic assistance to countries on the terrorism list . also , the foreign assistance act prohibitsproviding foreign aid to these designated countries . section 6 ( j ) of the 1979 export administrationact stipulates that congress must be notified at least 30 days in advance before any licenses areissued for exporting equipment or services that could be used for terrorist or military purposes . other sanctions include denying foreign tax credits on income earned in those countries . the degree of support for , or involvement in , terrorist activities typically varies dramatically from nation to nation . in 2003 , of the seven on the u.s. terrorism list , iran continued to becharacterized on one extreme as an active supporter of terrorism: a nation that uses terrorism as aninstrument of policy or warfare beyond its borders . closer to the middle of the spectrum is syria . although not formally detected in an active role since 1986 , patterns reports that the assad regimereportedly uses groups in syria and lebanon to export terror into israel and allows groups to trainin territory under its control . on the less active end of the spectrum , one might place countriessuchas cuba or north korea , which at the height of the cold war were more active , but in recent yearshave seemed to settle for a more passive role of granting ongoing safe haven to previously admittedterrorists . also at the less active end of the spectrum , and arguably falling off it , are libya andnotably sudan , which reportedly has stepped up counterterrorism cooperation with u.s. lawenforcement and intelligence agencies after the attacks of september 11 , 2001 . in the wake of discrepancies contained in the patterns 2003 as originally released , the chairmenof three house committees ( international relations , judiciary , government reform ) forwarded aletter to secretary of state , colin powell , dated july 15 , 2004 . the letter cites discussions betweenstate department and other officials with committee staff and reiterates "that there will be acomprehensive review of the definitions of terrorist acts as compared to ( 1 ) the language in thestatute ; and ( 2 ) the current experiences with multinational terrorist organizations that sponsor orotherwise promote terrorist acts perpetrated by 'local' terrorist organizations.