the bill , h.r . a conference report on h.con.res . 109 - 62 , was filed and passed by the house ( roll call no . 149 , 214-211 ) and passed by the senate ( roll call no . advance appropriation is budget authority that will become available in a fiscal year beyond the fiscal year for which the appropriations act is enacted ; scorekeeping counts the entire amount in the fiscal year it first becomes available for obligation . appropriation is budget authority that permits federal agencies to incur obligations and to make payments out of the treasury for specified purposes . appropriations represent the amounts that agencies may obligate during the period of time specified in the law . annual appropriations are provided in appropriations acts ; most permanent appropriations are provided in substantive law . major types of appropriations are regular , supplemental , and continuing . budget authority is legal authority to incur financial obligations that normally result in the outlay of federal government funds . major types of budget authority are appropriations , borrowing authority , and contract authority . budget authority also includes the subsidy cost to the federal government of direct loans and loan guarantees , estimated on a net present value basis . budget resolution is a concurrent resolution passed by both houses of congress , but not requiring the signature of the president , setting forth the congressional budget for at least five fiscal years . it includes various budget totals and functional allocations . discretionary spending is budget authority provided in annual appropriations acts , other than appropriated entitlements . entitlement authority is the authority to make payments to persons , businesses , or governments that meet the eligibility criteria established by law ; as such , it represents a legally binding obligation on the part of the federal government . entitlement authority may be funded by either annual or permanent appropriations acts . forward funding is budget authority that becomes available after the beginning of the fiscal year for which the appropriation is enacted and remains available into the next fiscal year ; the entire amount is counted or scored in the fiscal year in which it first becomes available . mandatory ( direct ) spending includes ( a ) budget authority provided in laws other than appropriations ; ( b ) entitlement authority ; and ( c ) the food stamp program . rescission is the cancellation of budget authority previously enacted . scorekeeping is a set of procedures for tracking and reporting on the status of congressional budgetary actions . supplemental appropriation is budget authority provided in an appropriations act that provides funds that are in addition to regular appropriations . websites general information on budget and appropriations may be found at these websites . specific l - hhs - ed agency sites are listed in relevant sections of this report .