require nextel to give up some of its licenses at 800 mhz and all of its licenses at 700 mhz . modify nextel's licenses to provide the right to operate at 1910-1915 mhz and 1990-1995 mhz , "conditioned on nextel fulfilling certain obligations specified in the commission's decision. value the 1.9 ghz spectrum rights to be assigned to nextel at almost $4.9 billion , less the cost of relocating incumbent users in those channels . credit nextel the value of the spectrum rights it is relinquishing at 700 mhz and 800 mhz plus the "actual costs" to nextel in relocating "all incumbents in the 800 mhz band. require nextel to make an "anti - windfall payment" to the treasury at the conclusion of the relocation process that will equal the difference between the $4.9 billion valuation and the cumulative credits . require nextel to provide public safety users at 800 mhz and incumbent users at 1.9 ghz with "comparable facilities. require nextel to establish escrow accounts and a letter of credit in the amount of $2.5 billion , to "ensure that the band reconfiguration process will be completed. provide an independent "transition administrator" to authorize disbursements , "subject to de novo commission review. separate "generally incompatible technologies" by eliminating interleaving . move channels designated for interoperability to the lower end of the band , close to the planned public safety band at 700 mhz . require public safety systems to relocate to channels at 809-815 mhz and 854-860 mhz . require certain business and industrial users to relocate to channels at 809-815 mhz and 854-860 mhz . require enhanced specialized mobile radio users , "esmr," to relocate to 817-824 mhz and 862-869 mhz . until the band relocation plan is complete , apply "enhanced best practices" to define and correct interference that will place "strict responsibility on carriers to fix such interference. the fcc rebanding plan required that sprint nextel pledge $2.5 billion in cash and letters of credit to cover relocation costs for public safety . sprint nextel's obligation to cover the costs of rebanding is not limited to $2.5 billion , however . sprint nextel is expected to pay all the agreed upon costs , even if this total exceeds $2.5 billion . the difference between the values of the spectrum sprint nextel is relinquishing and of the new spectrum it is receiving is an increase — a potential windfall — of approximately $2.8 billion . this is the value , before specified relocation costs , that sprint nextel might be obligated to pay the u.s. treasury . if the rebanding plan costs reach $2.5 billion , the "anti - windfall payment" due the u.s. treasury would be $300 million . the final determination of the payment , if any , from sprint nextel is referred to as a true - up . because the deadline for the completion of the rebanding has been extended several times , the deadline for the true - up has also been extended .