reconsideration . in most states , claimants who are dissatisfied with the initial determination may request to have their case reconsidered by a different examiner from the state dds office . the disability examiner will reexamine the evidence from the original decision , along with any new evidence submitted with the appeal . can the applicant do the work he or she had done in the past ? if yes , the application is denied . if not , the application moves to step 5 . step 5 . any work t est . does the applicant's condition prevent him or her from performing any other work that exists in the national economy ? if yes , the application is accepted and benefits are awarded . if not , the application is denied . field offices are responsible for validating the non - medical eligibility requirements such as age , employment , marital status , income , resources , and insured status ( step 1 ) . field office staff will also interview claimants to obtain relevant medical and work - history information , as well as to make certain that required forms are completed . applications that meet the non - medical eligibility criteria are then forwarded to a state disability determination service ( dds ) for a medical determination ( steps 2-5 ) . ddss , which are fully funded by the federal government , are state agencies tasked with developing medical evidence and issuing the disability determination . the medical determination for both types of disability benefits is made based on evidence gathered in an individual's case file . state disability examiners — with the help of medical and psychological consultants — typically use medical evidence collected from the claimant's treating sources ( i.e. , a physician , psychologist , or other acceptable medical source ) to determine the severity of the claimant's impairment ( s ) . ordinarily , there is no personal interview with the applicant on the part of the state personnel who decide the claim . claimants who do not meet the criteria in the medical listings ( step 3 ) proceed to a more individualized assessment that examines their residual functional capacity to perform work . residual functional capacity ( rfc ) is a function - by - function assessment based upon all of the relevant evidence of an individual's ability to do work - related activities . at step 4 , the state dds evaluates a claimant's rfc to complete past relevant work . if the claimant cannot perform past relevant work , his or her application is forwarded to the final step of the determination process . at step 5 , the state dds uses a claimant's rfc along with vocational factors , such as age , education , and work experience to determine whether he or she can perform any work that exists in the national economy . claimants who are unable to perform such work are found to be disabled . after a determination has been made , the state dds returns the case to the field office for appropriate action . if a claimant's application for benefits is denied at any point during the disability determination process , the claimant has the right to appeal the decision .