these authorities are permanent . s / crs worked to develop the knowledge , capacity , and procedures to ably respond to the needs of countries at risk of conflict , in transitions from conflict , and in the early stages of recovery from conflict . s / crs grew slowly from a few dozen to somewhat under 200 . the numbers varied from time to time . staff was largely drawn from the state department ( foreign service officers and state department permanent civil service employees ) and several contributed by other executive branch agencies , including justice , the office of the director of national intelligence , usaid , dod , the army corps of engineers , the department of agriculture , and the department of health and human services . it also included a good number of contract employees working for s / crs , as well as fellows and interns . s / crs carried out a wide range of activities: monitoring potential conflict , planning for u.s. responses to conflict , and evaluating and initiating programs to prevent conflict or the spread of conflict , among others . on july 16 , 2008 , then secretary of state rice formally launched the civilian response corps active and standby components with a speech thanking congress for the passage of funding in the supplemental appropriations act , 2008 , to establish the crc . under plans developed by the bush administration ( and continued by the obama administration ) the three - component corps would consist of a 250-member active component ( crc - a ) of u.s. government employees who could deploy within 48 hours , a 2,000-member standby component ( crc - s ) of u.s. government employees who could deploy within 30 days , and a 2,000-member reserve component ( crc - r ) of experts from other public institutions and the private sectors who would be available for deployment in 45-60 days . under the leadership of s / crs , two other state department offices and eight other contributing departments and agencies are now recruiting the first 100 members of the crc - a , and 500 members of the standby component . besides the state department , contributors are usaid and the departments of agriculture ( usda ) , commerce , justice , health and human services ( hhs ) , homeland security ( dhs ) , treasury , and transportation . the obama administration's may 7 , 2009 , fy2010 budget request of $323.272 million for the civilian stabilization initiative ( csi ) was designed to continue bush administration plans for the establishment of a 4,250 member , three - component civilian response corps . according to the state department request for these funds , this csi would provide "trained , equipped , and mission - ready civilian experts and institutionalized systems to meet national security imperatives , including in partnership with the u.s. armed forces. this corps will enable the president and secretary of state "to react to unanticipated conflict in foreign countries" while reducing or eliminating "the need for large military deployments in such crises," according to the state department request .