existing warning systems are not interoperable . reasons for this are: separate transmitting and receiving equipment ; separate standard message protocols ; separate procedures for how warnings are input into dissemination systems ; and separate training , exercising , and testing of the system . since this technology is primarily researched , developed , and operated by private industry , the federal government could establish a relationship with the corporate suppliers of these technologies , a relationship to encourage development and effectively consolidate or provide the means to make the current warning systems interoperable . consolidating and coordinating federal warning systems , however , may cause a loss of concentration on the systems' traditional hazards . mature warning systems have established alerting protocols and routines that , if consolidated , could become too broad , which may result in less effective warnings . option 1: status quo . to what degree is the threat specific and imminent ? this approach allows mature warning systems to continue communicating alerts and protective measures to an identified audience . how grave are the potential consequences of the threat ? the dhs secretary decides to raise or lower the threat level in consultation with the homeland security council . when the decision to change the threat level is made , dhs sends an electronic notification to state homeland security centers and to federal , state , and local agencies via the national law enforcement telecommunications system ( nlets ) . if circumstances and time permit , the dhs secretary or his representative makes an advance conference call to alert governors , state homeland security advisors , and mayors of selected cities that the terrorism threat level has been changed and that electronic notification is about to be sent . following the first conference call and electronic notification via nlets , dhs makes a second conference call to as many state and local law enforcement associations as can be reached . following the second conference call , dhs initiates a secure call using the business roundtable's critical emergency operations communications link ( ceo com link ) to notify chief executive officers of the nation's top businesses and industries . they are asked to dial into a secure conference call , and after each ceo goes through a multi - step authentication process to ensure security , dhs or other federal officials brief them on developments and threats . following the conference call via ceo com link , dhs makes a public announcement through a press conference . finally , critical infrastructure associations and other business groups are notified . since the creation of the hsas , a number of issues have arisen , among which are: the vagueness of warnings disseminated by the system ; the system's lack of protective measures recommended for state and local governments , and the public ; the perceived inadequacy of disseminating threats to state and local governments , the public , and the private sector ; and how best to coordinate hsas with other existing warning systems . in the 109 th congress , the house of representative's committee on government reform's subcommittee on national security , emerging threats , and international relations held a hearing on the hsas , its threat codes , and public response to it .