response . the sars virus rapidly spread to 30 countries , ultimately infecting 8,437 people , of whom 813died . ( 32 ) each country handled the virus differently . some countries , like vietnam , immediatelycalled for international support . others , like china , initially downplayed the severity of the viruswithin their borders . although the united states reported 75 sars cases it had no sars - relateddeaths . ( 33 ) countries experiencing five or moresars deaths are discussed in this section . othercountries that reported sars deaths include: france ( 1 ) , malaysia ( 2 ) , philippines ( 2 ) , south africa ( 1 ) , and thailand ( 2 ) . the sars outbreak has provided lessons that may have future application . the who / cdcintervention greatly increased the effectiveness of the global response . a number of factorsinfluenced the outcome , such as the system of global alerts and awareness , and access to immediate,high - level research and scientific collaboration . coordinated efforts through the who / cdc,national governments , and the public health professionals also led to positive results , as in the caseof vietnam . dr. julie gerberding , director of the centers for disease control and prevention , hadhigh praise for who's leadership during the crisis and emphasized communication and transparencyas key to responding to international health crises . who officials and others have argued that there is a need for increased funding for laboratories and epidemiological research in the fight to contain diseases like sars . improvements to theexisting surveillance network and national capacity to address emergency health issues are also badlyneeded . for example , goarn reportedly needs $200 million to reinforce its network . areas in which improvements have been calledfor in the global response to infectious disease threats include . lack of transparency in promptly reporting and monitoring sars outbreaks directly contributed to the spread of the disease worldwide and had wide - ranging impacts beyond the obvioushealth factors . the case of sars demonstrated that state responsibility within a globalized worlddoes not end at its borders and that future containment relies on openness and cooperation in theinterests of all populations . the ability of public health systems and the availability of resources to deal with a threat like sars were clearly inadequate . addressing the need and ability to mobilize additional resources,both within the country itself , and through the who network during an emergency , would improvethe response to similar challenges in the future . some have expressed concern about the impactsars could have had if the outbreak had reached developing countries with minimal health careinfrastructures , particularly those already weakened by hiv / aids . others have argued that sarshas underscored the importance of boosting aid efforts that offer structural support , such as aidingin the training of health care professionals , donating medical supplies and equipment , upgradinghealth technologies , and ensuring universal inoculation against resurgent diseases such astuberculosis . it is believed to have hadits beginnings in china's guangdong province in november 2002 . a respiratory disease that causesflu - like symptoms which may progress to pneumonia , sars has an average fatality rate of 15% .