some work as domestic helpers . what are the possible succession scenarios ? how could they affect the country's stability ? what role will thaksin and his supporters play ? will foreign investors shy away from thailand given the uncertainties ? will the country continue to lead regional initiatives , including those supported by the united states ? how stringently should the united states advocate democratic principles , particularly when doing so may strengthen the sino - thai relationship ? if thailand is under a military government for an extended period , what are the implications for u.s. relations with one of its asian treaty allies and for u.s. policy in the region ? thai politics , in turmoil for several years , was thrown into crisis when the royal thai military declared martial law on may 20 , 2014 . two days later , the military ousted the civilian government , and army commander prayuth chan - ocha seized power . the military dissolved parliament , detained political leaders and academics , imposed a curfew , and restricted media outlets . former prime minister yingluck shinawatra was placed under house arrest ( she was later released ) . there was no widespread bloodshed associated with the coup . however , sporadic violence in the months prior left 28 people dead . after seizing power , prayuth announced that thailand would be governed by a group of senior military leaders known as the national council for peace and order ( ncpo ) . the ncpo created a new national legislative assembly ( nla ) and selected the assembly's members . on august 21 , 2014 , the new body elected prayuth as prime minister . prayuth has not set a date for a transition to civilian rule , and he has been reluctant to hold popular elections . after the coup , he said that elections might be held in early 2016 , but later announced they would be would be pushed back to august or september 2016 . the ncpo also created a constitution drafting committee ( cdc ) to draw up a new constitution . while the process is ongoing , preliminary version grants immunity to individuals involved in the coup and allows the prime minister to be selected , rather than popularly elected , if he or she receives two - thirds approval of the house . in april 2015 , prayuth lifted martial law . soon afterward , however , he invoked article 44 of the interim constitution , granting his government the authority to curb "acts deemed harmful to national peace and stability. human rights groups immediately condemned the move as being yet another indication of thailand's "deepening descent into dictatorship. in many ways , the military - to - military connection has been the strongest pillar of the u.s. - thai relationship . in november 2012 , then - u.s. defense secretary leon e. panetta and thai defense minister sukampol suwannathat signed the 2012 joint vision statement for the thai - u.s. defense alliance . the document celebrated 180 years of cooperation and updated the goals of the alliance , putting a particular emphasis on building regional security partnerships . however , the recent coups threaten military - to - military relations .