it appears that h.r . 235 would have permitted activities such as the express endorsement of a candidate by church leaders and others during religious services , requests for contributions to candidate committees and other political committees during religious gatherings , and written endorsements in church bulletins and inserts . any expenditures for these activities would not have been subject to the § 4955 tax . the bill would not have allowed churches to set up § 527 ( f ) ( 3 ) separate segregated funds or change existing campaign finance laws . 235 , an earlier version of the houses of worship free speech restoration act , was identical to the version introduced in the 109 th congress except it did not reference irc §§ 2055 , 2106 , 2522 and 4955 nor did it include the clarification concerning church leaders . while this version did not provide an exception from the § 4955 tax , it would seem from a practical standpoint that this difference between the two versions could be insignificant because many of the activities permitted under the bills would have little or no associated expenditures . the provision in h.r . 4520 , former section 692 ( safe harbor for churches ) , was only briefly in the bill before the house ways and means committee struck it by unanimous consent . it would have done several things . first , churches would not have been treated as participating in campaign activity solely because of their religious leaders' private statements . second , churches that unintentionally intervened in a political campaign would not have lost their tax - exempt status or eligibility to receive deductible contributions unless the church or its religious leaders had done so on more than three occasions during the year . third , unintentional violations of the § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) prohibition would have been subject to a new excise tax . if the church had at least three unintentional violations during the year , the tax would have equaled the highest corporate tax rate multiplied by the church's gross income , contributions , and gifts . if the church had two violations , then the tax would have equaled that amount divided by two . if the church had one violation , then the tax would have equaled the full amount divided by 52 . the tax would have been reduced by any amount imposed under § 4955 . this bill was more restrictive than the others because it would have only permitted unintentional violations of the campaign prohibition and even those violations would have been fined . thus , this bill was specifically targeted at removing the risk that churches that inadvertently engaged in campaign activity could lose their tax - exempt status , as opposed to permitting churches to engage in such activity . the impact of the provision addressing religious leaders' private statements could be unclear because it could be interpreted as simply codifying existing law . 2357 and s. 2886 , the houses of worship political speech protection act , would have allowed § 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) churches to engage in campaign activity so long as it was "no substantial part" of a church's activities .