app . 2405 ( j ) ) , under which the secretary of state makes a determination when a country "has repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism. cuba has remained on the list since 1982 , and at present there are four other countries on the list — iran , north korea , sudan , and syria . under various provisions of law , certain trade benefits , most foreign aid , support in the international financial institutions , and other benefits are restricted or denied to countries named as state sponsors of international terrorism . under the authority of section 6 ( j ) of the export administration act , validated licenses are required for exports of virtually all items to countries on the terrorism list , except items specially allowed by public law , such as informational materials , humanitarian assistance , and food and medicine . being listed as a sponsor of international terrorism also restricts bilateral assistance in annual foreign assistance appropriations acts , as required most recently in section 527 of the foreign operations , export financing and related programs appropriations act , 2006 ( p.l . section 502 of the trade act of 1974 ( p.l . 2462 ) makes a country ineligible for the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) if it is on the section 6 ( j ) terrorism list . section 620a of the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( p.l . 2371 ) also prohibits assistance authorized under the act to the government of a country that "has repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism. likewise , section 40 of the arms export control act ( p.l . 2780 ) prohibits the export or other provision of munitions to a country if the government "has repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism. cuba's retention on the terrorism list has received more attention in recent years in light of increased support for legislative initiatives to lift some u.s. economic sanctions under the current embargo . should u.s. sanctions be removed , a variety of trade and aid restrictions would nonetheless remain in place because of cuba's retention on the terrorism list . at this juncture , however , sanctions have not been removed and cuba remains subject to a comprehensive u.s. trade and financial embargo ( pursuant to the trading with the enemy act and the foreign assistance act of 1961 ) . in addition to the terrorism list sanctions imposed by the export administration act , section 40a of the arms export control act ( p.l . 2781 ) prohibits the sale or export of defense articles and defense services if the president determines and certifies to congress , by may 15 of each year , that the country "is not cooperating fully with united states antiterrorism efforts. this list has been issued annually since 1997 , and currently includes cuba , as well as iran , north korea , syria , and venezuela . under section 6 ( j ) of the export administration act , a country's retention on the terrorism list may be rescinded in two ways .