the rt . hon . peter hain mp , secretary of state for northern ireland . enclosures . us - uk extradition treaty—northern ireland issues political background the political and security situation in northern ireland has been transformed following the 1998 good friday agreement . a huge amount of progress has been made since then , including the historic statement from the provisional ira in july 2005 , in which they made clear that their armed campaign was over . the focus in northern ireland today is on restoring devolved government and continuing to build a prosperous and peaceful society . good friday agreement and early release scheme as part of the good friday agreement ( gfa ) , individuals convicted of terrorist - related offences committed before 1998 were able to apply for early release after serving only two years of their sentences . over 400 prisoners have been released on license under this scheme . the license requires that individuals do not become re - engaged in terrorism or serious crime . those released include many members of the provisional ira , which has maintained a ceasefire during this time . rec . s10766-767 ( daily ed . the understanding , declarations and provisos confirm that ( 1 ) federal courts will retain the authority to bar extradition when a request fails to meet the demands of 2003 treaty ; ( 2 ) the 2003 treaty does not obligate the united states to take any action proscribed by the constitution ; ( 3 ) the parties have disclaimed any interest in prosecuting offenses committed in northern ireland prior to and addressed in the belfast / good friday agreement . it also urges the secretary of state to consider carefully any requests for the extradition of a fugitive who was previous acquitted , and after the treaty becomes effective it requires annual reports from the secretary on the number and disposition of extradition requests under the treaty . extradition is the process by which one country formally surrenders a person to another country for criminal prosecution or punishment . ordinarily , extradition is governed by a treaty which operates in the nature of a contract and by implementing statutory provisions . the united states has extradition treaties in force with most of the countries of the world and under most circumstances will extradite an individual to another country only pursuant to a treaty of extradition . at least one early critic of the 2003 treaty contended that it: 1 . eliminates the political offense for any offense allegedly involving violence or weapons , including any solicitation , conspiracy or attempt to commit such crimes ; 2 . transfers responsibility for determining whether the extradition request is politically - motivated from the courts to the executive ; 3 . allows for extradition even if no u.s. federal law is violated ; 4 . eliminates any statute of limitations ; 5 . eliminates the need for any showing by the united kingdom of facts sufficient to show the person requested is guilty of the crime charged—mere unsupported allegations are sufficient ; 6 . allows for "provisional arrest" and detention for 60 days upon request by the united kingdom ; 7 . allows for seizure of assets by the united kingdom ; 8 .