but legislation by itself is insufficient . a well - equipped enforcement agency and a public mood that will support its efforts are also needed . in addition to prosecution under state and federal legislation , diploma mills may potentially be subject to a common law tort action for negligent misrepresentation or fraud . under a lawsuit for fraud , an individual who was injured as a result of receiving a phony degree from a diploma mill could sue for damages if: ( 1 ) the owner or operator of the diploma mill knowingly made false representations regarding the quality of the degree and ( 2 ) the individual relied on those statements to his or her pecuniary detriment . a suit for negligent misrepresentation may be pursued if the defendant did not exercise reasonable care or competence in obtaining or communicating the false information , even if there was no intention to deceive nor knowledge of the information's falsity . in addition to common law actions for fraud or misrepresentation , many states have enacted unfair or deceptive practices statutes that provide consumers with remedies against false , misleading , and deceptive business practices , unconscionable actions , or breach of warranty . depending on the circumstances , victims of diploma mill scams might be able to assert claims under these state statutes . despite the available array of laws targeting diploma mills , these phony institutions continue to exist . many observers believe that "[t]here appears to be a lack of prosecutorial interest at both the state and federal level in pursuing cases involving fraudulent academic credentials. postal inspection service . both agencies have the authority to investigate crimes involving mail fraud , wire fraud , and other types of fraud , and diploma mills are often prosecuted under these statutes if they use the mail or telephone wire to commit fraud . under the federal mail fraud statute , use of the mail with intent to commit fraud is punishable both civilly and / or criminally , respectively , by a fine and / or by up to twenty years in prison . use of a fictitious name or address in connection with mail fraud or any other unlawful purpose is punishable by monetary fines and / or up to five years in prison . likewise , violations of the wire fraud statute are punishable with fines and / or up to twenty years in prison . in addition , any attempt or conspiracy to commit the types of fraud described above is subject to the same penalties that would have applied if the underlying crime had successfully been committed . if an individual is violating or about to violate these anti - fraud provisions , doj can seek an injunction in federal court to prevent such violations . finally , the post office is authorized to take certain preventative actions if an individual conducts "a scheme or device for obtaining money or property through the mail by means of false representations. over the years , federal enforcement of laws against diploma mills has waxed and waned . for example , the fbi and the postal inspection service have periodically engaged in collaborative criminal investigations of diploma mills .