services . regarding the services negotiations , mode - 4 delivery of services ( temporary entry of foreign personnel ) will likely be an issue of critical interest to some membersof congress . provisions pertaining to temporary entry of personnel were included in the free tradeagreements that the united states entered into with chile and singapore . members were stronglycritical of trade agreements that included provisions affecting u.s. immigration policy , and vowedto oppose future agreements that did so . ( 37 ) mode - 4 is the most critical issue for a number of largedeveloping countries , including india and china who have criticized the offers made by developedcountries , including the united states , that have restricted mode - 4 liberalization to foreigners whoare executives and highly skilled employees of foreign firms that have an established presence in thelocal economy . non - agricultural market access . although the nama language wasreplicated from the 2003 cancãºn text , language inserted at the insistence of the developing countriescasts doubt on the finality of these decisions . the first activity of negotiators is to determine the tariffformula , or whether to use or whether to use a different tariff reduction modality . the success of thenama negotiations may also depend on cooperation of developing countries , some of which arewithholding active participation awaiting progress in the agriculturenegotiations . trade facilitation . in establishing talks on trade facilitation , membercountries may first reach an agreement on whether to negotiate new rules , or merely guidelines , fortrade facilitation . this may be accomplished by first reaching agreement on concrete steps for theprovision of technical assistance , and the application of special and differential treatment . agriculture . agreement to reduce domestic support according to aharmonizing formula ( wto members with higher levels of trade - distorting support must cut more ) represents substantial progress , but difficult negotiations are expected over specifics such as thepercentage cuts in overall support and in specific categories of trade distorting support ( amber box,newly - defined blue box , and de minimis ) . similarly , the eu's concession on eliminating export subsidies is supposed tobe matched with u.s. cuts in export credit guarantees and food aid programs . just how parallelreductions in these programs might be achieved as well as the schedule and end date for eliminatingexport subsidies likely will be difficult negotiating issues . the market access provisions of theagricultural framework agreement are less precise than those for domestic support or exportcompetition . a critical trade - off to be resolved is the extent of market opening by mid - leveldeveloping countries such as brazil or india versus the extent of reduction in trade - distortingdomestic support that developed countries will make . resolving this trade - off is critical to bothrealizing market benefits from further agricultural trade liberalization as well as gaining eventualsupport in congress for a wto trade agreement . developing countries may prove more likely to engage in the talks if they are confident that they willnot be forced to take measures beyond their capacity , and it may be possible to agree to negotiatenew rules . cotton . cotton was not mentioned in the 2001doha ministerial declaration .