it is as simple as that . 108-458 ( s. 2845 ) intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 . a bill to reform the intelligence community and the intelligence and intelligence - related activities of the united states government , and for other purposes . introduced september 23 , 2004 . 3942 would increase in muslim populations public diplomacy activities including through increased broadcasting , educational exchanges , and establishing the international youth opportunity fund . the president signed it into law ( p.l . 108-458 ) on december 17 , 2004 . despite all that has been accomplished in revamping u.s. public diplomacy in the last three years to better respond to the terrorism threat , the questions arise: is it worth it and is it enough ? then - national security council advisor , condoleezza rice cited the new initiatives but conceded that more needed to be done . she recommended the creation of sister cities programs , student and professional exchanges , and language and area studies programs that focus on the muslim world . u.s. public diplomacy has been viewed by some as overseas pr , but congressional testimony in 2004 by members of the 9 / 11 commission suggest that it goes much deeper than that . public diplomacy , they said , must now be viewed as a dialogue , not a monologue , to reach a deeper understanding between societies and build long - term relationships and trust between government officials and their societies . "if we don't have long - term relationships with muslim populations , we cannot have trust . chairman thomas kean asserted in recent testimony that ( excluding iraq ) egypt is the second largest recipient of u.s. assistance , yet only 15% of egyptians have a favorable view of americans , according to polls . in addition to bilateral programs , the commission recommended that the u.s. government join with other nations in generously supporting a new international youth opportunity fund . the report stated that education and literacy lead to economic opportunity and freedom ; therefore , better textbooks that do not teach racism or hatred to arab and muslim children , and offering a choice of schools other than extremist madrassas are among the steps that may be key to eliminating islamist terrorism . another multilateral approach the commission recommended is the establishment of a forum , perhaps modeled after the organization for security and cooperation in europe ( osce ) , for engaging both western and arab and muslim representatives to discuss each culture's needs and perspectives . an organization of this nature , said the commission , would help create long - term relationships and understanding among all countries . improved relationships would lead to cooperation and trust among western and muslim populations , which is critical for containing or eliminating global terrorism , the report said . the commission emphasized that the vast majority of muslims worldwide are moderates who do not agree with violence . in contrast , the commission stated that the islamist terrorists hate america and all that it stands for , and violence and terror are their weapons against the united states .