provisions in 3 u.s.c . ยง15 include a procedure for making and acting on objections to the counting of one or more of the electoral votes from a state or the district of columbia . when the certificate or equivalent paper from each state ( or the district of columbia ) is read , "the president of the senate shall call for objections , if any. any such objection must be presented in writing and must be signed by at least one senator and one representative . the objection "shall state clearly and concisely , and without argument , the ground thereof.... " during the joint session of january 6 , 2001 , the presiding officer intervened on several occasions to halt attempts to make speeches under the guise of offering an objection . when an objection , properly made in writing and endorsed by at least one senator and one representative , is received , each house is to meet and consider it separately . the statute states that "[n]o votes or papers from any other state shall be acted upon until the objections previously made to the votes or papers from any state shall have been finally disposed of. however , in 1873 , before enactment of the law now in force , the joint session agreed , without objection and for reasons of convenience , to entertain objections with regard to two or more states before the houses met separately on any of them . the timetable for the certification , transmission , review , and approval of the electoral votes was established by congress to avoid a repetition of the extraordinary delay incident to the electoral vote controversy surrounding the 1876 presidential election . in the event that no candidate has received a majority of the electoral vote for president , the election is ultimately to be decided by the house of representatives in which the names of the three candidates receiving the most electoral votes for president are considered by the house , with each state having one vote . in the event that no candidate receives a majority of the electoral votes for vice president , the names of the two candidates receiving the highest number of electoral votes for that post are submitted to the senate , which elects the vice president by majority vote of the senators . the development and current practices for election of the president and vice president by congress specified in the constitution and law are discussed in detail in crs report rl32695 , election of the president and vice president by congress: contingent election , by [author name scrubbed] . the topics presented are arranged in the approximate order of their occurrence . title 3 of the u.s. code includes provisions governing the conduct of the joint session . section 16 of title 3 is intended to ensure that the joint session conducts and completes its business expeditiously . as discussed below , ยง18 prohibits debate as well as the offering and consideration of almost all questions . section 16 provides that the joint session is to continue until the count is completed and the result announced , and limits recesses if the process of counting the votes and announcing the results becomes time - consuming .