b . the administration and senate bill included cpa operating expense fundingunder title i ( defense ) , in the account for operations and maintenance , army . c. the administration proposed to use funds previously appropriated for baghdadfacilities in p.l . 108-11 for urgent usaid needs in afghanistan and requestedin this supplemental additional resources for iraq facilities to replace thosediverted to afghanistan . the senate bill appropriated funds for usaid inafghanistan separately , thereby making funds provided in p.l . 108-11 availablefor u.s. diplomatic facilities in baghdad , without the need for newappropriations in this supplemental . the house bill and the conferenceagreement provided $35.8 million for a new u.s. mission in iraq in the d&csaccount below , and rescinded $35.8 million provided in p.l . d. the house bill and the conference agreement specified that peacekeeping fundsare available for both iraq and afghanistan . e. in addition to the amounts shown in this total for afghanistan , the administrationis reprogramming $390 million from other defense , state department , andforeign aid accounts for afghan reconstruction . f. the administration had requested $40 million for usaid operating expenses inboth iraq and afghanistan . the senate bill and the conference agreementprovided $40 million for usaid operating expenses in afghanistan only . g. instead of funding the emergency account , the house bill provided $100 millionin disaster and famine relief aid for liberia and sudan , below . the senate billprovided $200 million in the emergency crises fund account , but designatedall of it for liberia and required that $100 million be drawn by transfer from anyother account in the bill . the conference agreement provided $210 million forliberia and sudan , funds drawn from the iraq relief and reconstructionaccount and from a new account for international disaster and famineassistance , as shown below . h. under the account for diplomatic and consular services ( d&cs ) , theadministration proposed $11 million for additional security operations inafghanistan and $29.5 million to cover a projected shortfall in machinereadable visa ( mrv ) fees that had been expected to fund border securityinitiatives . the senate bill provided $35.8 million as a rescission andreappropriation for security operations in afghanistan and iraq , and addedfunding under the separate account of emergencies in the diplomatic andconsular services to cover the mrv shortfall . the administration requestedfunds under this latter account only for rewards related to osama bin laden andsaddam hussein . the house bill provided $156.3 million in the d&csaccount , of which $109.5 million was for mrv fees and consular services , $11million for security measures in afghanistan , and $35.8 million for a diplomaticmission in iraq . the conference agreement provided $115.5 million foremergencies in the diplomatic and consular services , $50 million of whichwas for rewards and $65.5 million was for costs of protecting foreign missionsand officials in new york city , and security and protection for the 203 freetrade in the americas ministerial and the 2004 summit of the industrializednations . the administration requested authority to use $200 million in economic supportfunds pending in the regular fy2004 foreign operations appropriation ( h.r.2800 and s. 1469 ) for debt reduction for pakistan . thesenate bill included this authority , while the house bill included both theauthority for debt reduction and the $200 million appropriation .