it is the states and the tribes that provide tanf benefits and services to families and individuals . this report provides an overview of tanf financing and rules for state programs , describing federal tanf grants and state funds under a "maintenance - of - effort" ( moe ) requirement ; how federal tanf and state moe funds may be used to help achieve the purpose and goals of the tanf block grant ; rules that apply when tanf or moe funds are used to provide "assistance" to needy families with children ; rules that apply when tanf or moe funds are used for benefits and services o t her than assistance ; certain accountability requirements , including requirements that states submit plans and report data to the federal government ; and provisions of tanf law not directly related to grants to states , such as competitive grants for promoting healthy marriage and responsible fatherhood , and tribal tanf provisions . tribes seeking to operate tanf programs must submit plans to the secretary of hhs for approval . the secretary of hhs — with the participation of the tribes — establishes work requirements and time limits for each tribe operating its own tanf program . additionally , tribes that operated pre - tanf work and education programs are provided grants to operate tribal work programs that total $7.6 million per year . it is best known as the major source of funding for cash welfare for needy families with children . however , federal law allows tanf funds to be used for other benefits and services that provide economic help to low - income families with children and to support the goals of reducing out - of - wedlock pregnancies and promoting two - parent families . the tanf block grant was created in the 1996 welfare reform law ( p.l . at the federal level , tanf is administered by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) . tanf programs operate in all 50 states , the district of columbia , puerto rico , guam , and the virgin islands . american samoa is eligible to operate a tanf program , but has not opted to do so . the social security act designates all these jurisdictions as "states," and thus that term will be used for them in this report . federally recognized indian tribes may also operate tanf programs . tribal tanf programs are funded through allocations made from the tanf basic block grant to the state in which the tribe offers tanf benefits and services . for data and statistics on the tanf block grant , see crs report rl32760 , the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant: responses to frequently asked questions . for the legislative history of tanf , see crs report r44668 , the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant: a legislative history . it also requires states to develop plans that outline their intended use of funds and report data on families receiving assistance . tanf also provides funding for healthy marriage promotion , demonstration projects to test the effectiveness of indian tribal governments in coordination of child welfare services , and responsible fatherhood initiatives .