appendix a . "above - parity gdp" nations — 2000 per capita gdps greater than $25,850 appendix b . the results are presented below . the relationships of population , economic growth , and emissions as defined by equation 1 , have been used to evaluate diverse assumptions about each factor . this analytical construct could be applied globally , to individual nations , or to groups of nations . so , are the twin objectives of holding down greenhouse gas emissions and of fostering economic growth compatible ? two alternative views of the situation avoid the conflict analyzed in this report . first , the apparent conflict in objectives can be mooted if one concludes that greenhouse gases do not cause global warming . for those who hold this position , growth can proceed without concern for emissions . second , the apparent conflict might also be mooted if one concludes that economic activity can be delinked from fossil fuel energy use within an acceptable time period . for those who believe that many opportunities exist to save energy at little or no cost with appropriate technical fixes , the conflict can be avoided — at least for some time — and economic development can proceed without increasing emissions rates ( and other societal benefits can also be achieved , such as reduced air pollution ) . as shown by table 1 , eight nations combined a greenhouse gas intensity of less than 110 tons per million dollars gdp with per capita gdps of $23,490 or better . while six of the eight are relatively small ( in terms of both geography and total gdp ) , the other two , italy and france , are among the top 15 nations in terms of both size of total economy and amount of greenhouse gases emitted . this shows that substantial economies can rank low in greenhouse gas intensity and that such efficiency is not restricted to only small countries / economies . from the perspective of global economic development , a benchmark of a per capita gdp of $23,500 — at the low end of the eight , falling between france and sweden — could be taken as a reasonable starting point for analysis . with $23,500 as the parity gdp benchmark , the world's nations can be categorized into three groups: a "parity income group" defined as nations with per capita gdps of $23,500 plus or minus 10% ( $21,150 - $25,850 ) , an "above - parity gdp" group with gdps greater than $25,850 , and a "below - parity gdp" group with gdps lower than $21,150 ( see table 2 ) . appendices a , b , and c provide additional data on these nations . this parity benchmark of $23,500 is more than triple the actual world per capita gdp of $7,333 in 2000 , and is more than 5.5 times the "below - parity gdp" nations' per capita gdp of $4,120 in 2000 . table 3 presents the shares of world population , gdp , and greenhouse gas emissions by each of the three parity - defined groups of nations .