the parties ( i.e. , signatory countries ) meet generally every two years at a cop to evaluate the implementation of the treaty and consider efforts which would improve cites's success . in the united states , the implementing legislation for cites is the endangered species act ( esa ; 16 u.s.c . the office of management authority ( oma ) and the office of scientific authority ( osa ) of the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) in the department of the interior ( doi ) exercise the responsibilities of the management and scientific authorities . enforcement responsibilities for cites are shared in varying levels by the fws ( division of law enforcement ) , and the animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) and the customs service in the department of homeland security . the noaa fisheries in the department of commerce also has a small role in cites's enforcement . the implementation of cites has generated several success stories along with controversy and problems . arguably , the success of cites can be summarized with the fact that no species listed under cites within the last 30 years has gone extinct . cites is an international treaty that is steadily gaining acceptance in the world and growing in terms of its application . it aims to ensure that the international trade in plants and animals does not threaten their survival . the primary issue , according to some , is the lack of implementing legislation , and hence enforcement mechanisms , in several party nations . this lack compromises the effectiveness of the treaty and lowers the value of enforcement and monitoring activities in complying party nations . this aspect of cites is to be addressed by the united states in the implementation plan for the u.s. national strategy for combating wildlife trafficking . the plan calls for the united states to provide support and technical assistance to ensure that countries are implementing cites and to hold accountable countries that fail to fulfill their cites obligations . the plan also calls for the united states to clarify and enforce use - after - import provisions mandated by cites . use - after - import provisions under cites allow party nations to specify how species or products derived from species may be used after they are imported . the united states , a signatory to cites , is the largest importer and exporter of wildlife products in the estimated $300 billion global wildlife trade . cites also provides a framework for addressing the illegal trade in wildlife . according to u.s. government estimates , illegal trade in endangered wildlife products , including elephant ivory , rhino horns , and turtle shells , is worth at least an estimated $7 billion - $10 billion annually . this figure does not include illegal logging and illegal fishing , which can account , respectively , for roughly an additional $30 billion - $100 billion annually and $10 billion - $23 billion annually . such figures may place illegal wildlife trafficking among the top 10 most lucrative criminal activities worldwide , behind only narcotics , counterfeiting , and human trafficking .