first . there are strong and articulate interest groups both defending and opposing the davis - bacon act . second . aside from the act , per se , davis - bacon ( prevailing wage ) provisions have been included in numerous program statutes thereby expanding the impact of the act to groups of people ( in government and in the contracting community ) unfamiliar with its operation and requirements . as a result , when these program statutes have come up for review and / or reauthorization , davis - bacon is frequently called into consideration . mcnamara - o'hara ( 1965 ) was a subject of contention during the 1970s and 1980s . however , it would appear that , following a strong attack by certain segments of industry and by the general accounting office , it has largely disappeared from the legislative agenda . it does , however , resurface during discussions of general procurement policy and has been a subject of administrative rulemaking . while the walsh - healey act ( 1936 ) may have been moderately controversial when it was adopted ( and again in the 1950s and early 1960s ) , it appears to have been overshadowed by other more contentious new deal statutes: for example , the wagner - connery labor relations act ( national labor relations act , 1935 ) and the fair labor standards act ( 1938 ) . perhaps because its minimum wage and overtime standards have become co - equal with those of the fair labor standards act , it seems to be no longer a focus of attention — neither legislative nor administrative . each of these protective legal structures — the federal contract labor standards statutes , the flsa , and the state and local protective legislation — was enacted to protect workers and to assist , in some measure , in stabilizing industry and the workplace . each , very largely , has developed in a separate pattern as legislators ( responding to workplace realities: accommodating workers , employers and the public ) have modified the statutes , adding technical corrective provisions and giving way to the need for flexibility . hardly static , the statutes have been in a continuing state of evolution . some have argued with respect to the federal structure , that it is dated , difficult to enforce and to comply with , and very much in need of updating . is such updating worth considering ? could it be achieved without major change to the substance of protections that have been crafted through nearly a century ? at the same time , some may question whether advocates of modernity ( of flexibility , of bringing labor standards law into the 21 st century ) want to update or to diminish the protective qualities of the statutes to the point of de facto repeal . through the years , some have questioned a certain redundancy in the labor standards law structure and the continuing need for protective standards for federal contract workers separate from those applicable to the workforce at large . might a consolidation of the statutes be useful ? were that attempted , how complex might that process become and what difficulties might be encountered ?