the u.s. and french economies share many similarities . based on a gross domestic product ( gdp ) in 2008 of $14.3 trillion , the united states is the world's largest economy . france with a gdp of $2.9 trillion is the world's sixth largest economy . most u.s. trade and investment with france , dominated by multinational companies and intra - firm trade , is non - controversial . nevertheless , three prominent issues — agriculture , government intervention in corporate activity , and the war in iraq — have contributed to increased bilateral tensions from time to time . agricultural trade disputes historically have been the major sticking point in u.s. - france commercial relations . although the agricultural sector accounts for a declining percentage of output and employment in both countries , it has produced a disproportionate amount of trade tensions between the two sides . as trade , as well as agriculture , is under the jurisdiction of the european commission , the problems , of course , are not technically bilateral in nature . from the u.s. perspective , the restrictive trade regime set up by the common agricultural policy ( cap ) has been the main problem. it has been a longstanding u.s. contention that the cap is the largest single distortion of global agricultural trade . american farmers and policymakers have complained over the years that u.s. sales and profits are adversely affected by ( 1 ) eu restrictions on market access that have protected the european market for european farmers ; by ( 2 ) eu export subsidies that have deflated u.s. sales to third markets ; and by ( 3 ) eu domestic income support programs that have kept non - competitive european farmers in business . from an eu and french perspective , the cap has been substantially reformed in recent years and cannot be characterized as the largest source of distortions in agricultural trade . on the contrary , under this view there is ample evidence that eu ( as well as australian , new zealand , and canadian ) farm exports have been hampered by u.s. food aid policies in some developing countries . france's agricultural sector , which in terms of output and land is the largest in europe , has long been the biggest beneficiary of the cap . over the past several years , french farmers have received about 20 to 25% of cap outlays that have averaged around $40 billion . acting to continue benefits and subsidies for its farmers , the french position , which is shared by many other eu members , can determine the limits and parameters of the european commission's negotiating flexibility on a range of agricultural issues that are of keen interest to the united states . the most prominent and perhaps important example relates to current efforts to get the wto doha round of multilateral trade negotiations back on track by reducing agricultural subsidies and other barriers to market access .