poverty . the official poverty rate in 2009 was 14.3 percent , up from 13.2 percent in 2008 ; the most recent figure is the highest poverty rate since 1994 . income disparities . there are persistent differences in household incomes among racial / ethnic groups in the united states . for instance , in 2009 , the real median income level for a black household—at about $33,000—was about $19,000 lower than that of a non - hispanic white household ( about $52,000 ) . one consequence of this disparity had been that low - income / low - wealth persons had faced hurdles when attempting to become homeowners . key findings from a study from the department of housing and urban development showed that subprime loans are three times more likely in low income neighborhoods than in high - income ones , and that predatory lending practices made homeownership far more costly for poor families . nonetheless , it was still 8.1 percentage points lower than in 1959 , the first year for which poverty estimates are available . in 2009 , 43.6 million people were counted as poor—the third consecutive increase in the number of people in poverty . according to gabe , the most recent increase in poverty reflects the worsening economic conditions since the onset of the economic recession in december 2007 and is expected to remain comparatively high even after the economy begins to recover . america's racial minorities continue to have disproportionately high poverty rates . for instance: assimilation . first , do we care about our collective future—the commonwealth—or only about our individual futures ? this reflects two forces . health policy is interrelated with population change . changes in the population size , racial and ethnic composition , and age structure affect the healthcare resources needed , spending levels , and health conditions observed . for example , recent fertility changes with more births occurring to women at the beginning and end of childbearing years—to teenagers and women over 40 respectively—could have profound consequences on the health of the children born to these mothers . specifically , there have been large increases in the birth rate of women over the age of 40 . children born to mothers at later ages are at greater risk for a number of health conditions including downs syndrome . infants born to women at later ages are also more likely to be low birth weight which is associated with higher infant mortality rates , premature birth , and a number of other health problems . increasing numbers of women delaying childbearing past age 40 may increase the number of children born with health conditions which may , among other things , increase health spending and increase the need for specific health resources such as neonatal intensive care . at the other end of the age spectrum , babies born to teenage mother are also at increased risk for a number of health conditions . babies born to teenage mothers are more likely to be premature and low birth weight . additionally , teenage mother receive less prenatal care than women giving birth at later ages which may exacerbate or cause adverse outcomes .