in federalist no . 67 , alexander hamilton refers to the recess appointment power as "nothing more than a supplement...for the purpose of establishing an auxiliary method of appointment , in cases to which the general method was inadequate. it is generally accepted that the clause was designed to enable the president to ensure the unfettered operation of the government during periods when the senate was not in session and therefore unable to perform its advice and consent function . in addition to fostering administrative continuity , presidents have exercised authority under the recess appointments clause for political purposes , appointing officials who might have difficulty securing senate conformation . while the president's exercise of the recess appointment power in any context may give rise to controversy , the use of the recess appointments clause to appoint judges to temporary positions on article iii courts has emerged as a particularly contentious political issue . additionally , while the text of the recess appointments clause does not differentiate between the appointment of judges and non - judges , the unique status of article iii judges gives rise to an inherent constitutional tension between the president's recess appointment authority and traditional notions of judicial independence , and has been the subject of recent litigation . two fundamental textual issues inhere to any consideration of the recess appointments clause . the first point of inquiry in this regard is what constitutes a vacancy "that may happen during the recess of the senate. if the term "happen" is interpreted as referring only to vacancies that occur during a recess , it necessarily follows that the president would lack authority to make a recess appointment to a vacancy that existed prior to the recess . conversely , if "happen" is construed more broadly to encompass vacancies that exist during a recess , the president would be empowered to make a recess appointment to any vacant position , irrespective of whether the position became vacant prior to or during "the recess of the senate. while this issue was a source of controversy in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries , a long line of attorney general opinions and judicial decisions have adopted the broader interpretation of the clause . attorney general william wirt , serving under president monroe , concluded that the phrase encompassed all vacancies that happen to exist during "the recess," declaring that "[t]his seems to me the only construction of the constitution which is compatible with its spirit , reason , and purpose. this interpretation was first adopted by a federal court in the 1880 decision in re farrow , and has adhered in judicial opinions on the issue in the modern era . similar interpretive difficulties adhere to the meaning of the phrase "the recess of the senate. an opinion issued by attorney general knox in 1901 concluded that the phrase applied only to adjournments between sessions of congress ( commonly referred to as "intersession" recesses ) . in reaching this determination , knox placed significant weight on the use of the definite article "the" in the recess appointments clause , emphasizing that "[i]t will be observed that the phrase is ' the recess.'