medical services . this accountprovides funds for treatment of veterans and eligible beneficiaries in va medical centers,nursing homes , outpatient clinic facilities , and contract hospitals . with the enactment of p.l . 109-148 , the totalamount of funds appropriated for vha is $29.3 billion . this accountprovides funds for the operation and maintenance of vha's infrastructure . the total amount of funds available forvha is $31.5 billion , including $2.2 billion in collections ( copays and third - party insurancepayments ) . the department of veterans affairs ( va ) provides benefits to veterans who meet certaineligibility rules . benefits to veterans range from disability compensation and pensions , education,training and rehabilitation services , hospital and medical care , and other benefits , such as home loanguarantees and death benefits that cover burial expenses . va carries out its programs nationwidethrough three administrations and the board of veterans appeals ( bva ) . the veterans healthadministration ( vha ) is responsible for health care programs . the veterans benefitsadministration ( vba ) is responsible for providing compensation , pensions , and education assistanceamong other things . the national cemetery administration ( nca ) is responsible for maintainingnational veterans cemeteries . va's budget includes both mandatory and discretionary spending accounts . mandatoryfunding supports disability compensation , pension benefits , vocational rehabilitation , and lifeinsurance , among other benefits and services . discretionary funding supports a broad array ofbenefits and services , including medical care . in fy2005 , discretionary budget authority accountedfor approximately 48% of the total va budget authority , with most of this discretionary fundinggoing toward supporting va medical care . vha operates the largest direct health care delivery system in the nation . ( 4 ) in fy2004 , vha operated157 hospitals , 134 nursing homes , 42 residential rehabilitation treatment centers , and 862 ambulatorycare and community - based outpatient clinics . vha also pays for care provided to veterans byindependent providers and practitioners on a fee basis under certain circumstances . in addition,vha provides grants for construction of state - owned nursing homes and domiciliary facilities , andcollaborates with the department of defense ( dod ) in sharing health care resources and services . during fy2004 , vha provided medical services to an estimated 4.7 million unique veteranpatients , a caseload that is expected to reach approximately 4.8 million in fy2005 . according tovha , this number will decrease to approximately 4.7 million by the end of fy2006 . ( 5 ) the total number of outpatientvisits reached 49.9 million during fy2004 , and is projected to increase to 52.8 million in fy2005and 55.8 million in fy2006 . in fy2004 , vha spent approximately 56% of its medical careobligations on outpatient care . in addition , vha manages the largest medical education and health professions trainingprogram in the united states . veterans' health care facilities are affiliated with 107 medical schools,55 dental schools and more than 1,000 other schools offering students allied and associatededucation degrees or certificates in 40 health profession disciplines . in fy2004 , over 84,000 healthcare professionals received training in va medical centers .