the final agreement on h.con.res . 95 , which cleared both houses on april 28 , cut deeper into the international affairs budget function than either of the earlier resolutions . as approved , function 150 was set at $31.37 billion for fy2006 , about $2.4 billion , or 7% , less than the president's request . house and senate appropriations committees , however , can choose to allocate the final amount set out in the budget resolution among the various subcommittees with jurisdiction over the international affairs budget proportionally different than what the president proposed or to alter the overall amount for foreign policy activities . depending on other competing priorities , the final allocations can diverge significantly from those assumed in the budget resolution . nevertheless , the size of the reduction compared with the executive request approved in the budget resolution created a challenging budget picture for appropriation subcommittees with jurisdiction over foreign operations and state department / broadcasting programs . the house appropriations committee announced its subcommittee allocations on may 5 , providing $20.27 billion to the foreign operations subcommittee , a level $2.55 billion , or 11% , below the administration's recommendation . during each of the past two years , the house foreign operations subcommittee was able to absorb more modest reductions to the president's request largely by paring back large increases proposed by the president for the millennium challenge account . once again the executive branch sought a substantial increase for the mca — doubling its budget to $3 billion . as discussed elsewhere in this report , even though the house subcommittee decided on june 16 again to recommend a sizable cut to the mca proposal ( $1.75 billion ) , it also had to make reductions across a number of other programs and accounts in order to meet its allocation target . for state department and related programs , the implications of the house sec . 302 ( b ) allocations were less clear because these funds are merged with a range of domestic agencies . however , the $57.5 billion house ssjc subcommittee allocation was 5.2% less than the administration's request . state department programs absorbed a relatively small portion of this reduction — $272 million , or 3.7% less than the request — when the house appropriations committee ordered reported the ssjc measure on june 7 . the situation in the senate was much different , where the state , foreign operations subcommittee had significantly more funds than its house counterparts to support international under its jurisdiction . the senate 302 ( b ) allocations , issued on june 9 , provide $31.67 billion to the subcommittee , $1 billion , or 3.1% less than the combined state department / foreign operations request . the comparable totals for the house foreign operations and state department / broadcasting components of the ssjc appropriation were $29.837 billion or about 6% less than the senate allocation . under the senate plan , the decision to reduce the mca request along the lines of the past two years was able to absorb the entire gap between the president's request for fy2006 and the subcommittee allocation .