the law that established dhs ( p.l . 107-296 ) directed that the coast guard be maintainedas a distinct entity within dhs and that the commandant of the coast guard report directly to thesecretary of dhs . the homelandsecurity act of 2002 ( p.l . subtitle b also contains a provision implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendation to givepriority attention to screening passengers and their baggage for explosives . the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( irtpa ) has numerousbts - related provisions , many of which embody some of the recommendations made by the 9 / 11commission . title iv of the act relates to transportation security . subtitle a of title ivimplements the 9 / 11 commission recommendations by requiring the secretary of dhs , jointly withthe secretary of transportation , to develop and implement a national strategy for transportationsecurity . subtitle b of title iv implements the 9 / 11 commission recommendations to improvepassenger prescreening for both domestic and international flights , and improve the use of no - fly and automatic selectee lists while ensuring that the watchlists do not violate privacy or civil liberties . further , this subtitle alsocontains provisions: requiring tsa to develop a plan for implementing enhanced explosive detectionequipment ; preserving the anonymity of federal air marshals ; improving screener performance ; enhancing in - line baggage screening ; improving the security of pilot licenses ; improving biometrictechnology and technology to protect against the threat of shoulder fired missiles . subtitle c of title iv concerns air cargo security and: requires tsa to develop bettertechnologies for air cargo security ; authorizes funding for equipment , research and development ; requires dhs to finalize its air cargo requirements within eight months ; and requires a pilot programusing blast - resistant containers . subtitle d of title iv concerns maritime security and requires tsato begin screening cruise ship passengers and crew against consolidated terrorist databases within180 days , and requires maritime - security plans to be submitted in a timely fashion . title v contains provisions relating to border protection , immigration and visa matters . subtitle a authorizes pilot programs on the northern and southern borders which would testadvanced technologies to increase border security between ports of entry . subtitle b requires thesecretary of dhs to submit a plan to the president and the congress to use remotely piloted aircraftto surveil the southwest border . this subtitle also authorizes funding to implement this plan as apilot program . subtitle b also requires the secretary of dhs to increase staffing each year duringfiscal years 2006-2010 ( subject to the availability of appropriations ) by the following amounts: thenumber of border patrol agents by not less than 2,000 each year ; the number of immigration andcustoms enforcement agents by not less than 800 agents per year ; and the number of detention bedspaces by not less than 8,000 per year . subtitle c contains provisions: requiring in - personinterviews of certain applicants for nonimmigrant visas ; requiring applicants for nonimmigrant visasto completely and accurately provide information requested in the application ; and making therevocation of a nonimmigrant visa grounds for removal .