this approach is favored by many members of congress . as a result , the negotiation is covering trade in goods and services , agriculture , investment , and intellectual property rights , as well as other issues such as government procurement , competition policy , and customs procedures . the u.s. - thailand fta negotiations are of interest to congress because ( 1 ) an agreement would require passage of implementing legislation to become operational ; ( 2 ) an agreement could increase u.s. exports of goods , services , and investment ; ( 3 ) an agreement could increase competition for u.s. import - competing industries such as textiles and apparel and pick - up trucks ; and ( 4 ) if an agreement is implemented , thailand would become the second asian fta partner ( the first was singapore ) for the united states . many members of congress support an aggressive fta strategy because of the potential to open foreign markets further to u.s. exports and investment . one house ways and means committee member phil english announced on june 8 , 2006 that he would not support the fta if it were brought to congress . english said that "thailand continues to demonstrate that it does not share common views with the united states with respect to the world trade organization and a country's right to police its markets effectively from predatory or illegally traded imports. other members of congress may wish to consider how a u.s. - thai fta could affect u.s. commercial relations in asia in general , particularly in light of the trend among asian countries for bilateral trade agreements . china's growing economic role in asia and its quest for new markets , materials , and trade deals is pushing almost every other major asian country , including japan and south korea , to consider ftas with each other . given the increased competition , the u.s. - asean business council has called for a vigorous timetable for the completion of the u.s. - thai fta talks and designation of the next asean country with which the united states will seek an fta . accordingly , u.s. trade strategy toward the ten - nation asean grouping , which is the third largest market for u.s. exports , could be an important congressional consideration . despite the welfare gains to society as a whole ( e.g . ten years prior to the 1997 crisis , thailand had been one of the world's fastest growing economies . between 1990 and 1996 , gross domestic product ( gdp ) averaged 8.6% , fueled in large part by rapid export growth . however , in 1998 , gdp fell by 10.5% while , exports and imports dropped by 6.7% and 33.0% , respectively , over 1997 levels ( see table 1 ) . in addition , the unemployment rate rose from 3.2% in 1997 to 7.3% in 1998 , and living standards ( measured according to per capita gdp measured on a purchasing power parity basis ) , plummeted by 11% . thailand's economy was stabilized by a $17.2 billion loan from the international monetary fund . real gdp grew by 4.4% in 1999 and by 4.8% in 2000 , but slowed to 2.2% in 2001 .