a more thorough revision is in progress . a voluntary certification program for voting systems was also developed by the national association of state election directors ( nased ) to verify conformance with the vss . hava gives responsibility for establishing testing and certification procedures to the eac , with nist playing an advisory role and developing a laboratory accreditation program . the eac has accredited some laboratories for testing and certification of voting systems under the vvsg . hava does not authorize specific funding for nist support activities , but congress has provided appropriations for those activities as part of the eac funding . no federal standards exist with respect to absentee ballots , although the eac is required to conduct a study of absentee voting under hava . voters in many states can request an absentee ballot only for specific reasons that would prevent the voter from casting a ballot in person . but according to the national conference of state legislatures ( ncsl ) , 26 states in 2004 allowed any voter to request such a ballot , sometimes called "no fault" absentee voting . oregon conducts its elections entirely by mail — all registered voters receive their ballots through the postal service . while the percentage of votes cast by absentee or mail ballot has been increasing in recent elections , some observers have expressed concerns that the method is more vulnerable to certain kinds of fraud and coercion of voters than is balloting at the polling place . absentee ballots are perhaps the classic example of the legacy of state - by - state election administration . eligibility , types of ballots used , deadlines for submission , and counting procedures and deadlines vary widely by state , and no uniform approach exists with any single element of absentee voting . in some states , voters may cast a ballot in person before election day through an early voting program . there are many approaches , and the number of states using early voting is growing . according to the ncsl , 23 states had some form of it in 2004 , whereas 13 states offered early voting in 2000 . in some states , a voter can cast a ballot at multiple locations in the jurisdiction before election day , while in other states , the voter must visit the election official's office to do so . the days and hours for voting vary as well . a defense department program to allow those in the military and their family members abroad to vote over the internet was cancelled for 2004 after a report that noted it could be prone to tampering that might affect the election outcome . the 2004 program was to be an expanded version of a pilot program in 2000 in which 84 voters cast ballots over the internet . as many as 100,000 voters might have cast ballots under the program in 2004 . arizona's democratic party conducted a primary in 2000 in which approximately 40% of voters cast ballots over the internet , although computer problems and access issues emerged after the voting .