figure 1 . map of kyrgyzsta . he won a legislative seat in the march 2005run - off . however , ethnic tensions remain of concern . beyond their anti - akayev stance anddemands for redistributing political and economic power , the opposition parties mostly lackwell - developed policies and strategic plans for the future of kyrgyzstan . some observers have raisedconcerns that interim government leaders are engaging in nepotism and other corrupt practicesrather than combating them . however , some pro - akayev and northern interests have created the akyykat ( justice ) politicalmovement to challenge opposition candidates in the election . some observers raise the specter of a highly contentious and problematic presidential electionthat may deepen civil disorder . another source of likely disorder may then come to the fore later inthe year if the 15-20 or more disputed legislative seats are re - contested , or if a new election of thewhole legislature is carried out . unless these elections take place , however , the legislature willremain illegitimate in the eyes of many kyrgyzstanis . calls by some in kyrgyzstan for rewriting theconstitution to remove what are viewed as illegitimate changes made during akayev - orchestratedreferenda create still more uncertainties about kyrgyzstan's stability during the next few months . omurbek tekebayev , heads the ata meken party . some optimistic observers suggest that the relatively bloodless march coup ( 3 deaths were reported ) and reduced public passions after akayev's ouster may bode well for the avoidance of violence orpolitical instability in the near term . ( 11 ) other observers who caution that political disorder may deepen suggest that islamicextremists could bid to take power . they maintain that hizb ut - tahrir and other islamic extremistgroups have gained members in kyrgyzstan in recent years , and warn that such groups areanti - american and anti - russian . ( 12 ) before the coup , there appeared to be some cooperation among ethnic kyrgyz and uzbeksin protests in kyrgyzstan's south , in contrast to inter - communal violence there in the early 1990s . many ethnic uzbeks and kyrgyz joined in supporting ethnic uzbek opposition leader anvar artykovin osh . the emergence of such cooperation appeared buttressed by region - wide parades and othercelebrations to mark akayev's overthrow . however , while some ethnic uzbeks have supportedbakiyev , others have criticized him for appointing people to leading government posts whom theyregard as kyrgyz nationalists and for not appointing enough ethnic uzbeks . kurmanbek bakiyev , prime minister 2000-2002 . then - president askar akayev blamed him for agovernment crackdown on a protest in the south that led to several deaths , and he was forced toresign . he became head of the opposition people's movement of kyrgyzstan ( pmk ) bloc in late2004 . he lost his bid for a legislative seat in the march 2005 run - off . azimbek beknazarov , head of the nationalist asaba party . in 2001 he harshly criticized presidentakayev for agreeing to border adjustments deemed favorable to china and kazakhstan , allegedlycontributing to his arrest in 2002 . in late 2004 , he became deputy head of pmk . he won alegislative seat in the march 2005 run - off . murtabek imanaliyev , foreign minister 1997-2002 .