311c ) among other provisions . other proposals inthe 109th congress , including h.r . 3811 would lift federal restrictions on natural gas exploration and production on federal submergedlands of the outer continental shelf . s. 1310 would authorize the expansion of a naturalgas transmission pipeline on federal lands in the northeast . while an increase in lng imports is already underway , federal officials and members ofcongress have been debating the merits and risks of u.s. lng dependency . in april , 2005 , forexample , president bush stated that "one of the great sources of energy for the future is liquefiednatural gas.... we need more terminals to receive liquefied natural gas...." ( 1 ) in june , 2005 department ofenergy secretary samuel bodman remarked that "lng seems to offer a solution to ... the growingdemand for natural gas that we will see all around the globe. ( 2 ) in november , 2005 federalreserve chairman alan greenspan testified before congress that "severe reaction of natural gasprices to the production setbacks that have occurred in the gulf highlights again the need to ... importlarge quantities of far cheaper , liquefied natural gas ( lng ) from other parts of the world. ( 3 ) some in congress havequestioned the implications of such a policy , however , drawing analogies to the consequences ofu.s . dependency on foreign oil and citing potential instability among foreign lng suppliers . ( 4 ) others have expressedconcern about lng safety and vulnerability to terrorism . ( 5 ) specific questions are emerging about the implications of greater lng imports to the unitedstates . lng has substantial physical infrastructure requirements and there are uncertainties abouthow this infrastructure would be integrated into north america's existing gas network . the potentialeffects of larger lng imports on u.s. natural gas prices will be driven by the global lng marketstructure , although that market structure is still evolving . political relationships among countries inthe lng trade may also change as lng becomes increasingly important to their economies . this report will review the status of u.s. lng imports , including projections of future u.s.lng demand within the growing international lng market . the report will summarize recentpolicy activities related to lng among u.s. federal agencies , as well as private sector plans for lnginfrastructure development . the report also will introduce key policy considerations in lnginfrastructure and market structure , highlighting current market information and key uncertainties . finally , the report will identify key questions in lng import policy development . natural gas is widely used in the united states for heating , electricity generation , industrialprocesses , and other applications . in 2005 , u.s. natural gas consumption was 22 trillion cubic feet ( tcf ) , accounting for 23% of total u.s. energy consumption . ( 6 ) until recently , nearly all u.s.natural gas was supplied from north american wells and transported through the continent's vastpipeline network to regional markets . in 2003 , however , due to constraints in north americannatural gas production , the united states sharply increased imports of natural gas from overseas inthe form of liquefied natural gas ( lng ) .