appendix a . initial cfsr review and pip implementation schedule states generally have 90 days after the final report date to submit a program improvement plan ( pip ) . there is no time frame for approval of the plan by hhs , and the department may require changes before granting approval . the approval date is also the formal implementation date for the plan . states generally have two years in which to implement their pip . in rare instances , the regulations provide that a state may receive approval from hhs for an additional year to complete their pip . or is it simply a lack of widely available child mental health services in the state ? if a state is not in compliance with the statute's termination of parental rights ( tpr ) provisions , is this because the courts in the state have a tremendous backlog and cannot hear the cases on a timely basis or is it because the child welfare agency is not making an effort to begin these proceedings in a timely manner ? the regulation provides that for states not found in substantial conformity , a second full cfsr is to begin two years after the date hhs approves the state's pip . however , hhs has since determined that state performance may not be reasonably re - reviewed until at least one year following the completion of its pip . appendix b. overview of state performance on outcomes , systems , and national standards this appendix includes three tables that summarize state performance in the initial round of child and family services reviews . tables included are — table b - 1 . state performance on outcomes in the initial child and family services review table b - 2 . state performance on the national standards in the initial child and family services review table b - 3 . state performance on systems in the initial child and family services review appendix c. state performance on outcomes assessed in the initial child and family services review this appendix contains a summary table showing aggregate state performance on the case reviews along with detailed tables showing , for each state and each outcome , how many cases were found to have substantially achieved , partially achieved and not addressed or achieved a given outcome . individual state performance on the national standards is also shown for the two outcomes where these standards were a part of determining the state's overall compliance . tables included are — table c - 1 . performance ratings for applicable cases reviewed in the initial child and family services review table c - 2 . safety outcome 1: children are first and foremost protected from abuse and neglect table c - 3 . safety outcome 2: children are safely maintained in their own homes whenever possible and appropriate table c - 4 . permanency outcome 1: children have permanence and stability in their living situation table c - 5 . permanence outcome 2: the continuity of family relationships and connections is preserved for children table c - 6 . well - being outcome 1: families have enhanced capacity to meet their needs of their children table c - 7 .