in other major industries , the results are mixed . the manufacturing sector presents a similar picture . during the decades of the 1990s and the 2000s , manufacturing production experienced a slow decline as a share of u.s. parent company gross product , falling from 53% of total output in 1994 , to 39.2% in 2010 , reflecting the slowdown in the rate of growth in the u.s. economy and the decline overall in the share of the u.s. economy devoted to the manufacturing sector . after the turnaround in u.s. economic growth in 2003 , the share of output arising from the manufacturing sector rose to 45.7% in 2005 among u.s. parent companies , although the manufacturing sector continued to slide as a share of overall u.s. gross product and as a share of gross product of multinational firms . within the u.s. economy , u.s. multinational corporations ( mncs ) rank among the largest u.s. firms . according to data collected by the commerce department's bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) , when american parent companies and their foreign affiliates are compared by the size structure of employment classes , 40% of the more than 2,000 u.s. parent companies employ more than 2,499 persons each . these large parent firms account for 95% of the total number of people employed by u.s. mncs . employment abroad is even more concentrated among the largest foreign affiliates of u.s. parent firms: the largest 2% of the affiliates account for 90% of affiliate employment . another concern some observers have expressed about u.s. direct investment abroad is that as u.s. parent companies shift jobs abroad , they also transfer economic production abroad , thereby permanently replacing u.s. domestic production with foreign production . this effect would be partially muted by foreigners investing in the united states . a large share of foreign direct investment in the united states reflects foreign acquisitions of existing u.s. firms . in general , such acquisitions are not characterized as creating new jobs , but they may well sustain u.s. employment and production and potentially prevent job losses . over time , there is bound to be some shifting of jobs and economic activities within the u.s. economy and between economies as part of the overall structural changes that occur within such dynamic economies as the u.s. economy . such shifts in employment would continue to occur even in the absence of foreign investment . in addition , such shifting occurs as a result of greater economic specialization both within countries and between countries . as table 6 indicates , u.s. parent companies had a gross product , or total u.s. output , of $2.9 trillion in 2010 , representing 68% of the total output of u.s. multinational companies , compared with a gross product of their majority - owned foreign affiliates of $1.2 trillion . as the u.s. economy expanded rapidly in the last half of the 1990s through 2001 , u.s. parent companies performed better than their overseas affiliates and increased their share of total multinational company gross product from 74.6% in 1995 to 76% in 2001 .