appendix a . what the defense authorization and appropriations bills cover congress provides funding for national defense programs in several annual appropriations measures , the largest of which is the defense appropriations bill . congress also acts every year on a national defense authorization bill , which authorizes programs funded in several regular appropriations measures . the authorization bill addresses defense programs in almost precisely the same level of detail as the defense - related appropriations , and congressional debate about major defense policy and funding issues often occurs mainly in action on the authorization . the annual defense appropriations bill provides funds for military activities of the department of defense ( dod ) , including pay and benefits of military personnel , operation and maintenance of weapons and facilities , weapons procurement , and research and development , as well as for other purposes . most of the funding in the bill is for programs administered by the department of defense , though the bill also provides ( 1 ) relatively small , unclassified amounts for the central intelligence agency retirement fund and intelligence community management , ( 2 ) classified amounts for national intelligence activities administered by the national intelligence director , by the cia , and by other agencies as well as by dod , and ( 3 ) very small amounts for some other agencies . at the beginning of the 109 th congress , the house appropriations committee undertook a substantial reorganization that removed the defense health program , environmental restoration programs , and military facilities maintenance accounts from the jurisdiction of the defense appropriations subcommittee and placed them under the jurisdiction of the newly - named military quality of life and veterans affairs subcommittee . the senate appropriations committee subsequently adopted a reorganization plan that kept the same accounts within the defense appropriations bill , though it assigned military construction and veterans affairs programs to a renamed subcommittee on military construction and veterans affairs . this report will continue to track funding levels of the programs moved out of the defense appropriations bill by the house , as they still fall within both the department of defense and overall national defense budget functions . several other appropriations bills also provide funds for national defense activities of dod and other agencies . this report does not generally track congressional action on defense - related programs in these other appropriations bills , except for a discussion of action on some department of energy nuclear weapons programs in the energy and water appropriations bill . appendix b. overview of the administration request on february 7 , 2005 , the administration released its fy2006 federal budget request . the request includes $441.8 billion in new budget authority for national defense , of which $421.1 billion is for military activities of the department of defense ( dod ) , $17.5 billion for atomic energy defense activities of the department of energy , and $3.2 billion for defense - related activities of other agencies ( see table b - 1 ) . the fy2006 request does not include funding for ongoing military operations in iraq , afghanistan , and elsewhere . on february 14 , 2005 , the administration submitted a supplemental appropriations request for fy2005 that included $74.9 billion for dod .