ambassador . regardless of the reasoning behind them , most observers expect bilateral relations to remain tense , at least in the short to medium term . the morales administration has speculated that the positive comments made by the obama state department spokesperson following the constitutional referendum might reflect a willingness to re - visit the relationship in the near future . by the late 1990s , bolivia , like peru , was considered a counternarcotics success story and a close u.s. ally in the fight against illegal narcotics . as aggressive coca eradication programs in bolivia resulted in significant reductions in illegal coca production , the bulk of u.s. concern ( and counternarcotics funding ) shifted to neighboring colombia . at that time , some argued that bolivia's earlier significant gains in reducing illegal coca production could be threatened by any successes in controlling production in colombia through a "balloon effect," in which coca production shifts to other areas with less law enforcement presence . those warnings appear to have some merit as , according to the state department , coca cultivation in bolivia increased 17% in 2003 , 6% in 2004 , and 8% in 2005 . these findings , and the social discontent that has resulted from forced eradication , have prompted some critics to question the efficacy of existing counternarcotics programs in bolivia and across south america . bush administration officials maintain that it is vital that governments in latin america continue to combat the cultivation of coca in order to help stem the flow of illicit narcotics to the united states . many u.s. officials were seriously concerned that the level of drug cooperation from bolivia would lessen following the december 2005 election of evo morales . morales was a coca growers union leader who had been extremely critical of u.s. drug policy . at first , some u.s. officials expressed a willingness to engage in a dialogue with the morales government on how to fight drug processing and trafficking while allowing some level of coca cultivation for traditional uses . this willingness has been replaced by increasing frustration on the part of the u.s. government with bolivia's counternarcotics efforts . the state department found that the chapare agreement , rather than contributing to reductions in coca cultivation , actually "undercut the government of bolivia's commitment to its forced eradication policy and resulted in less eradication in 2005. . u.s. officials are wary of president morales' december 2006 policy to allow more coca to be grown in order to satisfy demand for traditional coca usage and coca - based products for export . the state department asserts that "many suspect [that traditional coca usage] has declined as bolivian society has urbanized. in september 2007 , president bush expressed concern about the expanded coca cultivation in bolivia that occurred in 2006 despite the morales government's eradication efforts . figures from the united nations office of drugs and crime ( unodc ) showed that the area under coca cultivation in bolivia increased by 5% in 2007 ( as compared to a 27% increase in colombia ) .