app . 2405 ( j ) ) ( hereafter "eaa" ) . ( 14 ) under terms of thatsection , exports to libya of goods or technology require a validated license , and there is otherwisea presumption of denial of licenses for items that the secretary of state determines could make asignificant contribution to the country's military potential or could enhance the country's ability tosupport acts of international terrorism . the secretary is further required to notify congress inadvance of issuing any validated license . section 6 ( j ) ( 4 ) states that the secretary's designation maynot be rescinded unless the president submits to congress one of two possible reports . the firstwould certify that ( i ) there has been a fundamental change in the leadership and policies of thegovernment ; ( ii ) the government is not supporting acts of international terrorism ; and ( iii ) thegovernment has provided assurances that it will not support acts of international terrorism in thefuture . the second option available to the president would be to certify , at least 45 days before theproposed rescission would take effect , that ( i ) the government concerned has not provided anysupport for international terrorism during the preceding six - month period ; and ( ii ) the governmentconcerned has provided assurances that it will not support acts of international terrorism in thefuture . similar language is contained in section 40 of the arms export control act ( 22 u.s.c.2780 ) ( hereafter "aeca" ) , and the list maintained by the secretary of state under section 6 ( j ) of theeaa is generally understood to apply to both sections of law . the aeca states the terms underwhich government - to - government and commercial sales or transactions of defense articles anddefense services may be conducted . unlike section 6 ( j ) , however , section 40 ( f ) ( 2 ) ( b ) states a meansfor congress to block a rescission of the sanction if it chooses to keep sanctions in place . alsounlike the eaa , section 40 ( g ) authorizes the president to waive the prohibitions with respect to aspecific transaction if " ( 1 ) the president determines that the transaction is essential to the nationalsecurity interests of the united states ; and ( 2 ) not less than 15 days prior to the proposed transaction,the president...." consults with congress and submits a report detailing the proposedtransaction . ( 15 ) section 40a of the arms export control act ( 22 u.s.c . 2781 ) prohibits the providing ofdefense articles and defense services to a "foreign country that the president determines and certifiesto congress...is not cooperating fully with united states antiterrorism efforts. section 40a requiresan annual country list , on which libya has been named since the language was first added to theaeca in 1996 . ( 16 ) thepresident may waive application of section 40a "with respect to a specific transaction if thepresident determines that the transaction is important to the national interests of the united states. if libya were removed from the lists required under section 6 ( j ) , eaa and section 40a,aeca , a substantial body of economic sanctions imposed against that country could then beaddressed .