, repatriation authority ) . in granting the fpi these authorities , congress expressed concern that inmates did not have access to meaningful work opportunities . businesses can also choose to produce only one or a handful of products and services , which allows the business to effectively compete against other business by learning how to efficiently produce its product or service . even if congress removed these requirements , the fpi argues it would still be operating with several competitive disadvantages , such as using a lower - skilled workforce , frequent turnover in employees , and operating a business in a correctional environment . however , the fpi would still have some competitive advantages , such as being able to pay inmates a lower wage and having some labor costs ( eg , health care ) covered by the bop . in addition , there would likely be the concern , and one that is central to the debate over the fpi , that if congress lifted some of the current restrictions on the fpi's operations , the fpi would control the market for some products . the debate surrounding the fpi often centers on two competing visions of what it does — is it a business vying for federal contracts or is it a rehabilitative program for prisoners ? the bop considers the fpi to be a rehabilitative program , not a business . as harley lappin , former director of the bop , stated in his testimony during a hearing on the fpi: the fpi program's purpose is not to be a business that generates revenue . rather , it is a correctional program charged with the goal of providing meaningful work opportunities for federal offenders... . this is commonly referred to as the "mandatory source clause. the fpi may grant waivers to executive agencies if its price exceeds the current market price for comparable products . federal agencies , however , are not required to procure services provided by the fpi . opponents of the fpi argue that providing work opportunities for federal inmates has come at the cost of jobs for law - abiding citizens . further , critics contend that if inmate labor is allowed to displace private sector workers it can cost the federal government revenues it might collect from corporate and / or individual taxes . in addition , competition from inmate labor might shrink the private sector job market in fields where inmates are learning their skills while participating in the fpi program , thereby limiting the ability of inmates to find employment after being released . any future deliberation about the scope of the fpi's activities will probably focus on the same policy question posed in past debates: how can the fpi continue to provide work opportunities for inmates while minimizing the effect on the private sector ? two current programs could expand employment opportunities for inmate workers while , in theory , having minimal effect on private sector workers . the fpi has started a work - sharing initiative , by which two inmates work part - time to fill a single full - time position . the initiative was "intended to increase the number of inmate workers employed by the fpi while minimizing the impact on factory efficiency and costs.