sec . this section specifies the final criteria that areto be used by the secretary of defense in calculating the "military value" ofinstallations considered for closure or realignment and "other criteria" that thesecretary shall consider in making his recommendations . previous law establishedseveral criteria for the evaluation of military value and "special considerations" thatare to be included "at a minimum" in the writing of the secretary's recommendations.the act's language appears to remove some flexibility in the ability of the secretaryto choose those factors he deems relevant to the calculation . previous law specifiedthat military value is the primary consideration in creating the recommended bracaction list . the act's language requires the secretary to "give priority" to militaryvalue . would you recommend a veto if adefense bill came to the president that had a two - year delay in brac ? rumsfeld: yes , i certainly would . itwould be a terrible thing , senator . ( 23 ) press accounts on the deliberations of the conference committee cited theissue of brac delay as one of three or four most significant issues confronting theconferees . ( 24 ) conference report , ronald reagan national defenseauthorization act for fiscal year 2005 ( h.r.4200 ) . the conference report for the ronaldreagan national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2005 does not delay theimplementation of the 2005 brac round , but several sections in the bill do addressbrac issues: sec . the secretary of defense is required to submitan updated force - structure plan and infrastructure inventory not later than march 15,2005 . existing law states that these are to be submitted along with the department'sfiscal year 2006 budget justification material . the section goes on to state that the "final selection criteria specified in thissection shall be the only criteria to be used , along with the force - structure plan andinfrastructure inventory ... in making recommendations for the closure or realignmentof military installations inside the united states under this part in 2005. . sec . existing law authorizes the secretary of defenseto place a military installation in an inactive status as an alternative to closure orrealignment . the act's language repeals this authority . sec . previous law required the commission to givethe secretary of defense a 15-day warning before adding an installation to his list ofrecommendations for closure or realignment and demanded that seven of the ninecommissioners then vote for the addition . the act's language made the samerequirement applicable to commission consideration for adding an installation to thesecretary's list of recommendations and requires that at least two members of thebase realignment and closure commission visit any installation for which thecommission intends to add a closure or realignment recommendation not made bythe secretary of defense or to expand a realignment that the secretary hasrecommended . military housing privatization budget authoritycap . in the late 1990s , congress granted to the department ofdefense specific "alternative authorities" by which the department could enter into"public - private partnerships" with private enterprise . ( 25 ) thesepartnerships are corporations that assume responsibility for the construction,maintenance , and operation of housing for military personnel on , or adjacent to,military installations . to date , the military services have negotiated contracts for 32separate projects that will create or refurbish more than 61,000 military familyhousing units .