the court , however , disagreed . entitlement authority has been defined as "authority to make payments ( including loans and grants ) for which budget authority is not provided in advance by appropriation acts to any person or government if , under the provisions of the law containing such authority , the government is obligated to make the payments to persons or governments who meet the requirements established by law. budget authority is the authority provided by law to enter into obligations that will result in immediate or future outlays involving federal government funds . burnett v. teller , 107 u.s. 64 ( 1882 ) . the court in the stouper case added that benefits under the civil service retirement act are similar to those under the social security act ; they are not based on an employee's contributions to the retirement fund , but instead on the employee's earnings record and years of service . it was noted that the retirement act pays higher benefits when a deceased employee is survived by a widow or widower and children , than when he or she is survived only by a widow or widower even though the employee's contribution to the civil service retirement and disability fund had been the same in either case . "we conclude that an employee has no right under the retirement act based on contractual annuity principles , and hold that the appellant had no vested right to the disability annuity which was terminated. the u.s. supreme court also has made clear that the payment of social security taxes conveys no contractual rights to social security benefits . in 1937 the high court upheld the constitutionality of the social security act in helvering v. davis . in doing so , the court held that the social security program is not an insurance program . the court noted , "the proceeds of both employee and employer taxes are to be paid into the treasury like any other internal revenue generally , and are not earmarked in any way. the court , in essence , deferred to congress on the question of which welfare schemes fall within the ambit of the constitution's general welfare clause . later , in flemming , the court rejected any comparison of social security with insurance or an annuity: it is apparent that the noncontractual interest of an employee covered by the act cannot be soundly analogized to that of the holder of an annuity , whose right to benefits is bottomed on his contractual premium payments . the absence of contractual rights extends to government pensions in general . in dodge v. board education , a retired school teacher challenged the constitutionality of a state statute that reduced her retirement annuity from $1,500 to $500 . the statute in effect when she retired said that , "each person so retired ... shall be paid the sum of fifteen hundred ( $1500 ) annually and for life from the date of such retirement.