105 stat . this omnibus legislation provides expanded enforcement authority for federal banking regulators , including prompt corrective regulatory action to enforce capital standards on depository institutions to ensure institutional safety and soundness . it has meant greater uniformity of chartering , regulation , and supervision of both commercial banks and savings associations . it provides for greater federal supervision of state banks and state savings associations through the federal deposit insurance corporation . 108 stat . this legislation provides the authority and sets the framework for bank holding companies to acquire banks outside their home states and for banks to acquire branches on an interstate basis . it overrode long - standing state prohibitions against nationwide banking , which had already been weakening via regional interstate banking compacts . 113 stat . this legislation authorizes financial holding companies and eliminates many state and federal barriers to affiliation among banks , securities firms , insurance companies , and other financial service providers . it provides for functional regulation by activity and thus specifies , for example , conditions under which securities activities of banking organizations are regulated by securities regulators . it sets the framework for insurance activities by banking organizations , prevents the creation of new "unitary" savings and loan holding companies mixing banking and commerce , modifies the membership criteria and capital structure of the federal home loan bank system , sets a framework for potentially establishing a national association of registered [insurance] agents and brokers , requires certain disclosures about automatic teller machine ( atm ) fees , establishes sunshine ( disclosure ) requirements for entities involving community reinvestment act contracts with banking organizations , and includes various banking regulatory reforms . its privacy title mandates that financial institutions disclose their privacy policies ; requires them to protect the security and integrity of non - public personally identifiable information ; and criminalizes obtaining customer information of financial institutions by fraud . congress has designed this legislation to prevent terrorists and others from using the u.s. financial system anonymously to move funds obtained from or destined for illegal activity . it authorizes and requires additional record keeping and reporting by financial institutions and closer scrutiny of accounts held for foreign banks and of private banking conducted for foreign persons . it requires financial institutions to establish anti - money laundering programs and imposes various standards on informal money transmitting businesses . it amends criminal anti - money laundering statutes and procedures for forfeitures in money laundering cases and requires further cooperation between financial institutions and government agencies in combating money laundering . it thus increases federal scrutiny of individual financial transactions and extends it to certain previously unexamined domestic and international transmitters of money , when in the national interest . following the collapse of several major corporations , including enron corporation , congress acted to protect investors and improve the reliability of corporate disclosures required under the securities laws . this legislation establishes the public company oversight board to regulate public accounting firms that audit publicly traded companies . it prohibits such firms from providing other services to such companies contemporaneously with the audit .