a litigant could also challenge the constitutionality of the base closure act itself . for example,in national federation , plaintiffs unsuccessfully argued that the 1988 base closure act violated thenon - delegation doctrine and the separation of powers doctrine . ( 53 ) however , the baseclosure act has not yet been held unconstitutional by any federal appellate courts . a brief summaryof the major steps in the process is illustrated in figure 1 on the following page . in addition toestablishing the basic framework for the brac process , the base closure act sets forth a varietyof selection criteria and mandatory procedures , such as the requirements that certain information bedisclosed and that certain meetings be made open to the public this report analyzes whether judicial review is available when plaintiffs allege that thedepartment of defense ( dod ) , the independent brac commission ( commission ) , or the presidenthas either ( 1 ) failed to comply with procedural requirements of the base closure act or ( 2 ) failedto properly apply specified selection criteria in making brac determinations . congress couldemploy numerous strategies to attempt to "enforce" the base closure act . ( 4 ) however , this report focuseson the effect a failure to comply would have if members of congress or other parties sued based onan alleged failure to comply with the act's provisions . ( 5 ) in particular , the report synthesizes key federal court decisions thataddress three potential bases for judicial review of brac - related actions: the administrativeprocedure act ( apa ) , the base closure act , and the u.s. constitution . figure 1: the brac process ( 6 ) additional crs reports addressing a variety of brac issues are also available . the administrative procedure act ( apa ) provides for judicial review of "final agencyaction," ( 8 ) unless either oftwo exceptions applies: ( 1 ) when a statute precludes judicial review or ( 2 ) when "agency action iscommitted to agency discretion by law. the dalton court distinguished between two types of potential claims: ( 1 ) claims that thepresident exceeded his statutory authority and ( 2 ) claims challenging the constitutionality of thepresident's actions . ( 38 ) the court stated that not every case of ultra vires conduct by an executive official was ipso facto unconstitutional . ( 39 ) in dalton , the lower court had held that the president would be acting in excess of his statutoryauthority under the base closure act if the secretary or the commission had failed to comply withstatutorily - required procedures during previous stages of the brac process . ( 40 ) on appeal , the supremecourt characterized this claim as a statutory claim - - not as a constitutional claim . ( 41 ) the court assumed arguendo that some statutory claims against the president could bejudicially reviewable apart from the apa . ( 42 ) however , it stated that statutory claims are not judiciallyreviewable apart from the apa "when the statute in question commits the decision to the discretionof the president. ( 43 ) according to the court , the base closure act did not limit the president's discretion in anyway .