but there are a number of practical complications that make constructing such an index difficult . with a given level of income that constrains their choices , consumers decide how to spend their money based on the satisfaction the various available goods and services yield . consumers are assumed to spend their income in such a way as to get the most satisfaction possible within the limitations of their budget . any indicator of the cost of living must be based on what consumers actually spend because utility cannot be directly measured . toward that end , it asked the committee on national statistics of the national research council ( nrc ) to convene a panel of experts to look into the conceptual , measurement , and other statistical issues that arise when constructing cost - of - living indexes . in its 2002 report , the panel endorsed continuing to use the cpi for tax indexation , which began in 1985 as required by the economic recovery tax act of 1981 . one of the difficulties in estimating changes in the cost of living is that consumer spending patterns change continuously and for different reasons . spending patterns change because of changing tastes and preferences ( eg , for meals in restaurants rather than meals prepared at home ) . spending patterns also change due to changes in relative prices . as prices change over time , consumers will tend to buy more of those goods and services whose prices are rising slower than average and fewer of those goods and services whose prices are rising faster than average . so - called substitution bias causes the standard cpi to overstate the effect of inflation on consumer well - being . many others have released similar proposals in recent years . an amendment offered by representatives cooper and latourette as a substitute to the house's fy2013 budget resolution would have relied on the recommendations in the simpson - bowles report to establish the following year's budget . although the bipartisan amendment failed on march 28 , 2012 , its being offered suggests that interest in changing to the c - cpi - u to curb the growth of the budget deficit remains among some members of congress . in april 2013 , a modified version of the chained cpi - u proposal was included in president obama's fiscal year 2014 budget . one reason besides slowing the growth in the budget deficit for changing to the c - cpi - u is that the standard cpi has not been without criticism as a measure of change in the cost of living . a true cost - of - living index would measure the change in income required for consumers to maintain a constant level of "utility" ( satisfaction ) . the bls , which produces the standard cpi , has strived to construct a better measure of changes in the cost of living .