sec . funds go to the environmental protection agency . sec . funds go to the national highway traffic safety administration in the department of transportation . sec . [plus up to $150 million per fiscal year for fy2004 - fy2013 from federal oil and gas leases issued under the outer continentalshelf lands act ( ocs ) and the mineral leasing act would be deposited into the fund . seq. ) would be amended to create the office ofindian energy policy and programs at the department of energy . changes made by s. 2095 are in bold . source: table prepared by crs using the text of the conference agreement of h.r . table notes: this table shows funding that would be authorized including loans but not loan guarantees under the conference agreement for h.r . the section number in the far left hand column is location in the bill of the authorizing language . when an activity is described a separatesection of the bill from where it is authorized , it is indicated in parentheses after the program title in column two . the fourth column from the right , labeled "fy2004 - fy2008," provides a five - year subtotal for each line . this column has been included sothat amounts may be compared to similar five - year subtotals shown in the authorization tables for the house and senate bills in crs report rl32033 , omnibus energy legislation ( h.r . 6 ) : side - by - side comparison of non - tax provisions . items that have been changed in s. 2095 are shown in bold . in the respective column , the old amount is shown in brackets . in theendnotes , details that were dropped from s. 2095 are placed in brackets and new information is in bold . such sums as may be necessary . lump sum . no fiscal year indicated . endnotes: 1 . revenues fluctuate year - to - year as a result of oil andgas prices and lease sales. this provision was dropped in s. 2095 . sec . for information onthese sections , see crs report rl32042 , energy tax incentives in h.r . 6: theconference agreement as compared with the house bill and senate amendment . section 1601: study on inventory of petroleum and natural gas storage . in the state of the union address on january 28 , 2003 , president george w. bush announced a newhydrogen fuel initiative to promote research and development on hydrogen and fuel cells . alongwith the freedomcar initiative ( announced in january 2002 ) , the administration is seeking a totalof $1.8 billion through fy2008 . this request includes approximately $720 million in new funding . the conference report would authorize $2.15 billion over the same time frame , slightly higher thanthe president's request . the house version of h.r . 6 would have authorized fundingat the president's requested level ( $1.8 billion ) , while the senate version would have authorizedsignificantly less ( $420 million ) . however , before it was replaced with the senate version of h.r.6 , s. 14 would have authorized nearly double the president's request ( $3.0billion ) . in addition to the above provisions on funding , the senate version of h.r .