an overview of the relative authorities in each zone follows . in light of the recent publication of the revised draft framework for developing the national system of marine protected areas and the introduction of h.r . 21 in the 110 th congress , it is important to understand the statutory and regulatory background for the designation of mpas . the executive order does not clarify where ( i.e . which zone of u.s. jurisdiction ) mpas can be created or what laws authorize their creation . it should be noted , however , that executive order 13,158 does not confer new designation or management authority on the federal agencies , stating that "[e]ach federal agency whose authorities provide for the establishment or management of mpas shall take appropriate actions to enhance or expand existing mpas and establish or recommend , as appropriate , new mpas. additionally , the order states that when designating mpas , federal agencies must "act in accordance with international law and with presidential proclamation 5928 of december 27 , 1988 , on the territorial sea of the united state of america , presidential proclamation 5030 of march 10 , 1983 , on the exclusive economic zone of the united states of america , and presidential proclamation 7219 of september 2 , 1999 , on the contiguous zone of the united states. in september of 2006 , the national marine protected areas center , a division of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration , issued its draft framework for developing the national system of marine protected areas . after an extensive comment period , the national marine protected areas center produced a revised version of this document in march of 2008 ( referred to herein as the draft framework ) . the draft framework provides guidance for a collaborative effort among federal , state , tribal , and local governments and other stakeholders to develop an effective national system of marine protected areas , building on existing programs . however , as the draft framework acknowledges , "[n]either the [mpa] national system nor [executive order 13,158] establish any new legal authorities to designate or manage mpas , nor do they alter any existing federal , state , local , or tribal mpa laws or programs . each mpa or program that participates in the national system will continue to be independently managed by its respective agency or agencies , as will any new sites that eventually may be established. as the draft framework states , the new national system is intended to be a "system of sites and systems" coordinating the various existing programs with legal authority to establish mpas . this report analyzes various sources of legal authority to assess their possible application to marine environments and will outline the protection and management system each might support . international law recognizes that coastal nations have legal authority to manage certain ocean resources within their jurisdiction . the 1982 united nations convention on the law of the sea ( unclos iii ) recognizes general zones within which signatory nations may regulate exploitation of marine resources .