chapter 35 ) . the pra provided that oira would be headed by an administrator , and designated the oira administrator as the "principal advisor to the director on federal information policy. the act also said that the director of omb "shall delegate to the ( oira ) administrator the authority to administer all functions under this chapter. specific areas of responsibility in the pra that were assigned to the director ( and later delegated to oira ) included information policy , information collection request clearance and paperwork control , statistical policy and coordination , records management , privacy , and automatic data processing and telecommunications . with regard to paperwork reduction , the act generally prohibited agencies from conducting or sponsoring a collection of information until they had submitted their proposed information collection requests to oira and the office had approved those requests . at various times in its history , certain members of congress have attempted to reduce funding for oira in order to signal congressional displeasure with the office's actions . other observers , however , believe that oira's funding should be increased , not reduced , arguing that a relatively small amount of additional resources for oira could yield substantial benefits . at other times , proposed legislation has been introduced designating how oira staff should be used . for example , in the 108 th congress , a provision in h.r . 2432 as originally introduced would have required the omb director to "assign , at a minimum , the equivalent of at least 2 full time staffers to review the federal information collection burden on the public imposed by the internal revenue service. the internal revenue service accounts for more than 80% of the estimated paperwork burden , but oira indicated that it devoted less than one fte to reviewing the agency's paperwork requests ( because much of the burden is mandated by statute ) . the bush administration objected to this specific direction of oira staff , so the sponsors of the bill agreed to delete this requirement before it was approved by the house of representatives in may 2004 . although several of the statutes that oira helps to administer include rules issued by independent regulatory agencies ( eg , the pra , the regulatory flexibility act , the congressional review act , and the data quality act ) , the executive orders that have established regulatory review within oira have explicitly excluded rules issued by those agencies . some observers have suggested that this limitation be lifted , arguing that independent regulatory agencies issue regulations that have a significant impact on the economy ( about $230 billion per year according to oira ) but their rules often contain little quantitative information on regulatory costs and benefits . those opposed to this expansion in oira's duties point out that independent regulatory agencies were established to be relatively independent of the president , and inclusion of their rules under oira's would be counter to this purpose . in response , proponents argue that independent regulatory agencies' rules are already reviewed for purposes such as paperwork clearance and ensuring that data quality requirements are met , so examining the substance of the rules is just an extension of those reviews .