known shipper programs . the transportationsecurity administration uses a program that differentiates trusted shippers that are known to a freightforwarder or air carrier through prior business dealings , from unknown shippers . under such aprogram , shipments from unknown sources are identified and placed under closer scrutiny . ( 63 ) laser visa ( mexican border crossing card ) . mexican nationals applying for admission to the united states as visitors are required to obtain avisa or hold a mexican border crossing card , now referred to as the "laser visa. the laser visa isused by citizens of mexico to gain short - term entry ( up to six months ) for business or tourism intothe united states . it may be used for multiple entries and is good for ten years . under currentpractices , mexican nationals in possession of a laser visa will be exempt from the requirements ofthe u.s. - visit program , thus allowing for a speedy passage into the united states . north american security perimeter . as theunited states moves forward with implementing much of the security requirements in the patriotact and the border security act , many fear that the tighter security requirements will impede theflow of people across the border . some critics are advocating for a more open border . the ideal ofa north american perimeter security concept has been around for several years and the basicpremise of a north american perimeter security would move inspections and enforcement activitiesaway from the border . such a concept would essentially eliminate barriers to the movement ofpeople ( and goods ) across the shared border . 107-173 called for a study to examine thefeasibility of establishing a north american perimeter security program that would provide forincreased cooperation with foreign governments on questions related to border security . the northamerican perimeter security , however , would require the harmonization of united states andcanadian immigration and refugee policies , among other things . this report isthe second in the series . the final report is crs report rl32841 , border and transportationsecurity: possible new directions and policy options . carrier consultant program ( ccp ) . sometimesreferred to as prescreening , the ccp was originally developed in the former ins . working withofficials from the department of state , cbp deploys officers to work with air carriers to preemptattempts to use those carriers to gain illegal entry into the united states using fraudulent documents . in doing so , ccp officials work towards eliminating the arrival of improperly documented aliens ata u.s. port of entry prior to their departure from the foreign port . at domestic airports , ccp officialswork with airlines in identifying any illegal or suspect activity involving the carrier , primarily relatedto the use of fraudulent documents . while the goal of ccp is to reduce illegal migration , theprogram has received heightened attention in this post 9 / 11 era . i - 68 canadian border boat landing program / outlying areareporting station ( oars ) . the i - 68 canadian border boat landing programpermits enrolled participants admission to the united states by small pleasure boats without aninspection . the program requires applicants ( 56 ) to appear in person for an inspection and interview .