shaheen i . the shaheen i is a solid propellant , single warhead missile reportedly developed by dr. samar mubarak mund's national developmentcomplex . many analysts consider the shaheen i a scaled - up version of the chinese m - 11 missile . the shaheen i has a reported range of 600 km , an accuracy of 200 m , and can carry a 750 kg , 35 ktnuclear warhead or conventional or chemical munitions . prithvi i . the prithvi i , like all prithvi variants , is a single - staged , liquid propellant , ( 100 ) singlewarhead short - range ballistic missile . the prithvi i isused exclusively by the indian army and is reported to have high explosive ( he ) penetration,submunitions ( incendiary and anti - personnel / anti - armor ) , and fuel air explosive and possiblychemical warheads . ( 101 ) following indiannuclear tests in 1998 , some experts believe that indiadeveloped a number of small yield nuclear warheads for the prithvi i with 1 , 5 , 12 or 20 kt yieldswith the warhead weight estimated at about 250 kg . first test fired in february 1988 , india hasconducted 16 known launch tests of the prithvi series as of march 2003 . ( 102 ) in service with the armysince 1994 , the prithvi i is believed capable of striking approximately a quarter of pakistan,including islamabad and other major cities . ( 103 ) prithvi ii . prithvi ii missiles are reportedly used by the indian air force to attack enemy airfields and to support the indian army on the battlefield . some experts believe that efforts are underway to adapt the full range of prithvi i warheads forprithvi ii use . ( 104 ) first test fired in january1996 , the prithvi ii is assessed to be capable of hittingalmost half of pakistan including almost all critical military targets and all major cities . ( 105 ) prithvi iii . the prithvi iii is currently under development and is not yet believed to be operational . it is believed to have a range of 350 km anda payload of 750 kg and may also have either a new liquid or solid propulsion system . some reportssuggest that india may install a global positioning system ( gps ) guidance system that could reducethe missile's cep to 25 m. agni i . the agni i is a two - staged , intermediate - range , single warhead ballistic missile . the agni i is believed to have a minimumrange of 500 km and a maximum range of 2,500 km with a cep of 100 m. some analysts believethat india has developed a 45 kt nuclear warhead for the agni i and possibly a 200 kt warhead . the agni i has a separating reentry vehicle ( rv ) that reportedly has an altitude control system andaerodynamic maneuver fins designed to make intercept from ballistic missile defenses more difficult . the agni i , considered a technology demonstrator and not a developed weapons system by the indiangovernment , has undergone three test flights between 1994 and 2002 . agni ii .