this report nextreviews these issues . given the wide recognition that intellectual property and the open source movement are ofgrowing importance in the u.s. computer industry , ( 115 ) the relationship between these fields is thesubject of increasing attention . the policymakers of the 108th congress have addressed the opensource movement with respect to cybersecurity and other contexts . should congress choose toaddress this area directly , a variety of approaches are available . if the current interface betweenintellectual property rights and the open source movement is considered satisfactory , then no actionneed be taken . indeed , growing awareness that intellectual property and open source softwarelicenses can sometimes conflict may lead to more sophisticated treatment of intellectual property bymembers of the open source community , as well as continued refinement of the governing law in thecourts . another approach is to provide governmental assistance to the open source movement in identifying intellectual properties that might bear upon a particular open source software product . for example , the u.s. patent and trademark office could , upon request by a recognized open sourcesoftware publisher or organization , conduct a search of pending patent applications and issuedpatents in order to determine whether these patents might bear upon a particular open sourcesoftware program . this capability would allow members of the open source community to becomemore fully informed of intellectual property rights . it should be noted , however , that a number ofpatent research firms already exist that could conduct such a search for a fee , at least with respectto issued patents and published patent applications . ( 116 ) more far - reaching legal reforms are also possible . for example , one recognized source of legal uncertainty for the software industry concerns the enforceability of open source licenses . ( 117 ) alegislative statement concerning the status of these licenses in terms of the federal preemptiondoctrine might allow software firms to make decisions concerning research , investment , and othercommercial activities with more confidence . the allegedly viral nature of open source software presents another source of concern . one possible legislative response is to allow a proprietary software publisher that discovers its productcontains an open source component a fixed period of time to eliminate the open source component . if the publisher removes the open source component within the stipulated grace period , then thesoftware would remain proprietary . any possible legal reform would be well - advised to recognize that the u.s. software industry is increasingly characterized both by rapid innovation and by a distinct community of knowledgeableusers who wish to "opt out" of the intellectual property system . the possibility of intellectualproperty rights , and their attendant license fees and royalties , may provide a significant incentive forfirms to innovate and to distribute software . on the other hand , some computer users believe thatthese incentives are unnecessary , and further hope to maintain a non - proprietary environment ofsoftware distribution and development . ( 118 ) these two trends have sometimes led to conflicts betweenexclusive intellectual property rights and open source software . striking a balance betweenpromoting innovation , on one hand , and accommodating the demands of software developers andusers , on the other , forms an important component of contemporary software policy .