this remains the case today . guatemala's per capita gdp is $3,630 , in the mid - range internationally . its total gdp , $20.5 billion , is the largest in central america . yet the world banksays data suggest that poverty is higher in guatemala than in other central american countries . estimates of the portion of guatemala's population living in poverty vary: the u.s. statedepartment reports that 80% of guatemalans live in poverty , with two - thirds of that number livingin extreme poverty . the world bank reports that 54% of the population lives in poverty , withindications that poverty has increased slightly in 2001-2002 . ( 9 ) poverty is highest in rural areas andamong the indigenous: 75% of all people living in the countryside live in poverty , and 25% in thiscategory live in extreme poverty . poverty is significantly higher among indigenous people , 76% ofwhom are poor , in contrast to 41% of non - indigenous people . guatemala's gdp for 2001 was $22 billion . gdp growth rate was 3.3% in 2000 , 2.1% in 2001 , and 2.3% in 2002 . low worldwide coffee prices contributed to guatemala's slowed growth over thelast couple of years . despite the downturn in commodity prices , traditional exports such as coffeeand sugar continue to lead guatemala's economic growth . over the last decade , non - traditionalexports , such as assembled clothing , winter fruits and vegetables , furniture , and cut flowers , havegrown dramatically . tourism also has grown , though continued growth may depend on thegovernment's ability to address security issues . problems limiting growth include illiteracy and lowlevels of education , high crime rates , and an inadequate capital market . the 36-year civil war generated social and economic costs . economic growth rates did not fall until the height of the conflict in the 1980s . but cumulatively , from 1960 to 1996 , the war entailedsignificant loss of life , jobs , and productivity , and caused disruption , especially in the hard - hit ruralareas . guatemala's social indicators continue to be among the worst in the hemisphere ; itsmalnutrition rates are among the worst in the world . its infant mortality rate is 43 per 1,000 livebirths , and its under - 5 mortality rate is 58 per 1,000 children . ( 10 ) guatemala's illiteracy rate isextremely high: at 31% , only nicaragua and haiti have worse levels in latin america and thecaribbean . the average level of schooling is an extremely low , 4.3 years ; among the poor it is lessthan two years . schooling is lowest among women , indigenous people , and the rural poor . as aresult of malnutrition , 44% of children under five years of age have stunted growth . drought andlow coffee prices triggered a rural economic crisis beginning in 2001 , which has caused severemalnutrition among the rural poor . throughout the peace accords , there are provisions seeking to reverse the historical exclusion of indigenous peoples and women . in signing them , the guatemalan government agreed toimplement a more inclusive development strategy .