figure 1 . actual unemployment and cbo's estimate of the natural rate,1950-2002 source: congressional budget offic . from the mainstream perspective , the 1970s and 1980s were a period of a rising natural rate,and the 1990s were a period of a falling natural rate . the 1990s decline caught most economists bysurprise . ( 5 ) what couldhave caused the natural rate to fall in the 1990s ? a number of theories have been advanced: ( 6 ) . employment fell for an unprecedented 20 months after the 2001 recession had ended . onepossible reason why is that the natural rate was rising during this time . during a period when thenatural rate was rising , a prolonged sluggish labor market could result regardless of the state of thebusiness cycle . but because the natural rate is a long - run concept , it is difficult to believe the naturalrate could have changed significantly over the past 2â½ years . there has not been any major changein labor market policy during that time , and demographic changes are incremental . if the natural ratehas changed , it would be part of a longer trend that will not be identifiable in the near term . there is another reason why the unemployment rate might have continued to rise for so longrecently related to the natural rate concept . in hindsight , if the natural rate has been higher than suspected in recent years,say 6.0% vs. 5.0% , then the prolonged increase in the unemployment rate over the 2â½ years couldpartly be attributable to the long - term adjustment back towards the natural rate from an unsustainablylow level . in this case , one would expect the unemployment rate to fall once the recovery becamemore robust , but it would fall less than expected . those who argue that the natural rate wasunderestimated in the late 1990s point to the fact that the natural rate averaged 6% - 6.5% in the 1970sand 1980s . to put that figure in perspective , consider that the unemployment rate following the2001 recession would have been considered to be full employment , only attainable near the peak ofthe business cycle , 20 years ago . because the natural rate is a long - run concept , it is too soon to determine which portion , ifany , of the recent increase in the unemployment rate is supply - side driven , and which portion isdemand - driven . but the inflation rate is one piece of evidence to determine whether inadequatedemand or a change in the natural rate is currently driving the rise in unemployment . if the economywas suffering from insufficient demand , the inflation rate should have been falling ; if theunemployment rate was being driven by changes in the labor market , inflation should be unaffected . the core inflation rate , which strips out volatile food and energy prices , fell from 2.6% in 2001 to2.4% in 2002 to 1.4% in 2003 . this indicates that insufficient demand was likely to be at least partof the story behind the rise in the unemployment rate . since 2003 , the unemployment rate has fallen to 5.1% in 2005 and below 5% in 2006 .