figure 2 . appropriations - funded energy conservation measures are the costs of energy conservation measures installed under espcs as favorable as thecosts obtained through competitive sourcing with appropriated funds ? to answer the question , oakridge national laboratory ( ornl ) conducted a cost evaluation comparing energy projectscompleted under espcs with those completed under appropriated funds . ( 20 ) ornl's evaluationconcluded that the "pricing under super - espcs , using a design - build approach negotiated for bestvalue , was as good as the pricing obtained for the appropriations - funded projects in the traditional'bid - to - specification' competitive program. in sum , ornl found that energy conservation measurescompleted under an espc were no more costly than those completed under direct appropriations . conventional espc how do the savings translate in terms of net economic benefit ? in an analysis of 214 federalprojects , using a 7% discount ( interest ) rate , lawrence berkeley national laboratory ( lbnl ) projected $550 million in benefits that would go to the taxpayer . ( 14 ) espc savings projections may or may not be achieved depending upon whether the buildingor facility is fully used after the energy improvement . ( 15 ) if savings were smaller than projected , future operation andmaintenance ( o&m ) spending would need to be larger than projected . the espcs' savings freedup funds that otherwise would have been appropriated for o&m . ( 16 ) though authorized for up to 25 years , espc contract terms have been averaging 14 years inlength . ( 17 ) normally,espc cost savings are used to pay the contractor first and then offset other base operating expensesafter the contract completion . ( 18 ) in an unconventional approach , dod deferred some espcs' costsavings until contract completion to shorten the contract term and accelerate payoff of the energyconservation improvement . these contracts reduced energy consumption but did not reduce the totalcost of operation until contract expiration . although cbo would score such espcs as futurefinancial obligations , the length of the obligation would be reduced , as would the interest chargesthat the esco would pass on to the government ( discussed below ) . the federal market for espcs has produced at least 340 projects valued at approximately$1.6 billion in private sector investments . ( 19 ) in comparison to espcs , $3.17 billion in appropriated funds wasinvested in energy - reducing capital improvements between fy1985 and fy2001.appropriations - funded projects peaked at $288 million in fy1995 and declined to $131 million byfy2001 . figure 2 shows the rate of spending between 1985 and 2001 . are energy conservation measures under appropriated funds more time - consuming thanunder espcs ? based on data for 71 awarded projects , ornl found that super espcs averaged 15months to award the contract and 12 months for design and construction - - 27 months in durationfrom start to finish for an average implementation price of $3.26 million . ( 21 ) based on data for 23energy projects , appropriations - funded projects averaged 63 months in duration . only 12 of the 39ecms studied were ultimately funded ( some projects having more than one ecm ) . how does project financing compare between espcs and appropriations - funded contracts ?