i , ยง8 , cl . the commerce clause ( art . 3 ) of the united states constitution provides that the congress shall have the power to regulate interstate and foreign commerce . the plain meaning of this language might indicate a limited power to regulate commercial trade between persons in one state and persons outside of that state . however , the commerce clause has never been construed quite so narrowly . rather , the clause , along with the economy of the united states , has grown and become more complex . in addition , when congress began to address national social problems , the commerce clause was often cited as the constitutional basis for such legislation . the court in sullivan relied on precedent finding that congress has not only the power to regulate commerce among the states , but also the power to "keep the channels of such commerce free from the transportation of illicit or harmful articles. moreover , the court affirmed that "congress was acting well within its authority to 'make all laws which shall be necessary and proper' to 'regulate commerce ... among the several states.' despite having concluded that under the "rational basis test" congress had acted within its constitutional authority when it enacted the csa and applied it to intrastate possession of marijuana , the court nevertheless had to distinguish lopez and morrison , the court's more recent commerce clause decisions . the court concluded that the csa , unlike the statutes in either lopez ( gun - free school zones act ) or morrison ( violence against women act ) , regulated activity that is "quintessentially economic," therefore , neither lopez or morrison cast any doubts on the constitutionality of the statute . the court specifically rejected the reasoning used by the ninth circuit , concluding that "congress acted rationally in determining that none of the characteristics making up the purported class , whether viewed individually or in the aggregate , compelled an exemption from the csa ; rather , the subdivided class of activities defined by the court of appeals was an essential part of the larger regulatory scheme. in supporting its conclusions , the court noted that , by characterizing marijuana as a "schedule i" narcotic , congress was implicitly finding that it had no medicinal value at all . in addition , the court returned to the fact that medicinal marijuana was a fungible good , thus making it indistinguishable from the recreational versions that congress had clearly intended to regulate . according to the court , to carve out medicinal use as a distinct class of activity , as the ninth circuit had done , would effectively make " any federal regulation ( including quality , prescription , or quantity controls ) of any locally cultivated and possessed controlled substance for any purpose beyond the 'outer limits' of congress'[s] commerce clause authority. under the "instrumentalities of commerce" category , congress may properly make whatever regulations it sees fit for the safety , efficiency , and accessibility of the nationwide transportation and communications networks .