until a 1986 amendment ( p.l . 99-592 ) , workers over the age of 70 were not protected by adea . for older workers , the uc system is a source of income security , just as it is for younger workers . unlike the case of younger workers , however , older workers' uc benefits become a factor in the decision to retire . unlike receiving social security benefits or certain other retirement income where benefits may be permanently reduced , receiving uc benefits does not have permanent adverse effects on future uc benefits . for example , after approximately 15 to 18 months of reemployment , a worker's uc benefit is strictly determined by the new employment activity . however , workers who are bridging to retirement through part - time work or self - employment are sometimes excluded from receiving uc benefits and workers receiving some pension or other retirement benefits may have their uc benefits substantially offset . table 3 summarizes how states' uc programs treat factors that might impact older workers: part - time work , self - employment , pension income offsets , and social security income offsets . in most states' uc systems workers who have had their hours reduced or who are working short - term in part - time jobs while looking for a permanent full - time job are able to receive some uc benefits . the workers find themselves faced with new decisions: should they search for a new job ; create a new job through self - employment ; spend down any non - retirement personal savings they may have accrued during their working years ; opt to withdraw funds from retirement savings plans and / or receive social security benefits ? some studies have found that unemployment in older workers contributes up to a one - third increase in the probability of retirement . once these workers have entered retirement , they then face a different set of incentives that may make it less rewarding for these retired workers to return to the labor market . the pattern of unemployment leading to unexpectedly early retirement is not a new development . rather , it is the relative scale of the phenomenon to the overall workforce that is new . the shifting demographics of the workforce have made what was once a fairly small policy issue grow in importance . one policy issue is how to address the inherent tensions among the unemployment compensation ( uc ) system , alternative working arrangements , and eligibility for and receipt of various types of retirement income . another is how federal programs might better balance providing income support for older americans with providing appropriate work incentives for those who would prefer to remain engaged in some type of work . when older workers find themselves unemployed , they face a substantially different set of decisions to make than if they were a few years younger . while all qualified unemployed workers may receive unemployment compensation , older workers may replace lost earnings ( conditional on age ) with retirement savings and pension programs .