many parents do not understand what the various ratings guidelines mean . for example , 28% of parents of young children ( 2-6 years old ) knew what the rating tv - y7 meant ( directed to children age 7 and older ) while 13% thought it meant the opposite ( directed to children under 7 ) ; and only 12% knew that the rating fv ( "fantasy violence" ) is related to violent content , while 8% thought it meant "family viewing. in releasing the survey results , vicky rideout , vice president and director of the kaiser family foundation's program for the study of entertainment media and health , commented , "while many parents have used the ratings or the v - chip , too many still don't know what the ratings mean or even that their tv includes a v - chip. a number of groups conducted research and published opinion pieces questioning the usefulness and / or legality of the v - chip and the ratings system after the 1996 telecommunications act was enacted ( eg , the progress and freedom foundation , the american civil liberties union , cato institute , morality in media ) . since that time , opposition has waned and even the controversies over inappropriate content being broadcast live did not renew it . further , while the v - chip and the ratings system can block objectionable or indecent programming when used in tandem , since the incidents were broadcast "live" and did not have ratings that would have blocked them , neither the v - chip nor the ratings system would have been effective in either case . therefore , some could claim that the v - chip and the ratings system , while useful tools in many cases , remain unreliable tools for parents because they cannot guarantee all objectionable content will be blocked . in the child safe viewing act , congress addressed most of the issues that have been raised by various interest groups about the v - chip . however , the issue that appears not to be able to be addressed through legislation , which is to educate parents and make them aware of the tools available to them , still remains . according the 2004 kff study , parents also indicated that they would like to see the ratings displayed more prominently to make it easier to notice them . such findings are consistent with a lack of wide - spread usage or even awareness of the v - chip . specifically , as noted above , the 2004 kff study indicated that even after years of being available , only 42% of parents who have a v - chip and are aware of it actually use it . however , of the parents that had used the v - chip , 89% found it "somewhat" to "very" useful . those figures would indicate that increased knowledge of the v - chip would substantially increase parents' perceptions of control over their children's television viewing . the noi additionally seeks comment about the effectiveness of media literacy efforts in enabling children to enjoy the benefits of media while minimizing the potential harms .