the internet ) . the secretary of health and human services enforces regulations related to the privacy of individual health information held on private computer systems maintained by health care organizations . the sec and other agencies with jurisdiction over financial institutions enforce regulations related to the privacy of individual financial information held on computer systems maintained by financial institutions . the sec also enforces regulations related to the certification of internal financial controls ( including those associated with a company's computer systems ) for a large number of private sector firms . a number of agencies have the authority to investigate and prosecute federal computer crimes , in particular the department of justice and the secret service ( now part of dhs ) . the ncsd has a much wider mandate ; to work with all owners , operators , and users of the nation's information infrastructure . there is some debate about whether these two functions should merge or remain separate . nsa , nsf , nist and dhs are specifically authorized to support research and development in computer security and to develop the nation's expertise in this area . however , at least three issues have arisen concerning these roles and responsibilities: 1 ) the role the federal government in regulating the nation's privately owned and operated critical information infrastructure ; 2 ) the relative roles of the department of homeland security and the national security agency in setting policy and standards for computer and telecommunication systems handling critical infrastructure information ; and , 3 ) the relative roles of the national cyber security division and the national communication system in setting policy and standards for dealing with the private sector . the current role of the federal government in regulating private sector computer systems is primarily derived from its interest to protect the privacy of individually identifiable information held on private computer systems or to improve the oversight of financial reporting by the private sector . security of a company's or an individual's computer system or the internet as a whole are not the policy objective . there is a long running debate about whether the federal government should take a more active regulatory role in improving private sector computer security . two options that have been discussed include requiring the development of more secure computer software and / or requiring users to improve and maintain the security of their systems over time . a number of critics of the national strategy to secure cyberspace have asserted that the strategy did not go far enough in either of these directions in its recommendations . these critics tend to come from the developers of security products and services . both software developers and software users take the position that it is in a company's interest to sell and maintain secure products and systems and that market forces are the best way to ensure cost - effective security . current policy is to engage the private sector and collaborate in efforts to raise awareness of security issues and to disseminate best practices . the homeland security act of 2002 defined a class of information called critical infrastructure information .