the conduct of mission rehearsals . the conduct of after action reviews . is the army rushing the gcv program ? will the army replace the non - line - of - sight cannon ( nlos - c ) ? what is the impact on the army's operational concept , force structure , and doctrine ? congress's decisions on these and other related issues could have significant implications for army capabilities and funding requirements , as well as the ground combat portion of the defense industrial base . crs report rl32476 , u.s. army's modular redesign: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs22707 , mine - resistant , ambush - protected ( mrap ) vehicles: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl33161 , the joint tactical radio system ( jtrs ) and the army ' s future combat system ( fcs ) : issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl34333 , does the army need a full - spectrum force or specialized units ? background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs21195 , evolutionary acquisition and spiral development in dod programs: policy issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . manned ground vehicles fcs manned ground vehicles ( mgvs ) were a family of eight different combat vehicles — with some having more than one variation — based on a common platform and being designed to be air transportable by the u.s. air force . they were to be equipped with a variety of passive and active protection systems and sensors that the army hoped would offer them the same survivability as the current heavy armor force . in addition , the army intended for its mgvs to be highly reliable , require low maintenance , and have fuel - efficient engines . the following are brief descriptions of mgv types and variants that were cancelled in may 2009 . mounted combat system ( mcs ) ( xm1202 ) as envisioned , the mcs was to provide direct and beyond - line - of - sight ( blos ) fires , was to be capable of providing direct fire support to dismounted infantry , and to attack targets with blos fires out to a range of 8 kilometers . the mcs was intended to replace to current m - 1 abrams tank . the mcs was to have had a crew of two and to be armed with a 120 mm main gun , a .50 caliber machine gun , and a 40 mm automatic grenade launcher . infantry carrier vehicle ( icv ) ( xm1206 ) as planned , the icv was to have consisted of four versions: the company commander version , the platoon leader version , the rifle squad version , and the weapons squad version . all four versions were to have appeared to be identical from the exterior to prevent the targeting of a specific carrier version . the rifle squad version was to have had a two - man crew and able to transport a nine - man infantry squad and dismount them so that they could conduct combat operations on foot .