renewals . the president requested a 5% decreasein renewal funding for project - based rental assistance contracts in fy2006 . hud budget documentsexplained that the department planned to augment the renewal funding request with $622 millionin funds recaptured from previous years and savings from program improvements . the additionalfunds would have raised the program level to $5.6 billion , an increase of 6% over the fy2005program level . the house version of h.r . 3058 proposed $17 million more for renewals thanthe president requested . the bill would have permitted the secretary to transfer , if necessary , up to$200 million from the tenant - based rental assistance account to the project - based account . thesenate version of h.r . 3058 proposed funding project - based renewals at the president'srequested level , and did not include the transfer language included in the house version . the senatecommittee report raised concern that hud was not doing enough to encourage landlords in theproject - based section 8 program to renew their contracts and thus preserve the properties as assistedhousing . the senate bill proposed that the government accountability office ( gao ) assess hud'sefforts to preserve assisted housing . the final version of h.r . 3058 adopts the house - passed funding level forproject - based renewals , but does not include the transfer authority proposed by the house . the billdoes not include a request for the gao report proposed by the senate , but does direct thedepartment to study and report back on the living conditions of residents in two developments inillinois . contract administrators . the president's budgetrequested a 46% increase in funding for contract administrators and stated that $185 million inunobligated balances would be used to augment the funding , resulting in a program level increaseof 70% over fy2005 . contract administrators are subcontracted by hud to manage the long - termsection 8 contracts between hud and private owners of subsidized multifamily units . hudcontinues to manage a portion of the contracts ; however , the department intends to transfer most,if not all , contracts to contract administrators in the future . the fy2006 budget request includes anincrease of $67 million to fund the transfer of additional contracts from hud to contractadministrators . further , hud's budget justifications state that the department intends to begin usingcontract administrators to manage rental assistance contracts outside of the section 8 program , suchas those entered into under the section 202 housing for the elderly program . the budget documentsnote that $30 million would be used to fund these transfers . the house , senate , and final versions of h.r . 3058 funded contractadministrators at the president's requested level and permitted the expansion of contractadministrators to additional programs . public housing programs . public housingprovides publicly owned and subsidized rental units for very low - income families . while no newpublic housing developments have been built for many years ( except through the hope vi program,which is discussed below ) , congress continues to provide funds to maintain the existing stock ofover 1.2 million units . the operating fund provides funds to phas for the ongoing maintenanceand administration of public housing . the capital fund provides funding to phas for large capitalprojects and modernization needs .