assets are frozen . in april 2004 , ashdown blocked state funding to the nationalist serbiandemocratic party ( sds ) , charging that the sds had helped to finance karadzic's efforts to avoidarrest . skeptics have noted that most sds funding does not come from the state , but fromstate - owned firms run by sds supporters . ( 21 ) in december 2004 , in a further move to punish the republika srpska for its non - complianceon war crimes issues , ashdown removed nine bosnian serb officials of the state border service , theintelligence and security service , and the rs interior ministry . ashdown also announced plans toabolish entity interior and defense ministries by fall 2005 , leaving only central governmentministries for these functions . ashdown warned that he will take further steps against the assets andinstitutions of the rs if bosnian serb leaders continued to block bosnia's pfp membership by failingto cooperation with the icty . in taking such moves , ashdown also may be using rs war crimesnon - compliance to weaken the rs and the whole system of ethnically - based entities set up by thedayton accords , which some observers see as a key stumbling block to reform and euro - atlanticintegration . the united states also introduced measures in december 2004 to punish the rs fornon - cooperation with the icty , freezing all sds assets in the united states and imposing a visa banon all members of the sds and the party for democratic progress ( pdp ) , a key member of the rsgovernment . a number of high level bosnian serb leaders in the rs and the bosnian centralgovernment resigned their posts in protest . the united states has offered a $5 million reward to anyone providing information leadingto the capture of karadzic or mladic . del ponte claimed that karadzic had narrowly escaped captureduring an sfor raid in the bosnian serb city of pale in february 2004 . subsequent sfor raidshave failed to capture karadzic , including a raid in april 2004 that resulted in severe injuries to aserbian orthodox priest and his son . international critics of sfor say that it has failed to developmuch useful intelligence on the whereabouts of war criminals and does not coordinate sufficientlywith the icty and other international organizations in bosnia . ( 22 ) in addition to pursuing karadzic and mladic , the united states and the internationalcommunity have promoted efforts to have war criminals tried by local courts . what would be the impact of reduced international intervention in bosnia's political systemand a decrease in economic assistance , particularly if reforms are slowed as a result ? the resolution calls for the icty to complete its investigations by 2004 , itstrials by 2008 , and all appeals by 2010 . in october 2003 , international donors held a conference on the establishment of a war crimeschamber in the state court of bosnia and herzegovina . the united states contributed $5 million andsaid it would contribute an additional $5 million in 2004 . however , it is unclear how effective thenew court will be . it appearsunlikely that the situation could explode into conflict again in the near future , perhaps mostimportantly because the geopolitical situation in the region has changed .