in its report on h.r . 1268 , the committee said that it expected that some of these projects could be financed by other countries , the asian development bank , and the world bank . the senate measure shifted $46.5 million of the request from operation and maintenance ( o & m ) of a helicopter fleet to eradicate illicit crops to a pilot program to train local afghan police forces . the committee noted in its report that an earlier reprogramming proposal for procuring the helicopters had been denied , making the o & m funds unnecessary . the administration requested $100 million for immediate support of the january 9 , 2005 comprehensive peace agreement between the government in khartoum and the sudan people's liberation movement in the south . in justifying the request , the state department noted that when fy2005 appropriation decisions were finalized , a peace accord was uncertain . the supplemental programs , officials said , would help ensure that the peace agreement is effectively implemented . most of the supplemental proposal targeted needs in southern sudan . the proposal included $22 million for assisting the national commissions required under the peace accords and supporting governance and political party development , $10 million for security sector reform in southern sudan , $63 million for rehabilitation and reconstruction , primarily in southern sudan , and $5 million for unhcr , international organization for migration , and ngo repatriation programs for sudanese refugees . the $100 million total supplemental requested for sudan compares with about $200 million allocated for all activities in fy2005 and $112 million proposed for fy2006 . the supplemental proposal for sudan also reflects a new initiative proposed more broadly in the regular fy2006 budget request for post - conflict , fragile countries . the administration recommends shifting assistance that has traditionally been channeled through usaid's development assistance account to the transition initiative ( ti ) account . ti funds are available under more flexible programming authorities than regular development assistance , and according to the administration , will permit more effective and better targeted types of support that post - conflict states require in the near - term . four countries — sudan , ethiopia , afghanistan , and haiti — are scheduled for this funding transfer in the fy2006 request . included in the $100 million , the supplemental proposal also seeks $63 million for sudan rehabilitation and reconstruction under the ti account . while fully supporting the requests for security , governance , and refugee repatriation programs , the conference agreement , like the house - passed bill , does not include $63 million for reconstruction programs in southern sudan . the senate measure provided the full $100 million requested for programs related to the comprehensive peace agreement . the supplemental sought $242 million for emergency humanitarian relief for the darfur region of sudan and for eastern chad . these funds would add to the roughly $375 million currently allocated or planned for emergency programs with existing fy2005 funds . as the crisis worsened throughout 2004 , the demands for a broader u.s. response exceeded those assumed in the fy2005 budget request , according to the administration .