destabilizing. even if modernized , these weapons will not "give moscow the capability to alter the strategic landscape. further , russian weapons , even with its new military strategy , may not pose a threat to nato or u.s. allies . russia's doctrine indicates that it would use these weapons in response to a weak performance by its conventional forces in an ongoing conflict . since it would be unlikely for nato to be involved in a conventional conflict with russia , it would also be unlikely for russian weapons to find targets in nato nations . this does not , however , preclude their use in other conflicts along russia's periphery . as russian documents indicate , russia could use these weapons if its national survival were at stake . this view , however , has been tempered , in recent years , by both russia's aggression in ukraine and its frequent "nuclear saber - rattling. not only have russian officials reminded others of the existence and relevance of russian nuclear weapons , russian military exercises , bomber flights , and cruise missile launches have seemed designed to demonstrate russia's capabilities and , possibly , its willingness to challenge nato's eastern members . these actions have raised concerns about the possibility that russia might threaten to use nuclear weapons during a crisis with nato , in line with its apparent "escalate to de - escalate" strategy , to force a withdrawal by nato forces defending an exposed ally or to terminate a conflict on terms favorable to russia . while some analysts dispute this interpretation of russia's doctrine , most agree that nonstrategic nuclear weapons appear to play a significant role in russia's doctrine and war plans . the bush administration argued , after the 2001 nuclear posture review , that the united states had reduced its reliance on nuclear weapons by increasing the role of missile defenses and precision conventional weapons in the u.s. deterrent posture . at the same time , though , the administration indicated that the united states would acquire and maintain those capabilities that it needed to deter and defeat any nation with the potential to threaten the united states , particularly if the potential adversary possessed weapons of mass destruction . it noted that these new , threatening capabilities could include hardened and deeply buried targets and , possibly , bunkers holding chemical or biological weapons . it indicated that the united states would seek to develop the capabilities to destroy these types of facilities . using a similar construct , the obama administration , in the 2010 nuclear posture review , also indicated that the united states would reduce the role of nuclear weapons in u.s. regional deterrence strategies by increasing its reliance on missile defenses and precision conventional weapons . unlike the bush administration , however , the obama administration did not seek to acquire new nuclear weapons capabilities or to extend u.s. nuclear deterrence to threats from nations armed with chemical or biological weapons . it stated that it would not consider the use of nuclear weapons in response to conventional , chemical , or biological attack if the attacking nation were in compliance with its nuclear nonproliferation obligations .