and volume . notwithstanding lack of hard evidence of any recent seizures involving illicit drugs of confirmed dprk origin or drugs being trafficked by dprk nationals with confirmed or likely links to dprk officials , press reports in early 2007 cite earlier arrests in china of north korean nationals involved with chinese criminals in the trafficking of methamphetamine . for example , in november 2006 , chinese police in shenyang reportedly arrested a north korean and others connected to an international drug ring which had trafficked large quantities of methamphetamine into china . earlier , in july 2006 , the media reported arrests by chinese police in two other cities , dalian and dandong , where chinese police arrested other north koreans and japanese apparently trying to bring methamphetamine purchased near the north korean / chinese border to japan . these were the first cases of involvement of dprk ( democratic people's republic of korea ) nationals in drug trafficking to become public in two years . arguably however , fewer seizures may simply be the result of changes in patterns of shipments designed to conceal any direct dprk role in the process — countermeasures spurred by increased international scrutiny of north korean trading activities . consistent with this line of reasoning would be the conclusion that since levels of enforcement success against dprk linked trafficking in illicit drugs often vary dramatically , it is not possible at this time to reach a definitive consensus about any changes in trends underlying such enterprise . an alternative explanation would be that north korea has cut back on , if not dramatically curbed , its drug trafficking activity and is compensating from the loss of income in this arena by beefing up its production and trafficking of counterfeit brand cigarettes . in contrast , the aggregate portfolio of north korean criminal activity over the past decade paints a different picture . information available points to an expansion in both the scale and scope of north korean cash generating criminal activity . in addition to production and trafficking in heroin and methamphetamines , major sources of revenue from criminal activity for the dprk now include ( 1 ) counterfeit cigarettes ; ( 2 ) counterfeit pharmaceuticals ( for example "usa" manufactured viagra ; ( 3 ) counterfeit currency ( e.g . u.s. $100 bill "supernotes" ) ; and ( 4 ) indiscriminate sales of small arms , i.e . "gun running. the result is a situation in which criminal activity is seen as playing an increasingly pivotal role in supporting north korea's fragile economy . best u.s. available source estimates suggest that the dprk earns at least $500 million per year in profit from combined criminal activity , and gross revenues are suggested by some to total $1 billion or more . regardless , however , of the current dollar amount such ventures generate , it appears that the scale and scope of north korean criminal activities are on the rise . increasingly , analysts view this as a global and not just as a regional concern .