services a . includes expenditures made from funds transferred to ccdbg from tanf . b . average monthly number of children served . c. includes services provided solely under terms of pre - tanf law , supportive services , pregnancyprevention and family formation activities , andunclassified "other" expenditures . d. includes these sums for transportation and other supportive services for non - employed persons ( classifiedas "non - assistance" ) : 2001 , $524 million ; 2002 , $339 million e. includes these sums for transportation and other supportive services for non - employed persons ( classified as "non - assistance" ) : 2001 , $133 million ; 2002 , $245 million . f. includes transfers from tanf: 2000 , $ 1,079 million ; 2001 , $920 million ; 2002 , $1,043 million . excluded are transfers from liheap and thecommunity services block grant ( and reported under those programs ) . g. not total tanf maintenance - of - effort ( moe ) child care spending . to avoid double counting , reportedhere is only the amount by which tanf moespending exceeds ccdbg moe spending . 2002 sum is estimated . h. appropriations i . none required . contributions unknown . j . recipient numbers are households served during the year with heating and winter crisis aid . outlay data include weatherization aid . expendituresare from regular liheap appropriations plus contingency funds . migratory children are presumed to be needy . r. for forgiveness of loans made to needy students who fail to complete studies . s. need for loans is decided by the educational institution , by use of a needs analysis system approvedby the secretary of education "in combinationwith other information" about the student's finances . for all health professional scholarships and for loans tostudents of medicine and osteopathy,federal regulations define the required "exceptional financial need. t. regulations require the educational institution to determine that migratory students need the financialassistance provided . u . law makes eligible middle school and secondary students who are "economically disadvantaged. v. federal income ceiling is 85% of state median for family of same size w. under the law , at least 70% of entitlement child care development block grant ( ccdbg ) funds must be used for families receiving tanf , tryingto leave welfare through work , or at risk of becoming eligible for tanf . x . applies to families aided with tanf dollars transferred to title xx ( their income cannot exceed 200% of the federal poverty guidelines ) . need is decided by agencies administering the benefits . z . the federal poverty income guideline is used if higher than 70% of the lower living standard incomelevel of the department of labor . aa . the law requires preference for "low - income" persons if funds are limited . bb . states have the option of setting limits below outer federal ceilings ( but cannot set a ceiling below110% of the federal poverty income guideline ) . table 8 . bureau of the census povertythresholds for 2002 source: u.s. department of commerce , bureau of the census ( jan. 23 , 2003 ) . table 9 . 2003 federal poverty income guidelines source: federal register , v. 68 , no . 26 , feb. 7 , 2003 , pp .