also , p.l . 1640 ( which was incorporated into h.r . 6 ) by the house committee on energy and commerce , an amendment to add an rps ( 1% in 2008 , increasing by 1% annually and reaching 20% in 2027 ) was rejected . proponents noted a growing number of states with an rps and noted that eia reports show an rps could reduce electricity bills . opponents raised concerns about the exclusion of existing hydropower facilities and renewable energy resource limits for the southeastern united states . the senate - passed version of h.r . 6 had an rps in section 291 . it set an initial target of 2.5% in 2008 , rising in steps to 10% by 2020 , and remaining at 10% through 2030 . multiplying 10% times the energy information administration's ( eia's ) projected total generation for 2020 yields an estimate of renewable energy peak generation slightly greater than 500 billion kilowatt - hours ( kwh ) . further , eia projects that the renewable energy stimulated by a 10% rps would mostly displace natural gas , but also some coal , with a cumulative ( 2005 through 2025 ) value of saved energy projected at about $5 billion . production from hydropower and municipal solid waste facilities would have been excluded from the base amount used to calculate the annual target . "existing renewable energy" was defined as electricity produced from facilities already placed in service that use solar , wind geothermal , ocean , or biomass ( open and closed loop ) resources . only "new renewable energy" would have been eligible to satisfy the target . it would have been defined as electricity produced from facilities placed in service after the rps is enacted , that use solar , wind geothermal , ocean , or biomass ( open and closed loop ) , landfill gas , or incremental hydropower resources . further , for existing facilities , any "incremental" production above the previous three - year average would also have qualified . double value would have been given to production from facilities on indian land and triple value would be given to production from distributed generators that are smaller than one megawatt in capacity . the retail obligation to meet the annual target could have been met through direct generation , purchases of renewable energy , and / or purchases of tradable credits from the department of energy . tradable credits would have had a cost cap of 1.5 cents / kwh , adjusted annually for inflation , and credits for surplus generation exceeding the annual target could be carried forward for up to three years . a noncompliance penalty would have been imposed , with a value that was the greater of 1.5 cents / kwh or two times the national average market value of the tradable credits . title xvi of p.l . 109-58 establishes a voluntary national program designed to accelerate demonstration and deployment of less - carbon - intensive technology to encourage voluntary reductions in greenhouse gases . the sections of this title attempt to support actions focused on reducing u.s. carbon intensity ( the ratio of greenhouse gas emissions per unit of gross domestic product ) .