this report provides background on these issues . it first reviews the types of air emissions from livestock and poultry operations and their human health and environmental impacts . it then discusses provisions of several federal laws concerned with environmental impacts , beginning with the clean water act , because protecting water resources has been the primary regulatory focus regarding livestock and animal operations . the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has authority to address afo air emissions under several laws — the clean air act ; the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla , or superfund ) ; and the emergency planning and community right - to - know act ( epcra ) — which are discussed next . questions about the applicability of these laws to livestock and poultry operations have been controversial in several arenas and have drawn congressional attention . agricultural emissions of greenhouse gases that have been of interest in connection with proposals to address the global challenge of climate change are discussed . studies by the national research council concerning air emissions are reviewed , as are relevant activities of the states and the u.s. department of agriculture . in that report , epa attempted to develop a set of model farms , based on manure management systems typically used by large afos , and identify emissions factors that could be associated with each element of the model farm . in the absence of actual data from extensive monitoring , epa hoped that emission factors could be applied to model farms to estimate annual mass emissions . an emissions factor is a representative value that attempts to relate the quantity of a pollutant released to the atmosphere with an activity associated with the release of the pollutant . during that same period , ch 4 emissions from u.s. agricultural activities increased by 10.1% , while n 2 o emissions increased by 5.9% . as shown in table 3 , agricultural activities contributed 32.5% of all ch 4 emissions and 83.2% of all n 2 o emissions in the united states in 2014 . livestock - related categories ( enteric fermentation and manure management , primarily from dairy cattle and swine ) were 30.9% of total u.s. ch 4 emissions , while various land management practices were the largest source of n 2 o emissions , or 78.9% of total n 2 o emissions . the obama administration has taken a number of actions to develop national policies and strategies to address ghgs and climate change . the 111 th congress considered legislation in this area: comprehensive climate and energy legislation passed the house in 2009 and was reported by a senate committee , but no comprehensive bill was enacted . agriculture in general was a major part of these discussions , but so far the agriculture sector has been largely excluded from regulatory and legislative proposals . during the time that epa was developing the revised clean water act cafo rules that it promulgated in 2003 ( discussed above ) , the issue of air emissions from cafos received some attention . the clean water act requires epa to consider non - water quality environmental impacts , such as air emissions , when it sets effluent limitations and standards .