table 1 . comparison of current law with h.r.4 , as passed by the house andas reported by the senatefinance committee ( tanf provisions ) return to contents section of this long report . it also denotes the sectionnumber in each of the bills in which the provision is found . the differences in the two bills highlight some of the contentious issues in the reauthorizationdebate . before the bill was pulled from the senate floor , the senate did approve one amendment tothe bill which would have added $6 billion over five years for child care funding ( to a total of $7billion in child care funds above current law levels for the five years ) . there were no approvedamendments to the senate finance committee bill's tanf provisions . the bills had many similarities , with both extending basic funding at current levels throughfy2008 and incorporating president bush's proposal to provide categorical "marriage promotion"grants . they both also raised tanf work participation standards , though the two bills differed interms of how much more work would be required and what activities count toward the participationstandards . this report provides a comparison of the tanf provisions of h.r . the lack of final action in the 108th congress means that welfare reauthorization is likely to again be a topic in the 109th congress . this report describes both the house - passed and senatefinance committee - approved versions of welfare reauthorization legislation in the 108th congress . 4 as itpassed the house and was reported from the senate finance committee . it does not addressnon - tanf provisions of both bills , such as revisions to the child care and development fund,child support enforcement , abstinence education , and transitional medicaid . table 1 provides a detailed comparison of the tanf programs of thehouse - passed and senatefinance committee reported versions of h.r . the table provides references towhere current law provisions are found in the social security act ( ssa ) . the 108th congress did not complete action on legislation to reauthorize the block grant oftemporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) . instead it and its predecessor , the 107thcongress , adopted short - term funding extensions since the original funding authority for tanfexpired on september 30 , 2002 . the latest short - term extension funds the program through march31 , 2005 . the house of representatives did pass a bill in february 2003 ( h.r . 4 ) , and the senate finance committee reported an amended version of the legislation in october 2003 . thoughthe full senate took up the bill in late march 2004 , the measure was set - aside in that chamber aftera motion to limit debate on the bill failed to receive the required 60 votes on april 1 .