officials. on july 26 , 2006 , the house approved h.con.res . 400 ( burton ) , which , among other provisions , condemned venezuela's failures to stem the flow of narcotics through its territory and calls for , among other measures , steps to restore cooperation between venezuela and the dea . in 2008 , the venezuela government appeared to be taking more action on antidrug measures . it began a program aimed at destroying clandestine airstrip used by colombian drug traffickers and at tracking drug smuggling planes . by early september 2008 , venezuelan officials claimed to have destroyed more than 200 illegal landing strips . venezuelan officials maintain that venezuela has cooperated extensively with other countries in combating drug trafficking . they point to cooperation with colombia , including the return of captured colombian drug traffickers and a joint eradication program to target coca , poppy , and cannabis cultivation in the common sierra de perijá mountain area bordering the two countries . venezuelan officials also assert that the country is setting up a radar system , purchased from china , that when in operation , will help it monitor suspected drug flights . in early july 2008 , president chávez met briefly with u.s . ambassador patrick duddy and expressed a desire to reopen cooperation with the united states on drug trafficking and other issues . u.s. officials increased their criticism of venezuelan antidrug efforts in august and september 2008 , maintaining that the country was playing a leading role in drug trafficking in the western hemisphere . the white house office of national drug control policy maintained that the number of drug flights leaving venezuela increased tenfold from 21 metric tons in 2002 to 220 metric tons in 2007 and that the figure would be higher in 2008 . on september 16 , 2008 , for the fourth year in a row , president bush determined that venezuela had failed demonstrably to adhere to its obligations under international narcotics control agreements , but he waived sanctions to allow the continuation of u.s. foreign assistance to support civil society programs and community development programs . according to the state department , the amount of drugs bound for the united states and europe continues to grow , despite venezuelan assurances that seizures have increased . the state department again noted venezuela's refusal to renew counternarcotics cooperation agreements with the untied states . from fy2002-fy2007 , venezuela received small amounts of u.s. assistance under the administration's andean counterdrug initiative ( aci ) focusing on counternarcotics cooperation and judicial reform support . some $5 million was provided in fy2002 ; $2.075 million in fy2003 ; $5 million in fy2004 ; almost $3 million in fy2005 ; $2.229 million in fy2006 ; and $1 million in fy2007 . since fy2008 , no counternarcotics assistance has been requested for venezuela . the department of state , in its february 2009 international narcotics control strategy report ( incsr ) , maintained that venezuela is one of the preferred routes for trafficking illicit narcotics out of colombia because of the permissive and corrupt environment in venezuela and because of counternarcotics successes in colombia .