table b.1 . provision for health care costs in the child supportaward or agreement , 1993 source: laura wheaton , the urban institute , nonresident fathers: to what extent do they haveaccess to employment - based health care coverage ? , june 2000 , p. 6 of web version http: / / fatherhood.hhs.gov / ncp - health00 / report.htm . table b.2 . health care coverage of children in custodial families in 1993 source: laura wheaton , the urban institute , nonresident fathers: to what extent do they haveaccess to employment - based health care coverage ? , june 2000 , p. 7 and 8 of web version http: / / fatherhood.hhs.gov / ncp - health00 / report.htm . * if at least one custodial child receives health care coverage from a given source in at lest one month of the year , then the family is considered to have received health care coverage from that source . the family is placed into the first of the categories that applies to it . ( 2 ) medical support can take several forms . the noncustodial parent may be ordered to: ( 1 ) provide health insurance if available through his or her employer , ( 2 ) pay for private health insurance ( health care coverage ) premiums or reimburse the custodial parent for all or a portion of the costsof health insurance obtained by the custodial parent for the child , or ( 3 ) pay additional amounts tocover some or all of ongoing medical bills as reimbursement for uninsured medical costs . all of the data indicate thatmuch more needs to be done to improve the establishment and enforcement of medical support , inaccordance with current law . in reviewing the data , it is important to note that ( 1 ) in some caseschildren did not receive a child support award of any kind , cash or medical care ; ( 2 ) even if there wasa cash award , in many cases , health insurance coverage was not included in the award ; and ( 3 ) evenwhen health insurance coverage was included , in many cases , it was not actually provided by thenoncustodial parent . to improve establishment and enforcement of medical child support , there are a range of healthcoverage options . generally speaking for the last several years the focus has been on obtainingprivate health care coverage exclusively from noncustodial parents . the extent to which custodialparents work and have access to employer - sponsored health insurance has increased significantlyduring the last 20 years . similarly , medicaid coverage based on child poverty has also increased . today , in many cases health care coverage is more accessible if it is based on the custodial parent'scoverage . ( 13 ) moreover , over the last several yearshealth care costs have dramatically increased , andit can no longer be assumed that all employer - sponsored health insurance is affordable . requiringand enforcing expensive health care insurance may negatively affect the custodial parent and childas well as the noncustodial parent . most policymakers agree that health care coverage must beavailable , accessible , affordable , and stable .