table 6 . percentage of adult tanf recipients who are noncitizens by state , fy2001 source: crs presentation of data from national tanf datafile as of may 15 , 2002 . generally , states with larger shares of lprs were more likely to have expanded state - level tanf policies for noncitizens as well as have a greater percentage of their caseload who werenoncitizens . there were , however , some exceptions as noted above . the level of immigrantenrollment in assistance programs is affected by the restrictions imposed under the 1996 welfarereform law , by states' choices to extend or deny coverage when given the option and , to somedegree , by individuals' perception of their eligibility status and their election to participate or not . among the public at large , confusion remains over what classes of noncitizens are eligible for whichprograms , in part because the 1996 welfare law used the phrase "qualified alien" - - not a term inimmigration law - - that encompasses a variety of classes of noncitizens who must meet additionalspecified conditions . moreover , despite narrowly drawn regulations from the former immigrationand naturalization service ( now the u.s . citizenship and immigration services in the departmentof homeland security ) on what constitutes "public charge," many believe that receiving publicbenefits may adversely affect a noncitizen's immigration status or potential to sponsor immigrationpetitions for family members . these factors may be inhibiting participation among eligibleimmigrants . that many states haveexercised one or more options to extend coverage to certain classes of lprs has mitigated the effectsof the federal bars enacted in 1996 . this trend in receipt of tanf , which does not includenoncitizens assisted by the separate state programs noted above , is illustrated in figure 1 . california tops the list of states , with 16.9% of its 278,069 tanf recipients who were noncitizens in 2001 , as table 6 presents . calculated in terms of percentage of all adultnoncitizensreceiving tanf , californians comprised 41.8% of adult noncitizens in the united states on tanfin 2001 . new york followed california with 12.3% of its 189,299 recipients who were adultnoncitizens or 20.7% of noncitizens in the united states on tanf . texas and minnesota weredistant third and fourth places with 7.4% and 5.2% respectively of adult noncitizens in the unitedstates on tanf , with 8.9% and 16.8% of their states' caseload respectively who were noncitizens . data presented in table 6 do not include noncitizens assisted by the separate state programs incalifornia , georgia , hawaii , maryland , pennsylvania , tennessee , utah , and wisconsin . the percent of noncitizen adults receiving tanf dropped slightly to 11.7% in 1999 andultimately fell to 8.0% in 2001 , the most recent year data are available . as an annual percentage of total adult tanf recipients , noncitizens who received aid for families with dependent children ( the predecessor of tanf ) rose from 7.0% in fy1989 to 12.3%in fy1996 .