overall , h.r . it is very difficult to quantify these effects . s. 1637 also contained additional provisions , but the focus on a more limited number of foreign tax revisions . 2896 lost $128 billion over 10 years according to the joint committee on taxation , while s. 1637 is roughly revenue neutral . the final bill was roughly revenue neutral and contained a number of international provisions . the 2001-2003 temporary tax cuts have a mixed effect in that they magnify some existing distortions while reducing others . all capital income tax cuts reduce the distortion that favors consumption over investment , although it is by no means clear that tax cuts for capital income increase saving ( because of offsetting income and substitution effects ) and debt financed tax cuts could well reduce the national ( government plus private ) savings rate . any capital income tax cut also reduces the favorable treatment of owner occupied housing . in looking at the allocation of business capital , the dividend relief provision seems most consistent with economic efficiency , because it reduces distortions affecting payout choices , choice of finance , and sectoral allocation , without magnifying any existing distortions . reducing individual tax rates magnifies existing distortions , by favoring debt finance and noncorporate investment . bonus depreciation , if made permanent , has aspects that detract from efficiency , by expanding the favorable treatment of the returns from equipment investments relative to returns from investment in structures , while doing little to reduce financial or sectoral distortions . the revisions in the bills addressing the eti provision favor manufacturing and other eligible activities . when accomplished via equipment depreciation , they would have expanded the favorable treatment of equipment within that sector . the overall effects outside of that sector are very small , however . of course , there are other issues aside from the efficiency considerations that might be considered in making the temporary provisions permanent or in enacting new ones . many of these provisions , particularly bonus depreciation , were originally aimed at short run stimulus of the economy . an investment subsidy such as bonus depreciation is a more effective stimulus if it is temporary , and making it permanent might undermine the credibility of the government and hamper its ability to manage fiscal policy in the future . that is , the effectiveness of a temporary investment stimulus depends on investors believing it to be temporary , and if the government transforms the current temporary stimulus into a permanent one , firm managers may be less likely to believe that another temporary stimulus enacted in the future will actually be temporary . capital income taxes play an important role in the revenue base and the overall distribution of tax burdens , which might be considered . some tax revisions may add to administrative costs while others reduce those costs , and others ( such as changing rates ) are largely neutral . for example , tax rate cuts confined to manufacturing create a classification issue for firms ( or related firms ) that engage in activities both within and without manufacturing .