b . institute of medicine , priority areas for national action: transforming health care quality ( washington: national academy press , 2003 ) . 106-129 , the healthcare research and quality act of 1999 , directed ahrq to submit to congress annually a report on "disparities in health caredelivery as it relates to racial factors and socioeconomic factors in priority populations," beginning in fy2003 . the first national report onhealthcare disparities was released on dec. 22 . 2003 , and is available online at http: / / qualitytools.ahrq.gov / disparitiesreport / download_report.aspx . table 4 . summary of health information technology ( it ) legislation introduced in the 109thcongress a . institute of medicine , priority areas for national action: transforming health care quality ( washington: national academy press , 2003 ) . interconnect physicians . this goal centers on building an interoperable healthinformation infrastructure so that ehrs follow the patient , and clinicians have access to criticalhealth information when treatment decisions are being made . the strategies for realizing this goalinvolve fostering community - based health information exchange projects , developing a nationalhealth information network , and coordinating federal health informationsystems . personalize health care . this goal involves using health it to help individualsmanage their own wellness and become more involved in personal healthdecisions . improve population health . the final goal requires the timely collection,analysis , and dissemination of clinical information to improve the evaluation of health care delivery,public health monitoring , and biosurveillance . it also helps accelerate research and the translationof research findings into clinical products and practice . the framework identifies several potential policy options for providing incentives for ehradoption . they include: regional grants and contracts to stimulate ehrs and community informationexchange systems ; improving the availability of low - rate loans for ehradoption ; updating federal rules on physician self - referral that may unintentionallyrestrict the development of health information networks ; using medicare reimbursements to reward the use of ehrs ; and funding medicare pay - for - performance demonstrationprograms . the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act ( mma ) , which thepresident signed into law on december 8 , 2003 ( p.l . 108-173 ) , included provisions for electronicprescribing standards . the bill requires the standards to include not just electronic script writing,but also the patient's medication history and decision support for identifying potential drug - to - druginteractions . in addition , the mma called for the establishment of a commission to develop acomprehensive strategy for the adoption and implementation of health it data standards . finally,the bill authorized it grants for physicians and established demonstration projects to determine howto improve the quality of care through the adoption of it . table 1 , beginning on page 10 , providesa summary of the it - related provisions in the mma . in the 108th congress , the house and senate passed competing versions of the patient safetyand quality improvement act ( h.r . despite broad bipartisansupport for the legislation , no further action took place before adjournment in december 2004 .