they are among the working poor . refundable tax credits ( the federal earned income tax credit , or eitc , and the child tax credit ) supplement low earnings of parents . cash welfare programs make payments to some needy children and their parents . major welfare programs for children are temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) and , for disabled children or children with disabled parents , supplemental security income ( ssi ) . these programs impose an income test ( and , usually , an assets test ) . tanf seeks to move parents into the labor market and requires states to condition eligibility ( beyond two months ) on parental work . noncash welfare programs , such as food stamps , subsidized housing , medicaid and the state children's health insurance program ( schip ) provide in - kind benefits . these programs also are means - tested . government is challenged to maintain family self - support through work - based policies to promote parents' work and family economic self - sufficiency , while at the same time maintaining a safety net that prevents children from falling into abject poverty when parents are unable to work or their efforts are insufficient . in 2007 , 12.8 million children out of a total of 72.8 million lived in families whose pre - tax money income that year fell short of the poverty threshold . this translates into a child poverty rate of 17.6% . as a group , children are more likely to be poor than are either the aged ( persons aged 65 or older ) or nonaged adults ( persons 18 to 64 years old ) . health insurance for low - income aged , blind , and disabled persons and for needy families with children was added in the form of the medicaid program ( 1965 amendments ) . health insurance for low - income children ineligible for medicaid was added by enactment of the state children's health insurance program ( schip ) ( balanced budget act of 1997 ) . also , the cash welfare program for needy children was opened up to some unemployed two - parent families ( 1961 ) and , finally ( 1996 ) was replaced by a block grant for temporary assistance . the social insurance programs are designed to provide benefits when a family loses earnings because its breadwinner is permanently or temporarily out of the labor market ( through death , disability , unemployment ) . at the outset the welfare programs were restricted to persons not expected to work , but over time , work requirements have been added to the cash welfare program for families with children , and it now emphasizes moving families from welfare to work . in 1975 , congress enacted a program to explicitly support and supplement the income of working poor parents — the eitc . this provision of the tax code makes payments from the treasury to parents whose credit exceeds any income tax liability . in tax year 2005 , the eitc was claimed by 22.8 million tax filers , with credits totaling $42.4 billion .