both countries have a history of sending asylum seekers to the united states by boats . , dry land ) , are interdicted and returned to cuba unless they cite fears of persecution . those cubans who successfully reach the shore are inspected for entry by dhs and generally permitted to stay and adjust under the cuban adjustment act ( caa ) the following year . both nations have a history of repressive governments with documented human rights violations . finally , although u.s. immigration law is generally applied neutrally without regard to country of origin , there are special laws and agreements pertaining to cubans and haitians . despite these points of similarity , the treatment of cubans fleeing to the united states differs from that of haitians . many observe that cuban migrants receive more generous treatment under u.s. law than haitians or foreign nationals from any other country . as a consequence of special migration agreements with cuba , a "wet foot / dry foot" practice toward cuban migrants has evolved . put simply , cubans who do not reach the shore ( i.e. despite what some consider generous treatment of cubans , there are others who charge that the forced return of cubans interdicted at sea violates the spirit , if not the letter , of u.s. asylum and refugee law . critics maintain that the haitians are being singled out for more restrictive treatment than any other group of asylum seekers . haitians interdicted at sea are repatriated , as are cubans ; however , critics charge that haitians who reach the united states are more likely to be detained and less likely to be paroled after the credible fear determination . the administration maintains that paroling haitians ( as is typically done for aliens who meet the credible fear threshold ) may encourage other haitians to embark on the risky sea travel and potentially trigger a mass migration from haiti to the united states . the administration further argues that all migrants who arrive by sea pose a risk to national security and warns that terrorists may pose as haitian asylum seekers . some advocate amending the ina's definition of refugee and asylee to expressly mention gender - based persecution , as was done for resistance to coercive population control policies . proponents argue that those aliens fleeing such acts as female genital mutilation ( fmg ) , rape by military or police forces , "honor killings," or domestic violence are not adequately protected by the ina because the alien must demonstrate that the abuse was based on race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion . they contend that the judicial decisions thus far have been contradictory and often cite attorney general john ashcroft's announcement that he is reconsidering the decision of his predecessor attorney general janet reno to vacate the bia ruling denying asylum to a guatemalan woman who sought asylum based on repeated domestic violence by her husband . they assert that amending the ina to add gender as a basis would strengthen the policy , clarify the ambiguities resulting from varied judicial decisions , and speed up the lengthy asylum adjudication process .