consequently , construction delays can becontroversial . the federal highway administration has indicated that the planningand construction of a major highway project typically takes between 9 and 19 years,depending on size and complexity . of these projects , the preliminary design andenvironmental review process accounts for one to five years of this time . to reduce the approval time for highway projects and speed the delivery of federal highway funds to states and local areas , congress included provisions insection 1309 of tea - 21 which require the secretary of transportation to streamlinethe environmental review process . environmental streamlining can generally bedescribed as cooperatively establishing realistic project development time framesamong transportation and environmental agencies , and then working together toadhere to those time frames . these projects have received about9% of all federal highway funds . this reportis a resource document for the reauthorization debate and will not be updated . ( for a discussion ofreauthorization legislation , see crs report rl32454 , environmental provisions in surfacetransportation reauthorization legislation: safetea ( s. 1072 ) and tea - lu ( h.r.3550 ) ; crs report rl32226 , highway and transit program reauthorization legislationin the 2nd session , 108th congress ; crs report rl32032 , streamlining environmental reviewsof highway and transit projects: analysis of safetea and recent legislative activities ; crs report rl32106 , transportation conformity under the clean air act: in need of reform ? ; andcrs issue brief ib10128 , alternative fuels and advanced technology vehicles: issues incongress . ) slower growth in motor fuels excise tax revenues that support the federal highway trust fundis a significant consideration in determining how much funding is available for surface transportationinfrastructure and related environmental needs . during the previous authorization cycle , robustgasoline sales led to a substantial increase in trust fund revenues . congress used the greateravailability of funds to significantly expand most highway and transit programs , including numerousenvironmental activities . however , the fiscal climate of the current authorization cycle is morerestrictive , due to a smaller balance in the trust fund as a result of slower growth in motor fuelsexcise tax revenues . the limitation on available funding has made it more challenging to balancehighway capacity needs with protecting the environment and other competing priorities . in addition to deciding how much funding is made available for environmental activities , the category of funding under which these activities would be authorized will be a critical factor indetermining whether their support is insured . tea - 21 established a new budget category ofdiscretionary spending guarantees that function as a "firewall" to ensure a minimum level of fundingfor the majority of highway and transit programs , including most environmental activities . guaranteed funding is separated from the rest of the discretionary budget in a way that prevents theuse of federal highway trust fund revenues for any other purpose , and as such , is not subject toreduction in the annual appropriations process . ( 1 ) in addition to guaranteed funding , tea - 21 authorized traditional discretionary funding for certain programs , which is entirely subject to the annual appropriations process .