more have been proposed . because lng ( like other fossil fuels ) is a hazardous liquid transported and stored in enormous quantities — often near populated areas — concerns exist about the federal government's role in addressing lng safety in the terminal siting process . in addition , various energy policy proposals could impact the need for new lng terminals by encouraging the development of alternative u.s. energy supplies and promoting conservation and efficiency . this report provides an overview of recent industry development of new lng import terminals . the report summarizes lng hazards and the industry's safety record . it discusses federal laws and regulations related to lng terminal siting with a focus on the authorities of key federal agencies and safety provisions in the permitting of onshore facilities . the report reviews controversial safety issues in recent lng siting proceedings , such as safety zones , marine hazards , hazard modeling , and remote siting . the report outlines policy issues related to lng terminal safety , including the federal energy regulatory commission's ( ferc's ) lng siting authority , regional lng siting , "remote" siting requirements in federal regulations , state permitting requirements , terrorism , and other issues . the u.s. lng industry is subject to more extensive siting and safety regulation than many other similarly hazardous facilities . federal , state , and local governments have also put in place security measures intended to safeguard lng against newly perceived terrorist threats . some community groups and other stakeholders fear that federal siting requirements for lng facilities are still not stringent enough , but the responsible federal agencies disagree . the safety issues associated with lng terminal siting are both important and familiar . every major energy source poses some hazard to public safety . similar public concerns have been raised around siting of other types of energy facilities such as nuclear power plants , oil import terminals , pipelines , and electric transmission lines . in evaluating new lng terminal proposals , therefore , policy makers face a full range of facilities and safety hazards associated with u.s. energy supplies , not only lng needs and hazards on their own . although lng terminal regulations are extensive , and the global industry has decades of experience operating lng facilities , many stakeholders question lng terminal safety . some of these questions might be resolved through additional research on key lng topics . lng siting decisions are already underway , however , so any additional research efforts intended to affect the siting process would probably have to be completed quickly . revising lng safety requirements after completion of a facility could be disruptive of energy supplies . some cite the shoreham nuclear power plant in the 1980s , which was closed after construction due to new public safety requirements , as an example of the need to resolve safety concerns before capital is invested . both industry and government analysts project continued growth in the demand for natural gas . greater lng imports represent one way to address this growth in demand , along with increased north american gas production , conservation , fuel - switching , and the development of renewable energy sources .