the potential for terrorism is not new . in 1941 , federal bureau of investigation director j. edgar hoover wrote , "it has long been recognized that among public utilities , water supply facilities offer a particularly vulnerable point of attack to the foreign agent , due to the strategic position they occupy in keeping the wheels of industry turning and in preserving the health and morale of the american populace. epa also provides support for water security information sharing for drinking water and wastewater utilities through the waterisac and the water security channel . water infrastructure systems also are highly linked with other infrastructure systems , especially electric power and transportation , as well as the chemical industry which supplies treatment chemicals , making security of all of them an issue of concern . these types of vulnerable interconnections were evident , for example , during the august 2003 electricity blackout in the northeast united states: wastewater treatment plants in cleveland , detroit , new york , and other locations that lacked backup generation systems lost power and discharged millions of gallons of untreated sewage during the emergency , and power failures at drinking water plants led to boil - water advisories in many communities . likewise , natural disasters such as the 2005 gulf coast hurricanes and 2007 mississippi river floods caused extensive and costly damage to multiple infrastructure systems — transportation , water , electric power , and telecommunications . broadly speaking , water infrastructure systems include surface and ground water sources of untreated water for municipal , industrial , agricultural , and household needs ; dams , reservoirs , aqueducts , and pipes that contain and transport raw water ; treatment facilities that remove contaminants from raw water ; finished water reservoirs ; systems that distribute water to users ; and wastewater collection and treatment facilities . across the country , these systems comprise approximately 77,000 dams and reservoirs ; thousands of miles of pipes , aqueducts , water distribution , and sewer lines ; 168,000 public drinking water facilities ( many serving as few as 25 customers ) ; and about 16,000 publicly owned wastewater treatment facilities . all of these systems and facilities must be operable 24 hours a day , seven days a week . ownership and management are both public and private ; the federal government has ownership responsibility for hundreds of dams and diversion structures , but the vast majority of the nation's water infrastructure is either privately owned or owned by non - federal units of government . the federal government has built hundreds of water projects , primarily dams and reservoirs for irrigation development and flood control , with municipal and industrial water use as an incidental , self - financed , project purpose . many of these facilities are critically entwined with the nation's overall water supply , transportation , and electricity infrastructure . the largest federal facilities were built and are managed by the bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) of the department of the interior and the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) of the department of defense .