it made all federal sentences determinate . sentencing guidelines can be presumptive , statutory , advisory or voluntary . the most notable of these are the presumptive sentencing guidelines , which had been in place at the federal level at the time of the supreme court's ruling in booker . in light of the court's ruling in booker and its subsequent rulings in gall and kimrough , the issue for congress is whether to amend current law to require federal judges to follow guided sentences , or continue to permit federal judges to use their discretion in sentencing , under certain circumstances . following is a discussion and analysis of several selected options congress could consider . one option congress may wish to consider could be to maintain the sentencing guidelines by specifying mandatory minimum sentences and increasing the top of each guideline range to a statutory maximum for specified offenses ( hence , codify specified sentencing ranges that are in the guidelines ) . in essence , this option would require any upward departures to coincide with the statutory maximum for the offense in question , in which case a statutory maximum would have to be specified . this option was first presented to the u.s . sentencing commission shortly after the u.s. supreme court decision in blakely by frank bowman , who concluded with respect to such an option: the practical effect of such an amendment would be to preserve current federal practice almost unchanged . guidelines factors would not be elements . they could still constitutionally be determined by post - conviction judicial findings of fact... . the only theoretical difference would be that judges could sentence defendants above the top of the current guideline ranges without the formality of an upward departure... . congress could consider a measure that has been implemented in kansas . kansas had presumptive sentencing guidelines that were invalidated by the state's supreme court . in response to the court ruling , the state's legislature chose to retain the sentencing structure by incorporating jury fact - finding as the basis for enhanced sentences . under this scheme , for each enhancement that would increase the sentence beyond the guideline maximum for which the defendant did not waive his or her rights , the judge has the option of trying aggravating factors before the jury , either during the main trial or in a separate , bifurcated proceeding . the jury would have to find that the enhanced factors exist beyond a reasonable doubt in order for the enhanced sentence to be applicable . while this option may satisfy constitutional questions , it may prove to be an expensive and time - consuming . early penal policy in the united states served the goals of retribution and punishment . beginning in 1870 , however , rehabilitation became the focus of criminal sentencing , which led to the adoption of an indeterminate sentencing system in the federal penal system . at the time , indeterminate sentencing was seen as the preferred mechanism to rehabilitate offenders , which was the stated goal of punishment . under the federal indeterminate sentencing scheme , congress established the penalty range within which the judge imposed a sentence .