the results are portrayed in figure 1 . the figure should be viewed from left to right , moving from the foreign port of exit ( fpoe ) through a transit zone ( illustrating the case where some goods or people might move through one or more intermediate countries en route ) , to the domestic port of entry ( dpoe ) — the final destination in the united states . in the process , exported goods may be handled by multiple intermediaries , people will follow several processes , and the necessary travel documents will pass through many hands . while designed to illustrate the multiple points where bad things can happen , the illustration also suggests that the multiple points of vulnerability in the shipping or travel process can also be seen as opportunities for interception — and , if exploited , can actually increase the probability of interdiction of the bad things and bad people that we seek to intercept before they arrive at their intended targets . the current programs designed to accomplish this interception are discussed more fully in the second report in this series: crs report rl32840 , border and transportation security: selected programs and policies , by lisa m. seghetti , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] . these efforts can be summarized by using an analytical framework that highlights generic strategies that might be used to achieve greater border and transportation security: pushing the border outwards to intercept unwanted people or goods before they reach the united states ( as in the container security initiative and passenger pre - screening ) ; hardening the border through the use of technology ( eg , x - ray machines for examining cargo without opening the containers , radiation and explosives detectors , and unmanned aerial vehicles to monitor remote areas at the border ) ; making the border more accessible for legitimate trade and travel ( faster passage for trusted travelers and cargo conveyors ) ; strengthening the border inspection process through more effective use of intelligence ( terrorist screening data bases ) ; and multiplying effectiveness of interdiction programs through the engagement of other actors in the enforcement effort ( including engaging canada , mexico , state and local law enforcement resources , and the private sector ) . the realization that multiple points of vulnerability might be turned into expanded opportunities for interdiction has given rise to the notion of a "layered" approach to security . the basic idea of layering is that multiple and overlapping measures applied at key points in the border security environment could succeed where only more targeted measures might fail because of their rising expense , increasing conflict with other goals , or inability to cover all conceivable risks arising from opportunistic terrorist tactics . the concept of a layered approach to border and transportation security is gaining currency in policy discussions . the idea was cited in a security context in the so - called gore commission report on aviation safety and security in early 1997 . the commission stated the belief that "aviation security should be a system of systems , layered , integrated , and working together to produce the highest levels of protection.