to date there have been no takers . dfw contends that southwest'smove to eliminate the wright / shelby amendments is a major reason for this situation . dfwcontends that no carrier is currently willing to take a gamble until there is some certainty about thefuture of the wright / shelby amendments . dfw's argument could explain some of the reluctance of new carriers to locate at the airport,but does not take into consideration other factors that might be more important in the market at themoment . the current financial state of the airline industry makes it almost impossible for all but afew lccs to significantly expand service to new airports . at the moment , no legacy airline is knownto be contemplating the creation of a new hub . lccs , as mentioned earlier , do not normally createhubs . the dfw argument also fails to fully acknowledge american's competitive position at theairport . american has always been a fierce competitor and is likely to remain one , its financialproblems notwithstanding . there are not many airlines who are willing to compete head - to - headwith american's well established hub at the airport , especially when they have other options . there are a number of major cities that have more than one major airport successfullyoperating in relative proximity to each other . examples include chicago , new york , los angeles,san francisco / oakland / san jose , washington / baltimore , and houston . southwest contends that thisnational experience could easily be replicated in the dallas ft.worth region and that any negativeeffects on dfw of increasing flights out of love field would be of relatively short duration asregional growth continued to create new opportunities for both airports . dfw goes to some length in its briefing materials to argue that the houston model inparticular would be a bad model for the dallas - ft. worth region . dfw argues that it alreadyprovides more service out of dfw alone than houston does out of two airports . it also argues thatits fares are as low , and in some cases are lower , than those prevalent in the houston region . again,dfw repeats the argument that it would be inefficient for the region's resources to be split betweentwo airports . dfw initiated work . as part of its presentationon why the wright / shelby amendments need to be retained , dfw hired economists at the universityof north texas to perform an economic analysis of what the delta hub closure means to the airportand the local economy . ( 55 ) the specific findings of this analysis are that the delta pulloutwill result in a $782 million per year decrease in regional economic activity , the loss of more than7,000 jobs , a decrease in wages and salaries of $344 million per year , an annual loss of tax and otherrevenues collected by state and local governments of $58 million , and , in 2005 , a $35 million lossto the airport as a result of diminished landing fees , concession fees , etc . the authors conclude theirassessment by stating that: ...the airport will be severely pressed to fill the 24 gatesleft vacant by delta .