figure 1 . daily prices per gallon for california and nationwide retail gasolineand for crude oil , jan. 2003 - dec. 2004 sources: retail gasoline prices: oil price information service , daily fuel gauge report online,sponsored by the american automobile association , http: / / www.fuelgaugereport.com . spot oil prices: eia , weekly petroleum status report , table 14. http: / / www.eia.doe.gov / oil_gas / petroleum / data_publications / weekly_petroleum_status_report / wpsr.html also shown on figure 1 are crude oil prices for the benchmark nymex traded crude oil,west texas intermediate ( wti , for delivery at cushing , ok ) . this is often referred to as the "spotmarket" price ; the weighted average cost of different types of crude used by refiners tracks thenymex price , although it generally averages less than this benchmark . gasoline is manufacturedfrom crude oil , and this price series provides a baseline comparison between retail prices , wholesaleprices ( excluding tax ) , and raw material cost . when gasoline prices peaked in may , crude oilaveraged more than $40 per barrel on the nymex , the equivalent of 95 cents per gallon , an increaseof about 19 cents from the december 2003 average of $32 per barrel . crude oil prices fluctuatemarkedly on a daily basis , posing a difficulty in updating the figures cited here . while an oversimplification , every gallon of gasoline requires a gallon of crude added torefinery input . for much of the figure 1 time frame , crude oil prices track national average pumpprices reasonably closely . but the peaks in gasoline prices - - spring , late summer 2003 , and morerecently in may 2004 - - exceeded what could be attributed to increased crude costs . while crude oilprice increases are generally passed through to the gas pump on a penny - for - penny basis , and helpexplain much of the change in gasoline prices , the divergence between gasoline at the pump andcrude points toward changed gross margins in refining and marketing . this is due to the fundamentalsupply and demand situation for gasoline , relating specifically to an imbalance between the two thatis resolved by a change in price . the most recent price spike seen in figure 1 - - taking place in fall2004 - - appears to coincide with an increase in crude prices . the coincidence here suggests that highgasoline prices seen in september and october 2004 may have been driven by crude cost push , ratherthan demand pull at the pump . reformulated gasoline ( rfg ) supplies in particular have suffered , with thefirst post - strike cargo shipped to the united states in june 2003 . ( 3 ) subsequently , supplies fromvenezuela - - whose refineries have operated as if they were a part of the u.s. supply system - - havebeen sporadic , as operational and labor problems have limited the output of difficult - to - producegasoline that meets u.s. specifications . ( 4 ) u.s. refineries maintained gasoline production of about 8.4 mbd through most of 2003 , withtotal output of all products reflecting operating rates of between 92% and 96% of capacity .