( see figure 1 . ) the expanding u.s. prominence in global markets since 2000 , coupled with large u.s. subsidy levels directed considerable international attention to u.s. cotton program outlays . in 2002 , brazil — a major cotton export competitor — expressed its growing concerns about u.s. cotton subsidies by initiating a wto dispute settlement case ( ds267 ) against certain features of the u.s. cotton program . the cotton industry is a major component of the u.s. agricultural sector . from 1991 to 2010 u.s. cash receipts from cotton production averaged $4.3 billion per year , while export sales averaged nearly $3 billion . cotton is grown across the southern tier of states stretching from virginia down through the carolinas and into georgia , then westward through a belt of contiguous states to california . texas is the largest cotton - producing state , accounting for an average of 26% of u.s. production since 1990 . in 2002 , when brazil first originated its wto dispute settlement case against u.s. cotton programs , 17 states reported cotton production valued at over $20 million . also , some questions remain as to what extent the 2008 farm bill has addressed the adverse effects charge related to price - contingent subsidies . instead of eliminating or reducing program triggers , the 2008 farm bill appears to offer higher levels of price and income support that potentially could aggravate the perception ( if not the reality ) of adverse effects in the marketplace . several of the proposed changes are specifically relevant to the brazil cotton case , but also germane to the broader issue of program vulnerability to wto challenge . for example , the enacted 2008 farm bill: extends the counter - cyclical payments ( ccp ) program and current marketing loan provisions ( §§1104 and 1201 of p.l . 110-246 ) ; raises both target prices and loan rates for several commodities , while only lowering ( marginally ) the target price for upland cotton ( §§1104 and 1202 ) ; offers producers the choice ( subject to a 30% reduction in marketing loan rates and in lieu of 100% of ccp and 20% of direct payments ) of a revenue - based support option under the average crop revenue election program ( acre , §1105 ) with potentially higher per - acre revenue guarantees for several crops than under the previous 2002 farm bill ; and creates a new cotton - user payment of 4 cents per pound ( §1207 ) . this payment appears similar to the wto - illegal step 2 payment except that cotton from all origins ( not just domestic sources ) is eligible for the payment . since the united states imports very little cotton , most payments would still likely go to domestically sourced cotton . as a result , this subtle technical loophole might ultimately be subject to a wto challenge , but would not be part of the current wto cotton case . finally , the 2008 farm bill does not address the issue surrounding the disqualification of direct payments from the wto's green box exclusion as decoupled payments due to the planting restriction on fruits , vegetables , and wild rice on program base acres .