successive u.s . administrations , backed by congress , have supported the eu's esdp project as a means to improve european defense capabilities , thereby enabling the allies to operate more effectively with u.s. forces and to shoulder a greater degree of the security burden . u.s. supporters argue that esdp's military requirements are consistent with nato efforts to enhance defense capabilities and interoperability among member states . what should be the role of other international institutions in responding to these threats ? issues raised by these questions are the subject of this report . there is a consensus in nato that terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction are the principal threats facing the allies today . nato's 1999 strategic concept states that the allied "defense posture must have the capability to address appropriately and effectively the risks" associated with the proliferation of nuclear , biological , and chemical weapons . the document also describes terrorism as a threat , but indicates that political and diplomatic means should be the main instruments against both terrorism and proliferation . the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , on the united states led to a refinement of the allied posture on these threats . in a may 2002 communiqué , nato agreed that the allies must "be able to field forces that can move quickly to wherever they are needed , sustain operations over distance and time , and achieve their objectives. the communiqué marks the moment that nato decided to assume responsibilities around the globe should an ally be threatened . in november 2002 , at the prague summit , the allies made a commitment to build the capabilities necessary to go out of area . they agreed to establish a nato response force ( nrf ) of 20,000 troops for rapid "insertion" into a theater of operations . the nrf consists of highly trained combat units from member states , and could be used to fight terrorism . in addition , the allies agreed to a scaled - down list of new capabilities , called the prague capabilities commitment ( pcc ) , that declining european defense budgets might be able to sustain . under the pcc , some allies have agreed to develop consortia to fund jointly such systems as strategic airlift and aerial refueling , meant to provide mobility for combat operations distant from europe , or specialized "niche" capabilities , such as special forces or units to detect chemical or biological agents . the bush administration's effort to shift nato's mission to combating terrorism and proliferation , with a strategic center of gravity in the middle east , has led to uneasiness and a series of challenges by some allies . although all allies view terrorism and proliferation as serious threats , and all have embraced the need for more "expeditionary" forces , several key allies nonetheless have questions about the administration's leadership and its commitment to nato . international political considerations play an important role in some allies' questioning of u.s. leadership . most allies are members of the european union . they place great importance on international institutions as a means of solving transnational problems , from economic dislocation to narcotics trafficking to prevention of conflict .