6344 and is now law . previously , there were no statutory or even regulatory requirements concerning how hidtas are designated beyond the directive in the expired act that the director may designate such areas in consultation with the attorney general , the secretary of the treasury , heads of the national drug control program agencies , and the governors of the applicable states . most hidtas have been designated through this consultative process , although a few have been created by congress in appropriations acts . the reauthorization act retains the consultative process for designating hidtas and , in addition , requires the director to establish regulations under which a coalition of interested law enforcement agencies from an area may petition for designation as a hidta . these regulations must provide for a regular review by the director of the petition , including a recommendation regarding the merit of the petition to the director by a panel of qualified , independent experts . the expired act did not address how hidtas should be organized and operated . the reauthorization act goes into considerable detail on this subject and would bring the law into alignment with current practice . each hidta , as is now the case , is to be governed by an executive board . the executive board , composed of an equal number of votes between representatives of federal agencies and state and local agencies , would be responsible for providing direction and oversight in establishing and achieving the goals of the hidta , managing the hidta's funds , reviewing and approving all funding proposals consistent with the overall objective of the hidta , and reviewing and approving all reports to the director on hidta activities . the reauthorization act retains the provision in the expired act that no hidta funds may be used to establish or expand drug treatment programs . it adds the requirement that up to 5% of federal funds appropriated for the program can be expended to establish drug prevention programs . the reauthorization act allows the director to authorize the use of available hidta resources to assist federal , state , local , and tribal law enforcement agencies in investigations and activities related to terrorism and terrorism prevention , especially when such investigations and activities are also related to drug trafficking . the director , however , is required to ensure that assistance provided for counterterrorism remains incidental to the hidta program's purpose of reducing drug availability and carrying out drug - related law enforcement activities , and that significant program resources are not redirected to activities exclusively related to terrorism , except on a temporary basis under extraordinary circumstances , as determined by the director . the director , in consultation with the attorney general , is now required to ensure that a representative of the drug enforcement administration is included in the intelligence support center of each hidta . previously , the amount of funding received by each hidta was determined by the director after the annual appropriations bill was enacted , thereby bypassing congressional scrutiny .