hospital services . allied health and graduate medical education payments . skilled nursing facility ( snf ) and hospice services . other part a provisions . physician and practitioner services . hospital outpatient department ( hopd ) , ambulatory surgery center ( asc ) , and clinic services . therapy caps . application of the caps on outpatient therapy services provided by non - hospital providers is suspended from the date of enactment and forthe remainder of 2003 , in 2004 and 2005 . cbo estimates that the therapy cap moratorium willincrease direct medicare spending by $700 million over the 10-year period . durable medical equipment ( dme ) . competitive bidding for dme will be phased - in beginning in 2007 in 10 of the largest metropolitan statisticalareas and may be phased in first for the highest cost and highest volume items and services . theupdate for most dme items and services and for prosthetics and orthotics is 0 in 2004 , 2005 , 2006,2007 , and 2008 . for 2005 , payment for certain items , oxygen and oxygen equipment , standardwheelchairs , nebulizers , diabetic lancets and testing strips , hospital beds and air mattresses will bereduced by an amount calculated using 2002 payment amounts and the median price paid by thefederal employees health benefit program . ( 2 ) beginning january 1 , 2009 , items and servicesincluded in the competitive acquisition program will be paid as determined under that program andthe secretary can use this information to adjust the payment amounts for dme , off - the - shelforthotics , and other items and services that are supplied in an area that is not a competitiveacquisition area . class iii items ( devices that sustain or support life , are implanted , or presentpotential unreasonable risk , eg , implantable infusion pumps and heart valve replacements , and aresubject to premarket approval , the most stringent regulatory control ) receive the full increase in theconsumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) in 2004 , 2005 , 2006 , 2008 and subsequentyears . the secretary will determine the update in 2007 . cbo scored the dme provisions of thebill as reducing spending by $6.8 billion over the 10-year period . home health . home health agency payments are increased by the full market basket percentage for the last quarter of 2003 ( october , november , anddecember ) and for the first quarter of 2004 ( january , february , and march ) . the update for theremainder of 2004 and for 2005 and 2006 is the home health market basket percentage increaseminus 0.8 percentage points . cbo estimates that this provision will reduce direct medicarespending by $6.5 billion over the 10-year period . the legislation suspends the requirement thathome health agencies must collect the outcome and assessment information set ( oasis ) data onprivate pay ( non - medicare , non - medicaid ) until the secretary reports to congress and publishes finalregulations regarding the collection and use of oasis . selected fee - for service demonstration projects . the legislation establishes numerous demonstration projects for the medicare program . several demonstrations address aspects of disease management for beneficiaries with chronic conditions . chronic care improvement under fee - for - service .