, by [author name scrubbed] . are some brigade combat teams vulnerable to enemy armor ? is the army's overly - optimistic in its ability to fully fund modularity and the future combat system ( fcs ) ? how are the army's rebalancing , stabilization , and cyclical readiness efforts progressing and what are their associated costs ? how does the army's force generation model impact the manning and equipping of army modular forces ? the 110 th congress's decisions on these and other related issues could have significant implications for u.s. national security , army funding requirements , and future congressional oversight activities . this report addresses the u.s. army's redesign of its current force structure , based on large divisions , into one based on smaller brigade - level modular brigade combat teams ( bcts ) . crs report rl32888 , the army ' s future combat system ( fcs ) : background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl33757 , u.s. army and marine corps equipment requirements: background and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl32965 , recruiting and retention: an overview of fy2006 and fy2007 results for active and reserve component enlisted personnel , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl32238 , defense transformation: background and oversight issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs20787 , army transformation and modernization: overview and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs21754 , military forces: what is the appropriate size for the united states ? crs report rs20649 , u.s. military dispositions: fact sheet , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl32924 , defense: fy2006 authorization and appropriations , by [author name scrubbed] . key potential oversight questions for the 110 th congress can be summarized as follows: how will the administration's proposed increase of 65 thousand soldiers impact the modularity program ? the united states army is involved in a total organizational redesign of its combat and support units to better meet current and future operational requirements . this redesign effort , as well as associated rebalancing , stabilization , and cyclical readiness initiatives are deemed important by proponents as they are intended to sustain both the active and reserve army through a potentially long term , manpower and resource intensive war on terror . the overall issue facing congress is how well the army's modularity program is progressing and what are some of the issues affecting this major redesign effort . also of critical importance is the army's ability to fund both the future combat system ( fcs ) program and its modularity program concurrently .