so it is difficult to know what to make of this analysis . for the remaining classes , however , the measure appears to favor the lower - income individuals . a very different picture is presented with the distributional effect measured as a change in after tax income based on analysis by the brookings - urban tax policy center ( tpc ) , using the measure they favor , percentage change in after tax income . table 18 and table 19 present this data for income classes and population shares . at that point , the tpc was using adjusted gross income as their income measure , although they later developed expanded income measures . among a variety of statistics released by the urban - brookings tax policy center , one statistic presented is the average tax change among income quintiles . their discussion cautions the reader in using this measure ( as would the authors of this report ) , but it is included here for comparison purposes and to lend some concreteness to understanding the problem with percentage change in tax liability . as table 20 demonstrates , the average tax change in the lowest quintile , a group accounting for about half of the under $30,000 cash income group in the treasury table , is only a dollar . clearly , this group gained essentially nothing from the tax change . the entire under $30,000 group probably gained an average of about $20 — again , a very negligible amount . thus , while the treasury table seems to suggest that this group benefitted more than average ( "15%" as compared with an overall benefit of 11% ) , many people would not characterize the relative benefits in this way . the percentage change in after tax income , by contrast , suggests that these lower - income groups gained very little . it is particularly in these lower - income classes where average tax liabilities are small or negative , that percentage changes in tax liability can be highly misleading . most normative analysis in economics is focused on efficiency . even in the case of distribution issues , however , economic analysis can be used to facilitate the understanding of desirable distributions , measure them correctly , and determine the implications of different assumptions about social welfare for the optimal distribution of the tax burden . the first section of this report , which is normative in nature , therefore discusses different philosophies about how the tax burden should be distributed , and what those philosophies imply for the shape of the tax system . in particular , it addresses the question of the justifications for a progressive tax system ( one where the share of income collected as a tax rises as income rises ) . this section is presented for the interested reader , but is not a necessary preliminary to examining the analysis in the second section , which presents estimates of the distribution of the federal and total u.s. tax burden . the third section of the report discusses the measures that can be used to characterize the distributional effects of tax changes . there are two separate , albeit related , questions about tax burden distribution .