table 1 . ifi anti - corruption features at aglance source: compiled from ifi websites and correspondence with ifi staff . notes: a. ifad: international fund for agricultural development b. ebrd: european bank for reconstruction and development c. idb: inter - american development bank d. ifad does not have a unit dedicated to anti - corruption activities ; however , the office of internalaudit ( oa ) is independent and has anti - corruption responsibilities in addition to other audit andinvestigation responsibilities . sanctions are an important aspect of internal control , but they are only as effective as the mechanisms for detecting and investigating corrupt behavior . each of the ifis consider similarsanctions for misbehavior , such as demotions and dismissals of staff members , blacklisting firms,and the cancellation of loans for borrowers . despite the efforts by the mdbs to implement internal controls and prevent corruption , it is impossible to completely eliminate the possibility that mdb resources will be used toward corruptends . it is possible for mdbs to ensure that the actual loans are used legitimately , but in a corruptcountry they may be used to free up resources for less legitimate purposes . furthermore , there is adistinction between the operations of the mdb management and the decisions made by the executiveboard . the executive board is composed of representatives of member countries with politicalinterests , and it is these board members who make the decisions about whether to make a loan orgrant , the conditionality for that assistance , and whether borrowers have sufficiently met theconditionality requirements . anti - corruption efforts are focused on the activities of management,not the decisions of the executive board . in the most airtight organization , it may still be possiblefor corruption to occur . however , the consistent implementation of internal controls can send a clearmessage that corruption is not tolerated within the organization , and this could have a positiveimpact on the organization's experience with corruption . the world bank took the lead among the international financial institutions ( ifis ) in implementing its anti - corruption system in 1997 . the regional mdbs have moved since to set upbasically similar systems , with organizational variations . the mdbs have made substantial changesin their internal controls over the last five years , which are aimed at bolstering their effectiveness . however , there are still concerns about inadequate effectiveness and insufficient independence ofthese controls . the mdbs communicate with each other on issues of transparency and accountability through the evaluation cooperation group ( ecg ) , an organization of evaluation departments of mdbs . allof the institutions listed below are members of the ecg , with the exception of the international fundfor agricultural development ( ifad ) . the european investment bank ( eib ) , a component of theeuropean union ( eu ) , is also a member of the ecg . the united states is not a member of the eib . the world bank's internal audit department ( iad ) began working in anti - corruption issues in 1997 . a special unit , the department of institutional integrity ( int ) was created in 1998 , hiringspecialists from outside the bank as well as employees from within iad .