debt relief . some argue that the huge debtburden of developing countries , particularly those severely affected by hiv / aids , hinders theirability to develop an effective response to hiv / aids . proponents of heavier debt relief argue thatmany countries , including those receiving debt relief , spend more money on debt payments than onsocial services . this money , they argue , could be used on other programs that are effective incombating the virus , such as supporting education and health infrastructures . ( 103 ) oxfam estimates thatof the 26 countries participating in the highly indebted poor countries ( hipc ) initiative , half arestill spending 15% or more of government revenues on debt repayments . for example , zambia isspending 30% more on debt repayment than on health . ( 104 ) furthermore , hiv / aids is sinking these countries deeper intopoverty , making the debt repayments increasingly harder to pay . there had been some congressional action on this issue in the 107th and 108th congresses . 1567 , "debt cancellation for hiv / aids response act" in the 107th congress , andin the 108th congress h.r . 643 , "to urge reforms of the enhanced highly indebtedpoor countries ( hipc ) initiative," and h.r . 1376 , "to improve the hipc initiative"were introduced . all three bills sought to expand debt relief efforts to countries heavily affected byhiv / aids . similar legislation is expected to be introduced in the 109th session . some areconcerned that debt reduction initiatives can be abused , and corruption will undermine debtreduction strategies . furthermore , it has been argued that it is not debt repayments that are sinkingthese countries deeper into poverty but the lack of strong revenue sources . if some of these countrieswould revise their economic and social policies there would be less of a need for debt relief , criticssay . in an effort to limit the corruption and careless use of debt relief , international institutions , suchas the world bank and unaids , are working with countries to develop effective , transparent plansto incorporate hiv / aids efforts into debt reduction strategies . ( 105 ) agricultural subsidies . access to arvs for children . child advocates arecalling for more children to receive anti - retroviral therapy . unaids estimates that only between15,000 and 20,000 children living with hiv / aids have access to treatment . the organizationbelieves that 660,000 of the 2 million children living with the virus need immediate care . until1990 , no antiretroviral ( arv ) drug was specifically tested or approved for pediatric use . only threearvs are labeled for children under two , come in liquid form , and have who - approved genericversions available . the pediatric arv drugs that are available are significantly more expensive thanadult versions - - branded pediatric arv drug formulations cost between 50% and 90% more thanadult versions . ( 101 ) it is particularly challenging to treat infants and young children , as they are unable to swallowpills . this requires that they receive the drugs in liquid form , which has more stringent handling andstorage guidelines .