table a - 1 . senate and house hearings in the 115 th congress regarding the operation of the fcc are detailed in table a - 2 and table a - 3 , respectively . title i — fcc administration and powers . the 1934 act originally called for a commission consisting of seven members , but that number was reduced to five in 1983 . title iv — procedural and administrative provisions , such as hearings , joint boards , judicial review of the fcc's orders , petitions , and inquiries . title v — penal provisions and forfeitures , such as violations of rules and regulations . title vi — cable communications , such as the use of cable channels and cable ownership restrictions , franchising , and video programming services provided by telephone companies . title vii — miscellaneous provisions and powers , such as war powers of the president , closed captioning of public service announcements , and telecommunications development fund . since the 110 th congress , the fcc has been funded through the house and senate financial services and general government ( fsgg ) appropriations bill as a single line item . previously , it was funded through what is now the commerce , justice , science appropriations bill , also as a single line item . the fcc annually collects and retains regulatory fees to offset costs incurred by the agency and to carry out its functions . since 2009 the fcc's budget has been derived from regulatory fees collected by the agency rather than through a direct appropriation . the fees , often referred to as "section ( 9 ) fees," are collected from license holders and certain other entities ( eg , cable television systems ) . the regulatory fees do not apply to governmental entities , amateur radio operator licensees , nonprofit entities , and certain other non - commercial entities . the fcc is authorized to review the regulatory fees each year and adjust them to reflect changes in its appropriation from year to year . the commission originally implemented the regulatory fee collection program by rulemaking on july 18 , 1994 . the most recent regulatory fee order was released by the commission on august 29 , 2018 . the fcc's budgets from fy2010 to fy2020 are in figure 1 . one fcc - related hearing has been held in the 116 th congress . on april 3 , 2019 , the house committee on appropriations subcommittee on financial services and general government held a hearing on the fy2020 fcc budget . the hearing addressed issues including 5g deployment , federal preemption of state and local tower siting requirements , merger reviews , robocalls , and net neutrality . no bills that would affect the operation of the fcc have been introduced in the 116 th congress . the fcc operates under a public interest mandate first laid out in the 1927 radio act ( p.l . 632 , 69 th congress ) , but how this mandate is applied depends on which of two regulatory philosophies is relied upon to interpret it .