crs report 96-123 . historic preservation: background and funding , by [author name scrubbed] . 2863 was signed into law as p.l . the law affected funding levels enacted in p.l . 109-54 , through rescissions and emergency supplemental funds , which are not reflected in this report . the fy2006 interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations law included funding for agencies and programs in three separate federal departments , as well as numerous related agencies and bureaus . the law provided funding for department of the interior ( doi ) agencies ( except for the bureau of reclamation , funded in energy and water development appropriations laws ) , many of which manage land and other natural resource or regulatory programs . the law also provided funds for agencies in two other departments: for the forest service in the department of agriculture , and the indian health service in the department of health and human services , as well as funds for the environmental protection agency . further , the fy2006 law included funding for arts and cultural agencies , such as the smithsonian institution , national gallery of art , national endowment for the arts , and national endowment for the humanities , and for numerous other entities and agencies . in recent years , the appropriations laws for interior and related agencies provided funds for several activities within the department of energy ( doe ) , including research , development , and conservation programs ; the naval petroleum reserves ; and the strategic petroleum reserve . however , at the outset of the 109 th congress , these doe programs were transferred to the house and senate appropriations subcommittees covering energy and water , to consolidate jurisdiction over doe . at the same time , jurisdiction over the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , and several smaller entities , was moved to the house and senate appropriations subcommittees covering interior and related agencies . this change resulted from the abolition of the house and senate appropriations subcommittees on veterans affairs , housing and urban development , and independent agencies , which previously had jurisdiction over epa . in the recent past , interior and related agencies appropriations acts typically contained two primary titles providing funding . title i provided funds for interior agencies , and title ii contained funds for other agencies , programs , and entities . the fy2006 appropriations law contained three primary titles providing funding . this report is organized along the lines of the law . accordingly , the first section ( title i ) provides information on interior agencies ; the second section ( title ii ) discusses epa ; and the third section ( title iii ) addresses other agencies , programs , and entities funded in the fy2006 law . a fourth section of this report discusses cross - cutting topics that encompass more than one agency . in general , in this report the term appropriations represents total funds available , including regular annual and supplemental appropriations , as well as rescissions , transfers , and deferrals , but excludes permanent budget authorities .