we are virtually defenseless. pressed to name other marketed drugs he thought troublesome , graham named five . the february 2005 meeting of two fda advisory committees — coming three months after dr. graham's testimony to the senate finance committee and five months after merck withdrew vioxx from the market — also drew intense public attention . after weighing the evidence on the safety and risk - to - benefit of vioxx and similar drugs , the committees unanimously asserted that the three cox - 2 inhibitors then holding fda approval for sale in the united states — vioxx , celebrex , and bextra — do increase the risk of heart attack and stroke . illustrating the complexity of decisions that fda faces , a majority of the committee members , noting that the benefits of the drugs outweigh the risks for certain groups of people , therefore , recommended to fda that the agency permit the sale of these drugs — with , however , several severe limitations on advertising and strong warnings in consumer and clinician labeling about cardiovascular risk that is likely associated with dose and duration of use . the furor surrounding dr. graham's testimony reawakened interest in a variety of regulatory issues that have surfaced periodically ever since the storm of protest over "filthy , decomposed or putrid" food and "worthless" medicines resulted in fda's creation during theodore roosevelt's presidency . concerns about regulatory agencies' abilities to protect the public are not unique to fda or public health . the life - and - death issues of medicine , however , strike most closely to home for many americans . there has not been a decade since fda's creation without a highly publicized incident involving drug safety that has led to legislation expanding and strengthening fda's authority to protect the public . examples include the scores of children killed by an untested antibiotic ( elixir of sulfanilamide ) marketed by a company in tennessee in 1937 ; the mistakes at a plant manufacturing polio vaccine in 1954 that actually caused 260 cases of polio and 11 deaths ; and , in 1962 , thalidomide , the sleeping pill that eventually resulted in the birth of at least 8,000 severely deformed babies and thousands of prenatal deaths , mostly in europe . today , as the 110 th congress prepares to consider a variety of health issues , members still share concerns over drug safety and efficacy . the agency most responsible for such issues is the food and drug administration ( fda ) . in fy2006 , fda operated on a budget of $1.88 billion ( $1.49 billion in appropriated funds and $382 million from user fees ) , more than $6 per u.s. citizen . with that money , fda was expected to oversee about $1 trillion of goods , which make up about one - quarter of all u.s. consumer spending . congressional funding for fda has increased at about half the rate as that of industry user fees , established by congress as a way to defray the costs of hiring additional agency personnel so that drug approval review could be quicker .