specifically , p.l . 110-257 expressly exempts the anc from the ina's definition of "terrorist organization. the act also provides the secretary of state and the secretary of homeland security , in consultation with the other and the attorney general , with authority to exempt most of the terrorism - related and criminal grounds for inadmissibility from applying to aliens with respect to activities undertaken in opposition to apartheid rule in south africa . further , federal authorities are required to take all necessary steps to ensure that databases used to determine admissibility to the united states are updated so that they are consistent with the exemptions provided to aliens for anti - apartheid activity . state department officials have reported that the father came into the embassy in abuja , nigeria , on november 19 , 2009 , to express his concerns about his son and that the consular officials at the embassy in abuja sent a cable to the national counterterrorism center ( nctc ) . they relied on the standard interagency procedures for screening suspected terrorists , referred to as visa viper . state department officials acknowledge that a consular officer misspelled abdulmutallab when conducting the name check in the ccd and as a result did not report in the visa viper that abdulmutallab had received a visa in 2008 . this error was reportedly corrected in a visa viper cable sent november 25 , 2009 . some have questioned whether the embassy in abuja , nigeria , or other u.s. consular officials had sufficient authority and justification to revoke the visa issued to abdulmutallab in london as a result of the information his father provided . according to a state department spokesman: "[t]he information in this visas viper cable was insufficient for this interagency review process to make a determination that this individual's visa should be revoked. while consular officers have the authority to issue and to revoke visas on terrorist grounds , they defer to the nctc to identify suspected terrorists and designate known terrorists . after a visa has been issued , the consular officer as well as the secretary of state has the discretionary authority to revoke a visa at any time . a consular officer must revoke a visa if the alien is ineligible under ina ยง212 ( a ) as described above to receive such a visa , or was issued a visa and overstayed the time limits of the visa ; the alien is not entitled to the nonimmigrant visa classification under ina ยง101 ( a ) ( 15 ) definitions specified in such visa ; the visa has been physically removed from the passport in which it was issued ; or the alien has been issued an immigrant visa . the foreign affairs manual ( fam ) instructs: "in making any new determination of ineligibility as a result of information which may come to light after issuance of a visa , the consular officer must seek and obtain any required advisory opinion. this applies , for example , to findings of ineligibility under "misrepresentation," "terrorist activity," or "foreign policy. fam further instructs: "pending receipt of the department's advisory opinion , the consular officer must enter the alien's name in the class under a quasi - refusal code , if warranted.