voting systems . since the enactment of hava,controversy has arisen over whether dre voting systems are sufficiently secure and reliable . thesurvey revealed that leos who have experience with dres are very confident in them and do notgenerally support the addition of a voter - verified paper audit trail ( vvpat ) to address securityconcerns . however , leos using other systems are much less confident in dres and moresupportive of vvpat . the strongly dichotomous results suggest that as congress considers whetherto require the use of vvpat or similar security mechanisms , it might be useful to determine whetherdre users are overconfident in the security of their systems or , alternatively , whether nonusers needto be better educated about the reliability and security of dre systems . ( 23 ) the help america vote act ( hava ) . thesurvey results suggest that hava is in the process of achieving several of its policy goals . thegeneral support of hava provisions - - including those such as the creation of the eac and theprovisional ballot requirement that have been somewhat controversial - - implies that leos are inagreement with the goals of the act and are active partners in its implementation . the overwhelmingchoice of new voting systems that assist voters in avoiding errors indicates that the hava goal ofreducing avoidable voter error is in the process of being met . the areas of concern expressed byleos - - such as how to meet the costs of ongoing implementation of hava requirements - - raiseissues that congress may wish to address as it considers hava appropriations and reauthorization . the close relationship between leos and the vendors of their voting systems seems unlikelyto change as a result of hava . however , with the codification by hava of the voting systemstandards and certification processes , the influence of the federal government in decisions about newvoting systems might be expected to increase in relation to that of vendors and others . however , theinfluence of state elected officials seems unlikely to decline , especially given the responsibilities thathava places on state governments with respect to election administration . table 1 . importance of different factors in the recent andplanned acquisition of new voting systems by local election jurisdictions note: respondents were asked to rate the importance of each factor from 0 ( not at all important ) to 10 ( extremely important ) . recent systems are those acquired within the last three years . plannedsystems are those expected to be acquired within five years . the number reported is the medianresponse . source: texas a&m university , in coordination with the congressional research service . hava requirements and funding have been a major factor in the adoption of new votingsystems by leos . among the 17% of jurisdictions reporting that they acquired voting systems since2000 , about half reported receiving federal funding for that purpose , with about one - third reportingthat most of the funding was from federal sources . about 40% of respondents expect to acquire newsystems within the next five years . hava and state requirements and funding were listed as themost important factors in those decisions ( table 1 ) .