a judicial appeal might ensue . senators have considered changing senate rules or practice by invoking the "constitutional" or "nuclear" option , terms that refer to various types of proceedings . the framers of the constitution were committed to majority rule as a general principle . the appointments clause provides that the president "shall nominate , and by and with the advice and consent of the senate , shall appoint ambassadors , other public ministers and consuls , judges of the supreme court , and all other officers of the united states , whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for , and which shall be established by law.... " there are three stages in presidential appointments by the president with the advice and consent of the senate . first , the president nominates the candidate . second , the president and the senate appoint the individual . and third , the president commissions the officer . the constitutionality of the filibuster has been challenged in court , and such litigation raises justiciability issues . article i , section 5 , clause 2 , of the constitution authorizes "each house [to] determine the rules of its proceedings.... " the rule - making power has been construed broadly by the courts . it has been argued that the rule - making power and historical practice are the foundation for the filibuster , and that article i , section 5 , permits the senate to adopt procedures unless they conflict with a constitutional prohibition . supporters of the filibuster have contended that senate rules are not in conflict with the constitution because the rules require 60 votes to end debate on a nomination , not to confirm a nominee , and that therefore the senate rules are not unconstitutional because they are not at odds with the few constitutional provisions in which the framers specified a particular type of majority . opponents of the filibuster have claimed that senate rules violate the constitutional principle of majority rule and in effect impose an extraordinary majority requirement for confirmation of nominees that is at odds with the appointments clause . several factors have the effect of entrenching the filibuster . first , senate rule xxii , par . 2 ( the cloture rule ) applies , inter alia , to amendments to the senate rules . ( a vote of three fifths of the entire senate is usually required to invoke cloture . a vote of two thirds of the senators present and voting is required to invoke cloture on a measure or motion to amend the senate rules. ) second , senate rule v , par . 2 , provides that "the rules of the senate shall continue from one congress to the next congress unless they are changed as provided in these rules. and third , because the senate is a continuing body , its rules "are not newly adopted with each new session of congress. because the cloture rule may be applied to debate on a proposal to change the filibuster rule , it has been argued that the filibuster rule unconstitutionally interferes with the right of a majority to exercise the constitutional rulemaking authority by majority vote .