very few investigations have been completed . more than 2,000 incidents of violence involving killings and threats between 1991 to 2006 have been alleged . a special labor sub - unit of the colombian prosecutor general's office , set up in 2006 , employs 25 prosecutors and 150 investigators as of august 2012 assigned to investigate and process 1,465 labor - related cases . a vast majority of these labor cases are either under investigation or in preliminary phases of the prosecutorial process . according to the state department , the labor sub - unit has achieved 499 convictions against 597 individuals who committed violent acts against trade unionists ( including 91 convictions in 2011 ) . labor groups argue much more needs to be done to end impunity for crimes targeting trade unionists . human rights watch in its world report 2012 notes that closure of recent cases has been especially difficult . out of the 195 trade unionist killings that human rights watch reports occurred since 2007 when the labor sub - unit became operational , the unit has only achieved convictions in six cases . several measures in the april 2011 action plan include steps to strengthen the colombian judicial system with regard to labor violence prosecutions . until investigations and prosecutions are completed , it is very hard to determine the motive behind killings and if indeed labor union members are targeted . several human rights organizations , including human rights watch , have urged the colombian government to resolve labor cases that have languished in impunity . in addition to the action plan's measures to prevent violence against labor activists , and to strengthen the prosecution of such violence , the action plan sets out steps to protect internationally recognized labor rights . for instance , the action plan restricts the use of colombian "labor cooperatives" ( a form of labor contracting that can be exploitative which is frequently found in the sugar , flower , palm oil , mining and port industries ) and imposes sanctions on businesses that are violating colombian laws . it requires an increased presence of the international labor organization ( ilo ) , an invitation that the ilo has accepted . one of the few incomplete steps laid out in the action plan is the hiring of an additional 380 labor inspectors which must be accomplished by 2014 . when president obama announced the u.s. - colombia free trade agreement's entry into force he asserted that most of the requirements of the action plan had been substantially met . the u.s. trade representative's office , tasked with reviewing the documentation to ensure that colombia has completed the action plan steps , maintained that colombia had met all the important milestones to date . technical meetings between the two governments and meetings between senior labor officials from each country are being held through 2013 to ensure ongoing compliance . in the u.s. congress , some members have expressed continuing concern about labor action plan implementation . with approval by the u.s. congress of the u.s. - colombia free trade agreement in 2011 and its entry into force in may 2012 , the u.s. - colombia partnership passed a major milestone .