in reporting out h.r . 2419 , the house appropriations committee listed the transferred programs in title iii so as to integrate them with the existing programs . in its version of h.r . 2419 , the senate appropriations committee included $552 million more than was included in the house version . the conference report for h.r . 2419 provided $5.383 billion for the agency ( see table 4 ) , increasing the agency's funding by $749 million more than the amount requested by the administration . for the department of the interior , the energy and water development bill provides funding for the central utah project completion account and the bureau of reclamation ( bor ) . until this year , the energy and water development bill has included funding for most , but not all , of doe's programs ; some other doe programs were funded in the interior and related agencies bill . major doe activities historically funded by the energy and water bill include research and development on renewable energy and nuclear power , general science , environmental cleanup , and nuclear weapons programs . the subcommittee reorganization of the appropriations committees transferred doe's programs for fossil fuels , energy efficiency , the strategic petroleum reserve , and energy statistics , formerly included in the interior and related agencies appropriations bill , to the energy and water development bill . including the transferred programs , the total request for title iii for fy2006 was $24.213 billion , compared to $24.419 billion appropriated for fy2005 ( excluding the adjustments noted in table 3 ) . the house appropriations committee recommended $24.318 billion , and the house approved that amount in passing h.r . the senate version of h.r . 2419 would have appropriated $25.077 billion . the conference bill , p.l . 109-103 , appropriated $24.290 billion . in particular , the energy efficiency programs transferred from the interior bill were combined with the renewable energy programs in the energy and water bill into a single account , energy efficiency and renewable energy supply r&d . the senate and the conference followed the same order . in table 7 below , the title iii programs are listed in the order presented in the house report . independent agencies that receive funding from the energy and water development bill include the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) , the appalachian regional commission ( arc ) , and the denali commission . crs issue brief ib10041 . renewable energy: tax credit , budget , and electricity production issues , by [author name scrubbed] . crs issue brief ib10020 . energy efficiency: budget , oil conservation , and electricity conservation issues , by [author name scrubbed] . crs issue brief ib88090 . nuclear energy policy , by [author name scrubbed] and carl behrens . crs report rl33461 , civilian nuclear waste disposal , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs20702 , south florida ecosystem restoration and the comprehensive everglades restoration plan , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs20569 , water resource issues in the 110 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .