as stated by u.s . ambassador to russiaalexander vershbow in january 2004 , russia's operations in chechnya "lead ... to needless sufferingof the civilian population ... they are not holding enough of their own troops accountable when theycommit excesses. ( 44 ) on other issues , several analysts have discerned shifts in administration policy in recentyears , perhaps spurred to some degree by the moscow theater siege in late 2002 and stepped - upterrorist bombings throughout russia in 2003 and 2004 . u.s. concerns before the iraq conflict withgaining russia's support , concerns afterward with terrorist attacks within iraq on coalition forces,and concerns about the replacement of the "moderate" maskhadov with sadulayev ( who is an islamicfundamentalist with close and clear links to basayev ) also may have contributed to the shifts . thereappeared to be fewer administration suggestions to russia that it should open peace talks withseparatists , more tolerance for russia's argument that it was battling terrorism in chechnya , andsome hope that elections and rebuilding efforts in chechnya could contribute to a "politicalsettlement. ( 45 ) the administration's view that elections could contribute to a political settlement washighlighted by the u.s. mission to the osce on march 27 , 2003 . the u.s. emissary stressed thatproblematic voting could harm the legitimacy of russia's peace process , which the united stateshoped could create "institutions of self - government acceptable to the people of chechnya. ( 46 ) in the case of the regionalpresidential race , president bush reportedly urged putin at a september 2003 u.s. - russia summitto ensure a free and fair election . ( 47 ) after the race , however , state department spokesman richardboucher on october 6 criticized the elimination of viable challengers to akhmad kadyrov andconstraints on the media and concluded that "given these problems , it's unclear whether the electionwill have sufficient credibility and legitimacy [among chechens] to advance the settlement process. he also called on the "people of chechnya on both sides ... to work with the russians to resolve thisconflict peacefully. ( 48 ) putin downplayed this criticism by stressing "understanding ... from the president of the unitedstates," regarding russia's efforts to combat "islamic radicalism" in chechnya , and that "it servesu.s . interests to shore up" such efforts . ( 49 ) secretary powell reiterated during his january 2004 moscowvisit that the united states was "not satisfied with" the october 2003 presidential election inchechnya. ( 50 ) afterthe august 2004 presidential race in chechnya , the u.s. state department described it as having"serious flaws" and not democratic ( 51 ) more recently , the state department has placed more emphasis on the anti - terrorism aspectsof the chechnya conflict . it seemingly has reserved criticism of the character of the november 2005legislative and previous races in chechnya and downplayed the idea of talks with moderateseparatists . ( 52 ) some administration officials have raised concerns that problematic elections in chechnyaare emblematic of a russia less interested in adopting western democratic and human rights"values," and that such slippage could ultimately harm bilateral relations .