in addition , p.l . 110-53 made several changes to the criteria to qualify as a vwp country , which were intended to enhance the security of the program . there are a few provisions in s. 2362 that were not included in p.l . s. 2362 would require the secretary of dhs to regularly evaluate the questions being asked under esta and to report to congress after the evaluations . s. 2362 would also require the commissioner of cbp , in consultation with the secretary of dos , to constantly assess the data collected through esta to verify the accuracy of such data . in addition , s. 2362 would require that cbp submit a report to congress identifying ( 1 ) the five airports in europe that most closely adhere to the requirements for commencing preclearance operations ; and ( 2 ) the airports that would provide significant national security benefits if cbp officers were deployed at the airports . in addition , under s. 2362 ( and s. 2337 discussed in the next section ) countries would be required to enter into and comply with an agreement to assist in the "operation of an effective air marshal program. the newly enacted provision prohibiting dual nationals of vwp countries and certain other countries , including iran , iraq , sudan , and syria , from utilizing the vwp has raised some questions and concerns about the impact on u.s. citizens with dual nationality with one of the specified countries . some dual nationals of the united states and one of these countries have expressed concerns that they will now need to get a visa to come to the united states ( eg , dual u.s. - iranian citizens ) . the vwp applies to foreign nationals coming to the united states ; it does not impact u.s. citizens , even those with dual nationality . in other words , dual u.s. - iranian , u.s. - iraqi , u.s. - sudanese , or u.s. - syrian citizens still do not need a visa to travel to the united states . however , the provision may impact the ability of such dual nationals to travel visa - free to vwp countries , especially countries that are part of the european union ( eu ) . as discussed , the vwp is predicated on the idea of reciprocity . while the act does not affect u.s. citizens , vwp countries may enact similar provisions prohibiting visa - free travel of certain dual national u.s. citizens ( eg , u.s. - iranian ; u.s. - syrian citizens ) to those countries . concerns have been raised that the provisions enacted in p.l . 114-113 prohibiting dual nationals of vwp countries and specified other countries ( eg , iraq , syria ) from traveling under the vwp are discriminatory and ineffective . the equal protection in travel act would reinstate the ability of dual nationals from vwp and any other country to travel under the vwp . s. 2458 would amend p.l .