- european relations . despite some trade and economic frictions , it would be nearly impossibleand in neither side's interest to actively pursue less robust trade and investment relations . thus , theoptions below touch upon the economic aspects of the partnership only to the extent that they haveimplications for transatlantic trade and investment . additionally , the options are meant to beillustrative guideposts in considering the future direction of u.s. - european relations , rather thandefinitive , exhaustive predictions or stark choices . the united states and europe share a long and intertwined history . ( 1 ) u.s. - european political,security , and economic relations that today comprise the broad transatlantic relationship have theirmodern origins in post - world war ii efforts to deter the soviet threat and bring security to europe . nato , which was created in 1949 , and the european union ( eu ) , the latest stage in a process ofeuropean integration begun officially in 1952 , are the two main pillars upon which the transatlanticrelationship still rests . nato was founded upon a shared commitment to protect common valuesof democracy , individual liberty , and the rule of law ; in practice , it sought to do this by providingcollective defense against soviet expansion through a mutual security guarantee for the united statesand its european allies . the european integration project was meant to promote peace , politicalstability , and economic prosperity in europe by entrenching democratic systems and free markets . the u.s. congress and successive u.s . administrations have strongly supported both natoand the eu , believing that both organizations have helped foster democracy , reliable military allies,and strong trading partners . the united states also views the organization for security andcooperation in europe ( osce ) as an important transatlantic forum for promoting democracy andhuman rights both in europe and in europe's wider neighborhood , including russia , ukraine,belarus , and the countries of the caucasus and central asia . the united states and europeannations also share membership in other major international organizations such as the world tradeorganization ( wto ) and the united nations . since the end of the cold war , both nato and the eu have evolved along with europe'schanged strategic landscape . while nato's collective defense guarantee remains at the core of thealliance , members have also sought to redefine its mission as new security challenges have emergedon europe's periphery and beyond . at the same time , eu members have moved beyond economicintegration and have taken steps toward political integration with decisions to develop a commonforeign policy and a defense arm . both organizations have also enlarged in recent years toencompass many central and east european states , bringing the number of nato and eu membersto 26 and 25 respectively . the united states was a key proponent of nato expansion and a firmbacker of eu enlargement , viewing these twin efforts as serving u.s. interests by consolidating a"europe whole and free , at peace with itself and with the world. meanwhile , the u.s. - european economic relationship has continued to grow . the unitedstates and the eu share the largest trade and investment relationship in the world .