legislation . in the first session of the 108thcongress , the house passed h.con.res . 209 , a concurrent resolution commending thesigning of the united states - adriatic charter , on june 23 by a vote of 381 to 1 . the senate agreedto h.con.res . 209 with amendments on july 29 . in february , the senate passed s.con.res . 4 , commending the support of 18 european nations , including macedonia,for iraq's full compliance with u.n. security council resolution 1441 , and their expressions ofsolidarity with the united states . in the second session , the house passed a resolution ( h.res . 558 ) in march 2004 that welcomed the accession of seven countries intonato , called for the process of nato enlargement to remain open , and recommended a natosummit to review the applications of albania , croatia , and macedonia by 2007 . the house andsenate passed separate resolutions ( h.res . 314 ) in march2004 expressing condolences for the untimely death of macedonian president boris trajkovski andcommemorating his leadership . in november 2004 , the house introduced h.con.res . 530 , which encouraged greece and macedonia to continue negotiations to determine a mutuallyacceptable official name for macedonia . key aspects of the agreement are outlined below . implementation of the frameworkagreement at first progressed slowly and unsteadily , but consistent international support and pressurehave encouraged greater stability and political normalization . ( 2 ) macedonia's current multi - ethnic government remains committed to the ohrid process . itssurrounding region has remained relatively calm , with all western balkan states seeking closerassociation with and membership in nato and the european union . regional tensions could growin the coming months and years as deliberations begin over the disputed status of neighboringkosovo . at the international level , since september 11 , 2001 , u.s. and international attention andresources have shifted away from the balkans and toward other troubled regions of the world,especially in the middle east . the united states continues to support multilateral efforts to stabilizemacedonia , but has increasingly looked to the european union to play a larger international role inthe balkans , starting with macedonia . the growing eu role includes both operational elements anda broader integration strategy . the united states has long maintained that peace and security in the former yugoslavrepublic of macedonia is important for balkan stability and u.s. interests . during the 1990s , theunited states remained actively engaged in multilateral efforts to prevent the spread of ethnicconflict to macedonia , bolster macedonian independence and state viability , and manage bilateraldisputes between macedonia and greece . u.s. and other international leaders feared that anyprolonged violent conflict involving macedonia could swiftly become internationalized andimplicate neighboring states , including nato allies . they therefore frequently expressed supportfor macedonia's sovereignty and territorial integrity . the multi - year deployment of a smallcontingent of u.s. military forces to macedonia as part of a u.n. mission in the early 1990s - - thefirst engagement of u.s. military ground forces in the balkans - - further demonstrated the u.s.commitment to the macedonian piece of the regional stability puzzle .