in its report ( s.rept . 104-112 / s. 1026 ) , the senate armed services committee wrote that "to the extent that kinetic - energy bpi systems hold promise for tmd applications , the committee believes that reliance should be placed on unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) . some constraints on ship - based missile defenses have been eliminated by the bush administration's decision to withdraw from the 1972 abm treaty . ship - based systems are attractive to missile defense planners because ships often can be maneuvered close to hostile areas . how would a force of seven abls support the 10 aefs ? the air force , and other services , frequently complain about the onerous and disproportionate o&s ( operations and support ) costs of "high demand , low density" ( hd / ld ) assets such as jstars and u2s . would procurement of only seven aircraft create another hd / ld problem for the air force ? on the other hand , buying more aircraft would require more people to fly and maintain them . it is currently unclear what impact the abl might have on the air force's already strained aerial refueling fleet . while based at some yet - to - be determined u.s. base , abls will likely deploy to forward operating locations such as guam , diego garcia , raf fairford england , and elmendorf afb alaska during crises . although these bases are likely closer to tomorrow's hot spots than the continental united states , they are still hours of flying time away from the persian gulf , the korean peninsula , and central asia . abls will require refueling to get to the crisis theater , refueling to maintain combat air patrols in - theater , and refueling to return to base . what effect will the abl's current weight gain have on its fuel load ? might increased payload mean less fuel and therefore an even greater aerial refueling requirement ? some observers have questioned how the abl would be employed to counter intercontinental ballistic missiles ( icbms ) . the consensus is that russia and china currently field icbms that could plausibly threaten the united states ; there is no such consensus on the future ability of north korea or other so - called "rogue states" to field such missiles . ( some believe that such capabilities will emerge in the distant future , if ever . others see the proliferation of such missiles as inevitable , and that it could occur sooner rather than later. ) current estimates suggest that the abl's 400 km range ( about 250 miles ) is too short to stand outside russian or chinese airspace and still engage those countries' icbms in boost phase . would the abl fly into these countries' airspace during crisis to address potential icbm launches in boost phase ? or would the abl's laser need to be more powerful ? or will some alternative be deployed to supplement or replace the abl for these scenarios ? another set of questions pertains to using the abl in or near commercial airspace . would seven aircraft be sufficient to adequately address potential threats ?