3888 ( farr ) . no legislative action occurred on either bill . the legislation would amend the clean water act to prohibit cruise vessels entering a u.s. port from discharging sewage , graywater , or bilge water into waters of the united states , including the great lakes , except in compliance with prescribed effluent limits and management standards . it further would direct epa and the coast guard to promulgate effluent limits for sewage , graywater , and bilge water discharges from cruise vessels that are no less stringent than the more restrictive standards under the existing federal alaska cruise ship law described above . it would require cruise ships to treat wastewater wherever they operate and would authorize broadened federal enforcement authority , including inspection , sampling , and testing . the legislation also would impose passenger fees for use by epa and the coast guard to implement the legislation . environmental advocates supported similar versions of this legislation in previous congresses . incinerators may release toxic emissions as well . the several waste streams generated by cruise ships are governed by a number of international protocols and u.s. domestic laws , regulations and standards , which are described in this section , but there is no single law or regulation . another issue for congress is the status of epa's efforts to manage or regulate cruise ship wastes . as discussed previously , in 2000 congress authorized epa to issue standards for sewage and graywater discharges from large cruise ships operating in alaska . in response , the agency has been collecting information and assessing the need for additional standards , beyond those provided in p.l . 106-554 , but has not yet proposed any rules . in december 2008 , epa released a cruise ship discharge assessment report that builds on a 2007 draft assessment report and the 2000 white paper . the final report examines five cruise ship waste streams ( sewage , graywater , oily bilge water , solid waste , and hazardous waste ) and discusses how the waste streams are managed and current actions by the federal government to address the waste streams . for each waste stream , the report identifies possible options and alternatives to address cruise ship discharges , but it also states that epa has not determined that any of the options are necessary , feasible , or warranted , or that epa or any other entity has the legal authority to implement the options . other related issues of interest could include harmonizing the differences presented in u.s. laws for key jurisdictional terms as they apply to cruise ships and other types of vessels ; providing a single definition of "cruise ship," which is defined variously in federal and state laws and rules , with respect to gross tonnage of ships , number of passengers carried , presence of overnight passenger accommodations , or primary purpose of the vessel ; or requiring updating of existing regulations to reflect improved technology ( such as the msd rules that were issued in 1976 ) . several areas of research might help improve understanding of the quantities of waste generated by cruise ships , impacts of discharges and emissions , and the potential for new control technologies .