possible approaches include . congress could determine that the present amount of training and funding that states and localities receive is adequate . in support of this position , it might be argued that the current allocation of training funding and priority of training is necessary to ensure that every state and locality is provided a baseline amount of counter - terrorism training . this option , however , does not address the argument that some states and localities are at a greater risk of terrorist attacks and may need more training or funding than those states or localities at a lesser risk . if congress were to decide that the present counter - terrorism training provided by dhs is not fully meeting the needs of states and localities at a greater risk of terrorist attacks , it could direct dhs , specifically g&t , through statutory or conference language , to establish a priority attendance list of states and localities . this list could give training priority to states and localities that are determined to be at a greater risk of or vulnerability to terrorist attacks . g&t , with access to intelligence concerning the national terrorist threat , might be designated to determine which states and localities appear to have a greater need for training . this option , however , might result in some states or localities receiving reduced training due to the limited space in and availability of the training programs ; and it could be argued that this would not ensure adequate security for some states and localities . congress could direct g&t to increase funding to specific states or localities based on terrorist threat information . since congress , through the usa patriot act , directed only that a minimum of 0.75% of total appropriations be allocated to states for homeland security , it could through statutory or conference language require g&t to provide additional funding to specific states and localities for counter - terrorism training . this option could increase preparedness of states and localities at greater risk of terrorist attacks as determined by threat information . this option , however , would require g&t to coordinate terrorist threat information with its allocation of shsgp funding , which it presently does not do . supporters of this position would be likely to argue that since g&t coordinates terrorist threat information with its allocation of uasi funding , it could do this for shsgp allocations . within dhs , g&t and the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) administer training programs at the state and local levels , and at national training institutes . at the national level , fema administers the emergency management institute ( emi ) and the national fire academy ( nfa ) . g&t does not directly administer any training institute ; however , it provides guidance and funding to training institutes that are part of the national domestic preparedness consortium ( ndpc ) , described earlier in this report . some training programs offered by emi and nfa have similar subject matter in training provided by ndpc training institutes , such as incident management , homeland security planning , hazardous material incident response , emergency operations , and wmd response .