appendix a . 108-458 ) " as discussed below . while the administration has seemingly gone to great lengths to clarify the processes involved with the us - visit program , many concerns have surfaced . some have questioned the integration of us - visit with the vwp , while others have found the existence of too many potential exceptions problematic . some observers have suggested that the program may not be in compliance with congressional mandates . generally , the specific requirements and procedures that a traveler must abide by to enter the united states through the us - visit program are detailed in agency regulations . the vwp , while statutorily distinct , is linked to us - visit's components and implementation in many respects . for example , vwp regulations for manifest requirements have now been merged with the electronic manifest requirements for all passengers arriving on commercial aircraft from foreign countries . with respect to biometrics , travelers entering the united states pursuant to the vwp are enrolled in us - visit starting september 30 , 2004 . the current infrastructure at most u.s. ports of entry reportedly is not sufficient to accommodate the demands of an automated entry and exit data system . for example , according to some observers , at many land ports of entry additional lanes may be necessary to accommodate the number of individuals seeking entry into the united states who will need to be processed through the system . moreover , in order to record the departure of every alien leaving the united states through a land port entry , there needs to be a "port of exit" that has sufficient lanes , staff and resources . additionally , the sending or receiving countries ( i.e. , canada and mexico ) may not have the same number of lanes or the necessary infrastructure to create additional lanes that would accommodate the amount of traffic entering and leaving the country via a united states port of entry . some contend that this could lead to significant delays as travelers try to make their way through ports of entry . others assert that the cost of expanding the infrastructure would be great . with respect to air and sea ports of entry , concerns similar to those about land ports of entry have been expressed . for example , securing adequate space and facilities may prove challenging at many air and sea ports of entry , particularly for the exit process . moreover , in many instances passengers are inspected on board vessels because of inadequate or nonexistent inspection areas at sea ports of entry . with respect to the northern border , many businesses as well as the canadian government fear that the implementation of such a system would clog the border . there have been reports that the canadian government may introduce a plan that would have canadian customs officials collect exit information on non - citizens and pass it on to united states officials . such a plan could further aid the united states in identifying non - citizens who may enter the country . moreover , as the united states begins to implement the us - visit program , the demand for improved infrastructure may be critical for its development .