such legal agreements are made through treaty or executive agreement . the u.s. constitution allocates primary responsibility for such agreements to the executive branch , but congress also plays an essential role . and the supreme court has held that only self - executing international agreements have the status of judicially enforceable domestic law . but other issues concerning the status of international law in the u.s. legal system have never been fully resolved . the scope of presidential power to make executive agreements , the role of non - self - executing agreements and customary international law , and the division of power to withdraw from international agreements — like many international - law - related issues — have long been the subject of debate . because the legislative branch possesses significant powers to shape and define the united states' international obligations , congress is likely to continue to play a critical role in dictating the outcome of these debates in the future . the following section discusses historical practice and jurisprudence related to the withdrawal from and termination of international agreements . customary international law is defined as resulting from "a general and consistent practice of states followed by them from a sense of legal obligation. first , in order for a treaty ( but not an executive agreement ) to become binding upon the united states , the senate must provide its advice and consent to treaty ratification by a two - thirds majority . secondly , congress may authorize executive agreements . thirdly , the provisions of many treaties and executive agreements may require implementing legislation in order to be judicial enforceable in u.s. courts . the effects of customary international law upon the united states are more ambiguous and difficult to decipher . while there is some supreme court jurisprudence finding that customary international law is incorporated into domestic law , this incorporation is only to the extent that "there is no treaty , and no controlling executive or legislative act or judicial decision" in conflict . this report provides an introduction to the role that international law and agreements play in the united states . for purposes of u.s. law and practice , pacts between the united states and foreign nations may take the form of treaties , executive agreements , or nonlegal agreements , which involve the making of so - called "political commitments. in this regard , it is important to distinguish "treaty" in the context of international law , in which "treaty" and "international agreement" are synonymous terms for all binding agreements , and "treaty" in the context of domestic american law , in which "treaty" may more narrowly refer to a particular subcategory of binding international agreements that receive the senate's advice and consent . the effects that international legal agreements entered into by the united states have upon u.s. domestic law are dependent upon the nature of the agreement ; namely , whether the agreement ( or a provision within an agreement ) is self - executing or non - self - executing , and possibly whether the commitment was made pursuant to a treaty or an executive agreement .