they were not enacted . in the 111 th congress , the senate - passed version of the american recovery and investment act of 2009 ( h.r . 1 ) included a provision to prohibit permanently the use of federal funds for inspecting any nonambulatory disabled cattle for use as human food , regardless of the reason for becoming nonambulatory . however , the provision was removed by house - senate conferees prior to final enactment as p.l . a freestanding bill ( h.r . 4356 ) to ban such cattle from the food supply and to ensure that they are humanely euthanized was introduced in december 2009 ; the measure was pending at the start of 2010 . a subcommittee of the house oversight and government reform committee held a hearing on the issue on march 4 , 2010 , where , among other witnesses , the government accountability office testified on a new gao report concluding that fsis inspectors may not be taking consistent actions to enforce the hmsa . for background , see crs report rs22819 , nonambulatory livestock and the humane methods of slaughter act , by [author name scrubbed] . the nais is to be abandoned . in its place usda proposes a new approach that will allow individual states ( and tribal nations ) to chose their own degree of within - state animal identification ( id ) and traceability for livestock populations . under this revised focus , states may chose to have no mandatory animal id and traceability capability , or to rely on existing id systems already in place to fight brucellosis , tuberculosis , and other contagious animal diseases , or to develop their own version of a more detailed birth - to - market id system as originally proposed under nais . the flexibility is intended to allow each state to respond to its own producer needs and interests . however , under the proposed revision usda will require that all animals moving in interstate commerce have a form of id that allows traceability back to their originating states . animal id proposals were offered but not enacted in the 110 th congress . for example , h.r . 1018 would have prohibited the establishment of a mandatory id system . 2301 would have created a livestock identification board with members from industry to oversee a national program . several other bills establishing broader traceability programs would have applied to animal id as well . also in the 110 th congress , both the house and senate committee reports to accompany usda's fy2008 appropriation ( h.rept . 110-134 ) had questioned usda's progress and direction in implementing nais . over several years through fy2008 , about $128 million had gone into the development of such a program . the fy2009 usda appropriation ( p.l . 111-8 , division a ) , passed near the start of the 111 th congress , provided another $14.5 million for program , of which $3.5 million was for information technology , $9.4 million was for field implementation , and $1.6 million was for program administration .