515 on december 14 . the house agreed to the senate version by voice vote on december 20 . president obama signed the bill into law on january 3 ( p.l . the law reauthorizes the belarus democracy act ( bda ) of 2004 . it updates the provisions of the legislation to sharply condemn the fraudulent december 2010 presidential election and the ensuing crackdown . it expresses support for continuing radio , television , and internet broadcasting to belarus by radio free europe / radio liberty , the voice of america , european radio for belarus , and belsat . the legislation updates the bda by including the post - december 2010 events in the section of the earlier law that expressed support for u.s. sanctions against belarus . these include a prohibition on u.s. financial assistance to the belarusian government and expressing the sense of the congress that the united states should oppose multilateral financial aid to belarus . these conditions are to remain in place until the president determines belarus meets specific democratic and human rights criteria . the section expresses the sense of the congress that the president should coordinate with european countries to take similar measures against belarus . the bda also required the president to report within 90 days and every year thereafter on the sale of weapons or weapons - related assistance to regimes supporting terrorism , and on the personal wealth of lukashenko and other senior belarusian leaders . all four companies are deemed to be controlled by belneftekhim . in response to the u.s. announcement , belarus suspended the elimination of its stock of highly enriched uranium , which it had undertaken as part of the december 2010 agreement with the united states . in september 2012 , a state department spokesperson said the belarusian parliamentary elections "fell short of international standards and their conduct cannot be considered free or fair. the spokesperson added that "enhanced respect for democracy and human rights in belarus , including the release and rehabilitation of all political prisoners , remains central to improving bilateral relations with the united states. in addition to sanctions against persons and firms for the regime's undemocratic actions , the united states has imposed sanctions on belarusian firms on non - proliferation grounds . most recently , in february 2013 , the united states imposed sanctions on tm services limited and scientific and industrial republic unitary enterprise ( also known as db radar ) for violating the iran , north korea , and syria non - proliferation act ( p.l . the sanctions prohibit the u.s. government from working with these firms , including the sale of arms and granting of export licenses . the united states is concerned about human trafficking in belarus . according to the state department's 2012 trafficking in persons report , belarus is a country of origin and transit for women and children trafficked for sexual exploitation . it is listed as a "tier 2" watch list country . this means that it does not meet minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking , and has not made significant efforts in the previous year to do so .