zimbabwe is at a critical juncture . prior to the power sharing agreement , the government took some fiscal measures to reverse the economic downturn , but hyperinflation continued , and the measures were largely ineffective . the mdc controls the ministry of finance under the transitional government , but zimbabwe is in debt distress and it remains unclear how effective the mdc's economic policies will be without major donor financing for its recovery plans , estimated to require up to $8 billion . many donor governments and institutions have been reluctant to release significant funds until they can determine whether the transitional government's establishment will result in changes to the policies that brought about sanctions in the first place . the mdc and zanu - pf , long - standing political foes , must now demonstrate their willingness to work together to put the country's economy on the path toward recovery . cabinet positions have been divided among the parties . many observers remain skeptical that the parties will be able to work together to implement the remaining political reforms deemed necessary by international donors . the coalition government has faced considerable challenges in prioritizing development needs , attracting donor funding , and making the reforms necessary for the country's economic recovery . for further discussion of the coalition government and other current events , please see crs report rl34509 , zimbabwe: the transitional government and implications for u.s. policy , by lauren ploch . after years of economic sanctions by the international community and a decades - long civil war that resulted in more than 30,000 dead , the white minority rule government of southern rhodesia concluded a series of agreements with the black majority in 1979 that resulted in the establishment of the government of the republic of zimbabwe . among the greatest challenges facing the new government was the demand by the majority for greater equity in land distribution . at independence , the white minority , who composed less than 5% of the population , owned the vast majority of arable land . many observers at that time considered the country's white - owned commercial farms crucial to the country's economy , although there was a general recognition that land reform was necessary . britain initially funded a "willing buyer , willing seller" program to redistribute commercial farmland , offering to compensate amenable white farmers . dissatisfaction with the pace of land reform grew and led in the 1990s to spontaneous and often violent farm invasions . at the same time , the country's labor movement and a segment of its urban middle class were becoming increasingly critical of the government's economic performance . facing rising political and economic challenges , the government of zimbabwe began to implement aggressive land expropriation policies , leading britain and other donors to begin withdrawing financial support for resettlement . in 2000 , the government held a referendum to approve changes to the constitution that would allow land seizures without compensation , a responsibility that in its view lay with britain . the referendum was rejected by 55% of voters and was seen as a victory for a new opposition party , the movement for democratic change ( mdc ) .