the national security act of 1947 ( p.l . 80-253 ) established the statutory framework for themanagerial structure of the united states intelligence community , including the central intelligenceagency ( cia ) and the position of director of central intelligence ( dci ) . a fundamental intent ofthis legislation was to coordinate , and to a certain extent centralize , the nascent intelligence effortsof the united states as an emergent superpower in the face of a hostile soviet union . in addition,the act provided the cia with the ability to assume an operational role by charging it with: perform[ing] such other functions and duties related to intelligence affecting the national security as the national security council may from time to timedirect . ( 1 ) in 1947 , the foundation of the present - day intelligence community consisted only of therelatively small intelligence components in the armed services , the departments of state and thetreasury , the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , and the fledgling cia . since 1947 , however,the intelligence community "has greatly expanded in size and acquired a much broader range ofresponsibilities in the collection , analysis , and dissemination of foreign intelligence. ( 2 ) the u.s. intelligence community is defined in the national security act as amended . it currently includes the following: central intelligence agency ; national security agency ; defense intelligence agency ; national geospatial - intelligence agency ; national reconnaissance office ; intelligence elements of the army , navy , air force , marine corps , the federalbureau of investigation , the department of the treasury , the department of energy , and the coastguard ; bureau of intelligence and research , department ofstate ; elements of the department of homeland security concerned with analysesof foreign intelligence information ; and coast guard . ( 3 ) beginning in january 1948 , numerous independent commissions , individual experts , and legislative initiatives have examined the growth and evolving mission of the intelligencecommunity . proposals by these groups have sought to address perceived shortcomings in theintelligence community's structure , management , role , and mission . these proposals have rangedin scope from basic organizational restructuring to the dissolution of the cia . in 1948 and 1949 , two executive branch commissions examined the intelligence and operational missions of the cia , and identified fundamental administrative and organizational loopholes in p.l.80-253 . by the 1950s , however , the physical growth and evolving mission of the intelligencecommunity led subsequent commissions to broaden the scope of their proposals to include theenhancement of the dci's community - wide authority , and the establishment of executive andlegislative branch intelligence oversight committees . unlike the intelligence investigations of the1970s and 1980s , these early studies were primarily concerned with questions of efficiency andeffectiveness rather than with issues of legality and propriety . following the vietnam war and "watergate," investigatory bodies became increasingly critical of the national intelligence effort . beginning in the mid - 1970s , the impetus shifted to the legislativebranch where investigatory committees led by senator frank church and representative otis g. pikeissued a broad range of proposals , including the separation of the dci and cia director positions,dividing the cia's analytical and operational responsibilities into two separate agencies , and theestablishment of congressional oversight committees .