specifications are met . as a result of the clean air act requirements and state mandates , many different types ofgasoline are sold in the united states . in addition to conventional and rfg , there is oxygenated fuel ( higher oxygen content than rfg ) , low volatility conventional gasoline , and a variety of state andlocal blends . these "boutique fuels" include ethanol blends , california cleaner - burning gasoline ( also used in nevada and arizona ) and a number of other local formulations . as noted above , the trend toward ethanol blends may continue because it is the oxygenateused to replace the additive mtbe . there is a general perception among policymakers that price volatility isundesirable , but there is no consensus on what the price level ought to be . nor is there consensusabout how the government might deal with market volatility . similarly , there appears to be generalagreement that spot shortages - - run - outs and lines at gas stations - - are to be avoided . but there areno guides for policy actions to remedy such situations should they take place , and it could be thatletting market forces make corrections without government involvement would be the better courseof action . some policy initiatives in the 108th congress are embodied in two house bills focusing onthe proliferation of regional gasoline blends and expanding refinery capacity . 4545 , the gasoline price reduction act , centered on the proliferation of special , local boutiquegasoline blends . the bill failed to get the required two - thirds house vote for passage undersuspension of the rules . it would have authorized epa during significant supply disruptions to issuewaivers of state provisions requiring boutique fuels . the boutique fuel requirement is seen aspotentially limiting supply by impeding the movement of fuel between areas ; a shortage in one spotmight not be met with extra fuel from a nearby area because of differing requirements . the bill alsoproposed capping the number of boutique fuels at the current level . 4545 proposed dealing with supply fungibility ; but it did not offer remediesthat could have increased the supply of domestically produced gasoline . 4517 , therefinery revitalization act - - which passed the house , but has not seen senate action - - is aimedat facilitating increases in capacity by fast - tracking the environmental review and permitting offacilities in a designated refinery revitalization zone . the secretary of energy would designate thezones , coordinate environmental reviews , and make final decisions on federal authorizations for newrefineries within the zones . to the extent that those wishing to construct a new refinery - - or expandan existing facility - - have been hindered by environmental regulation , this measure is intended tooffer some assistance . these bills articulate at least some components of a gasoline supply policy , dealing withdomestic supply and indirectly with imports , and with fuel specifications that impact the distributionof supply . both measures have drawn substantial criticism , however , particularly on environmentalgrounds . for example , with regard to the refining bill , opponents express concern that such ameasure would override state clean air programs . among its cons , h.r .