some suggest thatu.s . strategy in this regard is contradictory - - senior u.s. military leadership describes the afghandrug trade as the most significant security problem facing afghanistan yet it appears that somebelieve that the u.s. is ceding its responsibilities in counternarcotics operations at a time that suchefforts should be intensified . ; what will be the u.s. military role in the nato commandstructure ? ; how much say will nato have in security and stability operations andoffensive operations designed to destroy the taliban / al qaeda insurgency ? will nato be able to"overrule" the united states or change existing policies ? will nato assumption of command leadto a less vigorous pursuit of insurgents ? some suggest that , despite theprogress made to date , afghanistan's burgeoning drug trade has the potential to undermine theafghan government and provide the taliban with the financial resources needed to perpetuate theinsurgency indefinitely . the current u.s. military role in counternarcotics operations is limited to training , planningsupport , and the transport of police and troops . the rationale provided in the past for limited u.s.military involvement in afghan counterdrug operations was that active involvement "was notachievable given u.s. force levels in afghanistan" and that it could "significantly undermine itscounterinsurgency campaign. ( 153 ) while the united states has gone from a "no participation"policy to a supporting role , critics suggest that a more active role is now essential . it is possible that congress may explore in greater detail how africa not only fits into theadministration's long term strategy for the war on terror but also what the administration's specificstrategy is for africa , if such a strategy exists . while combined joint task force horn of africa ( cjtf - hoa ) has been in existence for almost three years , little is publicly known about theselong - term commitments to the region in terms of overall strategy and what resources - - both militaryand financial - - would be required to implement such a strategy , particularly if the administrationintends to expand operations to other african nations . congress may also choose to review with dod , the prospects for establishing a separateregional command for africa . while there appears to be a number of arguments favoring such acourse of action , there are also political and resource issues that might be examined in great detail.security for such a headquarters , if it is placed in africa , could also be a significant issue fordiscussion , given the volatile nature of the region . removing africa from u.s. centcom's andu.s . eucom's responsibility could also have political and resource implications . reports that abu sayaaf and jemaah islamiyah are developing a training relationship andoperational alliance suggest to some the potential for an increase in terrorist activities throughoutsoutheast asia . while the majority of these activities would likely be against regional governments,the potential exists for attacks against u.s. concerns and citizens in the region . u.s. military presenceand ongoing operations in the region are considered by some as modest at best and might do littleto deter attacks or assist u.s. regional allies in pursuing those responsible .