app . 2405 ( j ) ( asamended ) ) . ( 8 ) under theterms of the act , the secretary of state provides congress with the list of countries that have"repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism. there are currently seven stateson the state sponsors of terrorism list: cuba , iran , iraq , libya , north korea , sudan , and syria . ( 9 ) being on the list subjects acountry to a range of severe u.s. export controls , especially of dual - use technology and militaryweapons . the provision of u.s. foreign aid ( except humanitarian assistance ) is also prohibited . the state sponsors of terrorism list has been remarkably static since its initiation in 1979,with only two states ever having been removed: south yemen , which was removed in 1990 whenit effectively ceased to exist , merging with north yemen to form the current state of yemen ; andiraq , which was removed from the list in1982 ( when it was allied with the united states ) and wasreturned to the list in 1990 ( after its invasion of kuwait ) . ( 10 ) this list differs from the fto list , as it is directed specificallytoward states , not substate actors - - like the terrorist groups that the states allegedly support . it alsoderives from different legislation . ( 11 ) at least three other important u.s. "terrorist lists" are in use . the "specially designatedterrorists" ( sdts ) list was generated pursuant to the international emergency economic powers act ( p.l . 1701 et seq . ) it was initiated under presidential executive order 12947 on25 january 1995 and was specifically oriented toward persons ( individuals and entities ) who threatento disrupt the middle east peace process . later , following the events of september 11 , 2001 , thepresident invoked the same emergency authorities in presidential executive order 13224 , to block"all property and interests in property" of certain designated terrorists and individuals and entitiesmaterially supporting them . ( 12 ) this established another , much longer list , known as thespecially designated global terrorists ( sdgts ) list . there are currently over three hundred personsidentified as sdgts . these two lists are especially targeted toward blocking terrorist financing , andthey do not have an immigration element . the treasury department maintains the so - called sdt and sdgt lists , and , unlike the ftolist , the secretary of the treasury takes the lead in adding individuals or organizations to the lists andthen freezing the assets of persons or entities that are on them . the lists have grown to include morethan 200 entities , organizations , and / or individuals . they derive from different legislation and,again , are not the same as the designated fto list . ( 13 ) the sdt , sdgt , state sponsors , and ( as of october 2002 ) fto lists were placed togetherin a new , larger roster called the "specially designated nationals and blocked persons" ( sdn ) listmaintained by the office of foreign assets control of the treasury department .