107-252 , 116 stat . the first is the question of whether such federal involvement in traditionally state and local practices would impose additional costs on state and local governments , and thus be regarded as an "unfunded mandate. one response by the state and local governments might be to call for federal funding to meet the increased expenses imposed on them by federal requirements . precedent for this exists in the grant program incorporated in hava . a second issue is related , and centers on perceptions as to whether such an amendment would be regarded as federal intrusion into state and local responsibilities . for instance , a more far - reaching scenario might include the gradual assumption of the entire election administration structure by the federal government . in this hypothetical case , questions could be raised as to: ( 1 ) the costs involved ; ( 2 ) whether a national election administration system could efficiently manage all the varying nuances of state and local conditions ; and ( 3 ) under these circumstances , what would be the long term implications for federalism ? conversely , it could be argued that a national election administration structure is appropriate for national elections , and that state or local concerns are counterbalanced by the urgent requirement that every citizen be enabled and encouraged to vote , and that every vote should be accurately counted . some observers assumed that action of the electoral college in 2000 , in which george w. bush was elected with a slight majority of electoral votes , but fewer popular votes than al gore , jr. , would lead to serious consideration of proposals to reform or eliminate the electoral college . notwithstanding these circumstances , however , none of the proposals introduced in either the 107 th through 109 th congresses received more than routine committee referral . in the 107 th congress , attention focused on proposals for election administration reform , resulting in passage of the help america vote act ( p.l . 107-252 , 116 stat . this legislation , as noted earlier in this report , substantially extended the role of the federal government in the field of voting systems and election technology through the establishment of national standards in these areas and the provision of aid to the states to improve their registration and voting procedures and systems . in many cases , all the aforementioned factors contributed to the success of an amendment . further , while the electoral college has always had critics , its supporters can note that it has ratified the people's choice in 47 of 51 presidential elections held since ratification of the 12 th amendment , a success rate of 92.2% . in the final analysis , given the high hurdles — both constitutional and political — faced by any proposed amendment , the electoral college system seems likely to remain in place unless or until its alleged failings become so compelling that large concurrent majorities in congress , the states , and among the public , are disposed to undertake its reform or abolition . other factors may also contribute to the endurance of the electoral college system .