appendix a . two hypothetical examples for determining a level of death benefits determining the value of death benefits to survivors is highly dependent upon individual circumstances . such variables include increases in benefits resulting from annual cost of living adjustments , possible changes in eligibility ( such as remarriage ) , tax implications , etc . in addition , such an assessment would need to take into consideration all benefits incurred as a result of military service of the decedent . ( as noted above , these would include social security benefits. ) since dependency and indemnity compensation are integrated with sbp , these benefits are considered here . social security benefits have been excluded from these examples because the primary focus of this report is to examine the death benefits provided by the department of defense and the department of veteran affairs . any computation of death benefits based on a hypothetical situation is unlikely to be representative of the "average" or "typical" benefits received by the survivors of military personnel who die while on active duty . indeed , the value of many of the benefits , such as health care and commissary / exchange privileges , cannot be quantified . the following examples are , at best , rough estimates , and are intended for illustrative purposes only . the first example consists of a marine corps corporal ( e - 4 ) who is killed while on active duty in iraq in january 2008 . the corporal has been in the service for four years . given the above , the corporal's spouse could receive a $100,000 death gratuity . assuming the corporal had maintained full participation in the sgli , the surviving spouse would also receive an additional $400,000 . hearse service . funeral director's services . transportation of the remains , and round trip transportation and prescribed allowances for an escort ... , to the place selected by the person designated to direct disposition of the remains or , if such a selection is not made , to a national or other cemetery which is selected by the secretary and in which burial of the decedent is authorized . [changes made in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 affect the transportation of remains of service members who die in a combat theater of operations and who are transported by air to dover air force base , delaware . unless directed otherwise , when the remains are transported by air , the remains shall be transported by a military or military - contracted aircraft and the transportation of said remains shall be the primary mission of that aircraft . this language also included provisions for an honor guard , in addition to the escort mentioned above , to travel with the remains or to meet the remains at the place to which the transfer is made. interment of the remains . presentation of a flag of the united states to the person designated to direct disposition of the remains , except in the case of a military prisoner who dies while in custody of the secretary and while under a sentence that includes a discharge .