( what is causing it ? is china's currency policy to blame ? ) economic consequences of china's currency policy for both china and the united states . appreciation in the nominal exchange rate has brought the yuan almost back to its 1998 level in real terms . in the long run , real ( inflation - adjusted ) exchange rates return to their market value whether they are ( nominally ) fixed or floating . imagine that the demand for chinese goods and services were to increase . if the yuan were floating , it would appreciate , as more yuan were acquired to purchase chinese goods . china's massive accumulation of foreign exchange reserves and purchases of u.s. federal debt instruments . policy options on how the united states might induce china to reform its present currency policy , including current legislation introduced in congress . many u.s. policymakers , business people , and labor representatives have charged that china's currency is significantly undervalued vis - à - vis the u.s. dollar by as much as 40% , making chinese exports to the united states cheaper , and u.s. exports to china more expensive , than they would be if exchange rates were determined by market forces . they further argue that the undervalued currency has contributed to the burgeoning u.s. trade deficit with china , which has risen from $30 billion in 1994 to $256 billion in 2007 , and has hurt u.s. production and employment in several u.s. manufacturing sectors ( such as textiles and apparel and furniture ) that are forced to compete domestically and internationally against "artificially" low - cost goods from china . furthermore , many analysts contend that china's currency policy induces other east asian countries to intervene in currency markets in order to keep their currencies weak against the dollar to remain competitive with chinese goods . several groups are pressing the bush administration to pressure china either to revalue its currency or to allow it to float freely in international markets . these issues are addressed in more detail later in the report . president bush and administration officials have criticized china's currency policy on a number of occasions , stating that exchange rates should be determined by market forces . initially , the bush administration rejected calls from several members of congress to apply direct pressure on china to force it to abandon its currency peg . instead , the administration sought to encourage china to reform its financial system — under the auspices of a joint technical cooperation program agreed to on october 14 , 2003 , for example — and take other measures that would pave the way toward adopting a more flexible currency policy . the administration's position on china's currency peg appears to have toughened beginning around april 2005 when then - u.s. treasury secretary john snow asserted at a g - 7 meeting ( on april 16 , 2005 ) that "china is ready now to adopt a more flexible exchange rate. this was likely driven in part by growing complaints from members over china's currency policy and the introduction of numerous currency bills .