this situation is shown in figure 3 . satellite subscriber z is located in state y and in dma f. under shvia , the satellite operator could provide subscriber z local - into - local service consisting only of the signals of broadcast television stations located in dma f , even if none of those stations are located in state y . nor could the satellite operator offer subscriber z any distant network signals that originated from state y because subscriber z is within the grade b contour of the broadcast stations in city m. because of these rules , news or sports entertainment that was broadcast by a station in central wyoming or arkansas often was not available to satellite subscribers in more remote parts of those states that were within out - of - state dmas . this restriction on local - into - local service was not based on technological constraints or lack of bandwidth ( although the number of dmas in which local - into - local service is offered may be affected by bandwidth and satellite capacity constraints ) . once a satellite operator has uplinked the programming of a particular broadcast station to a satellite , there are no technical constraints on making that signal available to all television households within the footprint of the satellite . ( it is true , however , that the greater use of spot beams has resulted in smaller footprints so there may now be situations in which the broadcast signal of a station in a particular state is uplinked to a satellite with a spot beam that does not cover other portions of the state that are located in a different dma. ) but in most cases , the primary reason why a subscriber did not receive broadcast signals from stations located outside that subscriber's dma was that the satellite operator , in order to conform with the law , had to set the subscriber's set - top box to exclude the out - of - dma signals emanating from its satellite . the satellite home viewer extension and reauthorization act of 2004 ( shvera ) expanded the scope of in - state television signals that may be of local interest to subscribers that satellite operators are permitted ( and , in the case of operators in alaska and hawaii , required ) to offer subscribers . in addition to the signals of those broadcast television stations with city of license within the dma in which the subscriber is located ( "local - into - local" service ) , satellite operators may offer ( subject to certain limitations ) signals from outside the dma if those signals are "significantly viewed" by those households in the subscriber's geographic area that only receive their broadcast signals over - the - air ( not via cable or satellite ) . in addition , satellite operators may offer certain subscribers located in new hampshire , vermont , mississippi , and oregon certain in - state signals from outside the subscribers' dma and must offer subscribers in alaska and hawaii certain in - state signals . specifically , the current restrictions on the retransmission of distant broadcast signals ( i.e.