medical care . the medical care appropriationwould provide for medical care and treatment of eligible veterans , and certain dependents andsurvivors of veterans . b . the senate committee on appropriations included bill language delaying availability of $1.1 billionfor medical care to provide flexibility to va to implement significant program changes . c. the senate committee on appropriations included bill language that canceled budget authority of $270 million , representing prior years recoveries for medical care . d. medical care collections fund ( mccf ) receipts are restored to the vha as an indefinite budgetauthority equal to the revenue collected , estimated to be $1.386 billion in fy2003 . theamount initially projected for fy2004 was $1.8 billion ; the conferees on the va - hudportion of the consolidated appropriations act ( p.l . 108-199 ) used a later estimate of$1.564 billion . source : department of veterans affairs note: service - connected disability means with respect to disability , that such disability was incurredor aggravated in the line of duty in the active military , naval or air servic . in addition , this appropriation would also provide for training of medicalresidents and interns and other professional paramedical and administrative personnel in the healthcare field . medical care collections fund ( mccf ) . vadeposits copayments collected from veterans obligated to make such payments for either medicalservices or inpatient pharmacy benefits for outpatient medication , ( 36 ) and third - party insurancepayments from service - connected veterans for nonservice - connected conditions into the mccf . ( 37 ) however , copayments,third - party insurance payments , and fees for services other than medical services or inpatientpharmacy benefits were deposited in several medical collections accounts . in fy2004 , the administration's budget proposed consolidating several medical collectionsaccounts into the mccf . the conferees of the consolidated appropriations act [ h.rept.108-401 ] ( 38 ) recommended that collections which would otherwise be deposited in the entities formerly known asthe health services improvement fund , the veterans extended care revolving fund , the specialtherapeutic and rehabilitation activities fund , the medical facilities revolving fund , and theparking revolving fund be deposited in the mccf . the funds deposited in the mccf would beavailable for medical services for veterans . these collected funds do not have to be spent in anyparticular fiscal year and are available until expended . the following describes former collectionaccounts now consolidated under the mccf , and current programs . pharmacy copayments ( formerly collected in the health services improvement fund - - hsif ) . in fy2002 , congress created a new fund ( the health services improvementfund ) to collect increases in pharmacy copayments ( from $2 to $7 for a 30-day supply of outpatientmedication ) that went into effect on february 4 , 2002 . the consolidated appropriations resolution,2003 ( p.l . 108-7 ) granted va the authority to consolidate the hsif with the mccf and grantedpermanent authority to recover copayments for outpatient medications . long - term care copayments ( formerly veterans extended care revolvingfund ) . ( 39 ) this fund received per diems and copayments from certain veteran patients receiving extended careservices from va providers or outside contractors .