by introducing h.r . 6537 and by holding hearings , but no further action was taken . many hold that nmsa comes closest to authorizing mpas . it authorizes the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) to designate specific sites for comprehensive and coordinated management and conservation . however , some , especially environmentalists and many marine scientists , assert that a more comprehensive approach with stricter protection and more extensive protected areas is still needed . this report identifies a number of issues related to establishing mpas in the united states . it begins by defining the concept and administrative actions taken to provide spatial protection in marine areas . it then considers some of the key issues and potential benefits and costs of designating additional mpas . it concludes by considering potential areas of congressional interest for the 111 th congress . existing federal laws related to the use of mpas are summarized in the appendix . the term mpa has been used to characterize spatial protection of marine resources , but ambiguities exist regarding the level of protection that qualifies an area as an mpa . protection might be considered on a continuum — from no protection to complete protection where all human activities within an area are prohibited . those areas afforded complete protection would certainly quality as mpas , but areas closed to a specific use or to protect a species might not . virtually all of u.s. waters are protected in some manner , but all u.s. waters are not considered mpas . often the definition depends on the context , such as the characteristics of the resources at risk and the extent of associated threats . the following section provides basic definitions of mpas , but application of the concept is likely to evolve with improvements in scientific understanding of the marine environment and development of associated institutions . according to the mpa center inventory , approximately 1,700 mpas are managed by federal , state , and territorial agencies in u.s. waters . these areas cover 34% of u.s. marine waters and vary widely in level of protection , restrictions on human uses , and overall purpose . less than 30% of mpas are managed by federal agencies , but because of the large size of several federal mpas , nearly 85% of the total mpa area in u.s. waters is under federal jurisdiction . about 90% of mpas permit access and multiple use , including fishing . most are permanent , providing protection throughout the year , and most have been established since 1970 . noaa manages mpas for fisheries management ( national marine fisheries service ) , units of the national estuarine research reserve system ( coastal programs in national ocean service ) , and the national marine sanctuary program ( national ocean service ) . the department of the interior manages marine areas that are part of the national wildlife refuge system ( fish and wildlife service ) , national parks ( national park service ) , and national monuments ( fish and wildlife service and national park service ) . a number of federal laws and programs already exist , and they have been summarized in the appendix .