the same is true for spyware . software programs that include spyware may be sold or available for free ( "freeware" ) . they may be on a disk or other media , downloaded from the internet , or downloaded when opening an attachment to an electronic mail ( e - mail ) message . typically , users have no knowledge that spyware is on their computers . because the spyware is resident on the computer's hard drive , it can generate pop - up ads , for example , even when the computer is not connected to the internet . one example of spyware is software products that include , as part of the software itself , a method by which information is collected about the use of the computer on which the software is installed , such as web browsing habits . some of these products may collect personally identifiable information ( pii ) . 109 th congress two bills passed the house on may 23 , 2005 — h.r . 29 ( bono ) and h.r . 744 ( goodlatte ) — both of which were very similar to legislation that passed the house in the 108 th congress . additionally , the ftc maintains its own list of cases . the ftc has consumer information on spyware that includes a link to file a complaint with the commission through its "onguard online" website . the ftc has also issued a consumer alert about spyware that lists warning signs that might indicate a computer is infected with spyware . the ftc alert listed the following clues: a barrage of pop - up ads a hijacked browser — that is , a browser that takes you to sites other than those you type into the address box a sudden or repeated change in your computer's internet home page new and unexpected toolbars new and unexpected icons on the system tray at the bottom of your computer screen keys that don't work ( for example , the "tab" key that might not work when you try to move to the next field in a web form ) random error messages sluggish or downright slow performance when opening programs or saving files . the ftc alert also offered preventive actions consumers can take: update your operating system and web browser software download free software only from sites you know and trust don't install any software without knowing exactly what it is minimize "drive - by" downloads by ensuring that your browser's security setting is high enough to detect unauthorized downloads don't click on any links within pop - up windows don't click on links in spam that claim to offer anti - spyware software install a personal firewall to stop uninvited users from accessing your computer . finally , the ftc alert advised consumers who think their computers are infected to get an anti - spyware program from a vendor they know and trust ; set it to scan on a regular basis , at startup and at least once a week ; and delete any software programs detected by the anti - spyware program that the consumer does not want . in march 2004 , utah became the first state to enact spyware legislation .