did not prevail on core issues . the ustr lists indicate that the united states has won overwhelmingly in the cases that it has brought to the wto . the united states has not fared as well , however , when other countries challenged u.s. practices . the ustr reports that as of march 21 , 2005 , the united states was a responding party in 103 complaints and compliance proceedings . 27 by a vote of 338-86 . a similar withdrawal resolution was introduced five years ago ( h.j.res . 106-672 ) and was voted down in the house by a 363-56 vote and not introduced in the senate . the withdrawal resolution offered the opportunity for members to examine the costs and benefits of wto participation , express the degree of satisfaction with wto dispute decisions , or debate other aspects of wto membership . in addition to considering the withdrawal resolution , the 109 th congress will monitor wto disputes involving u.s. interests and u.s. laws . congress might also consider whether or not to change u.s. laws where wto panels have decided against the united states . members of congress may debate whether the wto dispute process and individual decisions support u.s. interests . at the same time , the united states and the other members of the wto are participating in a multilateral round of trade negotiations . the talks began in november 2001 in doha , qatar , and are called the doha development agenda , or doha round . the purpose of this report is to analyze the main issues in the debate on u.s. participation in the wto . to put the issue in perspective , the report begins with a brief history of the wto , including its purpose and functions , followed by an examination of the economic benefits and costs of the wto . the main body of the report addresses selected issues for the united states: the economic costs and benefits to the united states , decisionmaking in the wto and national sovereignty ; the wto dispute process ; arguments on whether or not to include labor , environmental , and food safety standards in the wto ; and the wto and developing countries . it ends with a brief discussion of alternatives to participation in the wto . following world war ii , nations throughout the world , led by the united states and several other developed countries , sought to establish an open and nondiscriminatory trading system with the goal of raising the economic well - being of all countries . aware of the role of trade barriers in contributing to the economic depression in the 1930s , the countries that met to discuss the new trading system considered open trade as essential for economic stability and peace . the intent of these negotiators was to establish an international trade organization , which would address not only trade barriers but other issues indirectly related to trade , including employment , investment , restrictive business practices , and commodity agreements . unable to secure approval of such a comprehensive agreement , however , they reached a provisional agreement on tariffs and trade rules , called the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) .