( see below. ) it has also had a close association with singapore and malaysia through the fpda of 1971 . in recent years , new zealand has sought to expand its traditionally close relationships by reaching out to develop closer ties , particularly through expanded trade , with asian states . the future economic costs of doing nothing are dire. clark pointed to renewable energy as a key component along with the importance of forestry to climate change mitigation as key to lowering new zealand's carbon footprint . renewable energy sources , such as hydroelectric and wind power , account for between 60% and 70% of total electricity output . new zealand has undertaken a commitment to have 90% of its energy drawn from renewable sources by 2025 . the new zealand government has been keen to brand new zealand as a "green producer" as it has already encountered difficulty with food exports over the "food miles" issue in great britain . new zealand has made its case that though energy is expended in transporting new zealand food to distant markets , its meat and dairy is free - range and grass fed , and hence relatively carbon - emissions friendly when compared with concentrated animal feeding operations ( cafo ) , which feed energy intensive grain , that are more common in the united states and europe . two studies from lincoln university in christchurch have found that there is greater energy efficiency in new zealand for the production of lamb , apples , and dairy products when compared with british products . these studies took into account transportation costs from new zealand to the united kingdom as well as other aspects of production . new zealand's approach to climate change is under review . the climate change response act of 2002 requires a review of new zealand's emissions trading scheme ( ets ) by the end of 2011 . climate change minister nick smith announced the independent review in december 2010 . the panel is to make recommendations to government on how the ets should evolve beyond 2012 . uncertainty over the outcome of international efforts to address climate change may influence this process . new zealand ratified the kyoto protocol on climate change in 2002 . new zealand seeks "an environmentally effective and economically efficient long - term global agreement to meet the objective of the un framework convention on climate change. new zealand also seeks "appropriate and effective mitigation action by all developed countries and by major emitting and advanced developing countries. new zealand is a trade - dependant nation . as such , it is a strong advocate of free trade . new zealand's principal exports are dairy products , meat , timber , fish , fruit , wool , and manufactured products . new zealand has approximately 33 million sheep , 4 million cattle , and 4.2 million people . new zealand has been pursuing free trade agreements with india and south korea as well as seeking to promote the trans pacific partnership ( tpp ) agreement with singapore , chile , brunei , australia , peru , malaysia , the united states , and vietnam .