appendix a . list of law enforcement entities participating in 287 ( g ) program appendix b . legislation in the 110 th congress in the 110 th congress , a number of bills were introduced that would have provided state and local law enforcement officers immigration enforcement authorities or that would have otherwise supported the enforcement of immigration law by state and local law enforcement officers . s. 1348 , the comprehensive immigration reform act of 2007 , included provisions concerning the state and local enforcement of immigration laws that were similar to those contained in the version of s. 2611 that passed the senate in the 109 th congress ( see appendix c for a discussion of s. 2611 and other legislation in the 109 th congress ) . 1150 , the secure borders , economic opportunity , and immigration reform act of 2007 , which was proposed as a substitute to s. 1348 , and s. 1639 contained similar provisions . specifically , all three legislative proposals would have created a border relief grant program for eligible law enforcement agencies to address criminal activity that occurred near the border . under the program , the secretary of dhs would have been authorized to provide grants to law enforcement agencies located within 100 miles of the northern or southern border or to agencies outside 100 miles , located in areas certified as "high impact areas" by the secretary . 1150 , and s. 1369 would also have authorized dhs to reimburse state and local authorities for certain training , equipment , transportation , and incarceration costs related to immigration enforcement , and certain costs associated with processing criminal illegal aliens through the criminal justice system . other provisions of these legislative proposals would have , among other things , required dhs to ( 1 ) verify the immigration status of aliens apprehended or arrested by local police ; ( 2 ) take possession of illegal aliens within 72 hours after the local police apprehend an alien or complete the charging process ; and ( 3 ) designate at least one federal , state or local prison , jail , private contracted prison or detention facility within each state as the central facility for that state to transfer custody of aliens to dhs . unlike s. 1639 and s.amdt . 1150 , s. 1348 as introduced also contained a provision reaffirming a state's inherent authority to investigate , identify , apprehend , arrest , detain , or transfer into federal custody aliens in the united states , though this provision only concerns the enforcement of the criminal provisions of the ina . s. 1348 also contained a provision requiring the secretary of dhs to provide specified information on certain aliens to the ncic . 842 would have given state and local law enforcement personnel the authority to investigate , identify , apprehend , arrest , detain , or transfer into federal custody aliens within the united states . state or local governments that continued to prohibit their law enforcement officers from assisting or cooperating with federal immigration law enforcement entities two years after the bill's enactment would no longer have been eligible for funding under the state criminal alien assistance program .