however , the senate took no action . , those concerning fish , shellfish , sea turtles , and marine mammals ) recognize international interdependence on these resources and provide a framework for their cooperative and sustainable management . more recently , the george w. bush administration reiterated support for u.s. accession to unclos . in addition , sedentary continental shelf species are more specifically addressed in article 77 ( 4 ) , living resources on the high seas are considered in articles 116-120 , and marine habitat protection is provided by articles 192-196 . in addition , u.s. accession to unclos would provide the united states the opportunity to nominate a representative to the commission on the limits of the continental shelf and to seek clarification of u.s. continental shelf boundaries , thus addressing concerns related to shared continental shelf areas such as the bering sea's donut hole and the arctic waters of the chukchi and beaufort seas . furthermore , accession could benefit the united states by allowing u.s. participation in the international seabed authority and appointment of u.s. representatives to its various subsidiary bodies . moreover , u.s. accession to unclos would provide the united states with the opportunity to nominate national representatives as judges on the itlos and to fully participate in developing the practices of this important global body . as the status of the international whaling commission ( iwc ) is currently in dispute , some suggest that the united states , if ratifying unclos , might offer a declaration recognizing the iwc as the "appropriate international organization" to regulate cetaceans as a means to marginalize any competing organizations that might seek to offer an alternative model of cetacean management . such u.s. action might empower and energize the iwc , an organization that the united states has worked hard to develop as a key marine conservation body . on the other hand , some u.s. interests view u.s. ratification as potentially complicating enforcement of domestic marine regulations . these uncertainties reflect the absence of any comprehensive assessment of the social and economic impacts of unclos implementation by the united states . although early itlos cases do not indicate a problem , some in the united states remain concerned that unclos's language concerning arbitrary refusal of access to surplus ( unallocated ) living resources might be a potential source of conflict . additional concerns surround whether and to what extent the united states could regulate ballast water discharges to combat invasive species , supplemental to and in concert with international action taken by the international maritime organization ( imo ) . if unclos is interpreted such that invasive species are covered under the convention's broad definition of pollution , the united states ( and other coastal nations ) could be constrained as to what preventive measures could be imposed on ships operating outside our territorial sea . proponents of unclos maintain that u.s. participation in the development of policies and practices of the international tribunal for the law of the sea , the commission on the limits of the continental shelf , and the international seabed authority could help to forestall future problems related to living marine resources .