provide tax relief h.r . 218 would allow a deduction for amounts paid for health insurance and prescription drug costs of individuals . 2176 would provide a 100% deduction for the health insurance costs of individuals . expand medicare or fehbp coverage h.r . 55 would make fehbp available to individuals age 55 to 65 who would not otherwise have health insurance . since that time , americans are living longer . according to the u.s. national center for health statistics , 2002 data indicates that persons reaching age 65 had an average life expectancy of an additional 18.2 years , living beyond age 83 . according to the u.s. census , the total number of persons over age 65 has almost doubled since 1965 , reaching 35.6 million , or 12.3% of the total population by 2002 . this trend is projected to continue and , according to u.s. census bureau estimates for 2030 , when the baby boomers are all over age 65 , the total number of persons 65 and older will have more than doubled again , growing from 35.6 million to 71.5 million , comprising 20% of the u.s. population . as individuals reach their late 50s and 60s , they become increasingly likely to have acute and chronic health conditions such as heart disease , arthritis , and diabetes . according to the national center for chronic disease prevention and health promotion , approximately 80% of all persons over age 65 have at least one chronic condition and 50% have at least two . as previously discussed , the demographics of this group foreshadow that employers may be facing coverage for a larger number of individuals who are expected to live longer and therefore use a lot more health care services than originally anticipated when these companies first began to offer retiree health coverage . in addition , several other factors , described below , contribute to the erosion of retiree health insurance , including increasing costs ( especially for prescription drugs ) , the economy , and changes in accounting practices . there are a wide variety of policy options that endeavor to make retiree coverage more available or affordable , or even to require that employers maintain coverage . however , when considering any option , it is also essential to consider the relationship between retirees' health insurance and insurance for current workers . special treatment for retirees , compared to current workers could lead to inequitable outcomes . for example , one policy option often discussed to protect retiree health insurance is to require employers to continue to provide previously promised health insurance coverage to their retiree population . without a parallel requirement for current workers , employers could find themselves in an awkward situation in which they were financially unable to cover workers , but required to cover retirees . thus any statutory requirement to provide retiree health insurance coverage should be examined in the broader context of all employer - sponsored coverage . the 110 th congress has not yet introduced bills relating to retire health insurance .