418 and the version of h.r . 1268 that originally passed the house . however , some notable changes were made , including , inter alia , ( 1 ) removing provisions relating to the release of aliens in removal proceedings on bond ; ( 2 ) making asylum and withholding of removal eligibility and credibility standards less stringent than those proposed in earlier versions of the real id act ; ( 3 ) providing for limited judicial review of secretary of homeland security decisions to waive certain legal requirements to facilitate the construction of barriers at the borders ; ( 4 ) providing broader waiver authority to the secretary of state and secretary of homeland security regarding terrorist - related grounds for inadmissibility and removal ; and ( 5 ) modifying , and in some cases making more stringent , real id act provisions concerning minimum security standards for state - issued drivers' licenses and personal identification cards accepted for federal purposes this report analyzes the major provisions of the real id act of 2005 , as enacted . it describes relevant law prior to passage of the real id act relating to immigration and document - security matters , and discusses how the real id act altered preexisting law . the 9 / 11 commission report documented instances where terrorists had exploited the availability of humanitarian relief under immigration law . although the antiterrorism and effective death penalty act of 1996 ( aedpa ) and the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 ( iirira ) amended asylum procedures to reduce fraudulent claims and limited judicial review of removal orders , provisions in the real id act again amend the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) to further diminish the prospect of terrorists using the immigration system to their advantage . section 102 of the iirira generally provides for construction and strengthening of barriers along u.s. land borders to deter illegal crossings in areas of high illegal entry and specifically provides for 14 miles of barriers and roads along the border near san diego , beginning at the pacific ocean and extending eastward . iirira ยง 102 ( c ) provides for a waiver of the endangered species act of 1973 ( esa ) and the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa ) to the extent the attorney general determines is necessary to ensure expeditious construction of barriers and roads . despite the waiver of specific laws , construction of the san diego area barriers has been delayed due to a dispute involving other laws . california's coastal commission has prevented completion of the san diego barriers on the grounds that plans to fill a canyon in order to complete it are inconsistent with the california coastal management program , a state program approved pursuant to the federal coastal zone management act ( czma ) . the bureau of customs and border protection ( cbp ) within the department of homeland security believed that the requirements of ยง 102 ( c ) of the iirira and the czma could not be reconciled . consequently , legislation was proposed and considered in the 108 th congress that would have waived either a broader range of specific environmental , conservation , and cultural laws or all laws .