they would also reduce the progressivity of the tax . slower growing firms will lose . other sectors that might be adversely affected by broadening the base to more fully reflect income and by removing itemized deductions are the non - profit sector , the state and local sector , the residential real estate industry , and the health care sector . these are sectors that receive special benefits under the income tax . proposals to shift the tax base from an income base to a consumption base ( most proposals ) , while generally increasing business investment , would differentially affect firms , depending on their growth rate , capital structure , and employee benefit structure . they would also make investment in pensions , insurance policies , owner - occupied housing , and tax - exempt bonds relatively less attractive , and investments in ordinary stocks and bonds more attractive . one of the most difficult issues to address in considering a shift to consumption taxes is the transition from the current system to the new tax regime . while all shifts to a consumption tax cause some common transitional disturbances and windfall gains and losses , the most serious problems arise from a shift to a national retail sales tax or to a value added tax . in these cases , a tax formerly largely collected from individuals is now collected at the firm level — either from retailers on total sales or from both final and intermediate producers' value added . flat taxes avoid this problem but can result in confiscatory taxes on existing assets . the complexity and cost of the current tax system is one of the most potent arguments used by the tax reform advocates . each of the proposals discussed in this paper is advertised to be simpler and less costly to comply with and to administer than the current income tax . even tax evasion is sometimes blamed on the complexity of the income tax . many of the tax reform proposals have not been subject to detailed analysis . based on those analyses that have been done , however , a number of the flat - tax proposals could , in their current form , lose revenue , perhaps substantial amounts . most proposals have been designed to be revenue neutral , but have not been evaluated by official revenue estimators . the treasury department , however , has analyzed a version of the flat tax with a proposed rate of 17% , finding a revenue shortfall . ( this estimate , however , was made in 1995 before the major tax cuts were enacted. ) the treasury found that the revenue - neutral flat - tax rate in the proposal , given the level of exemptions ( ranging from about $10,000 for a single individual to about $30,000 for a family of four ) , would be around 21% ( 20.8% ) , about four percentage points above the proposed permanent rate of 17% . alternatively , the 17% rate could be maintained and the exemptions cut by over half to maintain revenue neutrality . with neither revision , treasury estimated the proposal would lose $138 billion annually .