but this is not the case for all such vehicles . trucks ( including suvs ) and vans placed in service after july 7 , 2003 , weighing 6,000 pounds or less , and built on a car chassis are exempt from the depreciation limits for passenger cars if they satisfy the requirements for a " qualified personal use vehicle. such a vehicle is defined as a truck or van that has been modified in such a way that it is unlikely to be used for personal purposes . examples of such vehicles are marked police or fire vehicles , delivery trucks with seating only for the driver , flatbed trucks , and refrigerated trucks . a different set of depreciation caps under irc section 280f applies to light trucks ( including suvs ) , minivans , and vans weighing 6,000 pounds or less built on a truck chassis and placed in service after 2002 . these caps are higher than the ones for passenger cars: for such a light truck placed in service in 2005 , the maximum first - year depreciation allowance is $3,260 , compared to a first - year allowance of $2,960 for passenger cars . the figures in table 1 illustrate the greater tax benefit from purchasing a large suv for business use . it can be seen in a comparison of the maximum first - year depreciation deductions and the present value of total depreciation allowances ( in 2005 dollars ) — and the present value of the tax savings associated with these allowances — a non - corporate business taxpayer is allowed to claim as a result of placing in service in 2005 a new suv weighing over 6,000 pounds but not more than 14,000 pounds , or a new passenger car of equal value . the comparisons are made under the depreciation rules that were in effect both before and after the enactment of ajca . in computing the depreciation deductions , it is assumed that each vehicle is driven solely for business purposes , the taxpayer earned at least $40,000 in 2005 from the trade or business in which the vehicle is used , and the double - declining balance method of depreciation with the half - year convention is used . in computing the present value of the total depreciation allowances claimed for each vehicle and the associated tax savings , it is further assumed that the discount rate is 4.3 , which was the average rate for 10-year treasury bonds in 2005 . the results imply that a business owner would realize a higher after - tax return on investment — and perhaps a greater cash flow in the short run — by purchasing the suv instead of the passenger car . such an inference is warranted because of the differences in the present value of total allowable depreciation deductions and the present value of the associated tax savings among the three cases . in general , the greater the present value of these deductions , the greater the tax savings from purchasing a depreciable asset ; and the greater the tax savings , the lower the tax burden on the returns to investment in the asset . these savings lower the effective price of a depreciable asset .