i want you to know that i am with you. however , in a september 24 , 2013 , general assembly speech , president obama explicitly stated that the united states does not seek to change iran's regime . the trump administration — in cited statements by secretary pompeo and other u.s. officials — asserts that its policy is to change iran's behavior , not to change its regime . however , the content of these and other statements by administration officials , in particular secretary pompeo's speech to iranian americans at the reagan library on july 22 , 2018 , suggests support for a regime change outcome . in his speech on may 21 , 2017 , in saudi arabia , president trump stated that his administration is hoping that iran's government will change to one that the administration considers "just and righteous. in testimony before two congressional committees in june 2017 , then - secretary of state rex tillerson said the administration supports a "philosophy of regime change" for iran ( senate appropriations committee ) and that the administration would "work toward support of those elements inside of iran that would lead to a peaceful transition of that government" ( house foreign affairs committee ) . in his october 13 , 2017 , policy announcement on iran , president trump stated that we stand in total solidarity with the iranian regime's longest - suffering victims: its own people . the citizens of iran have paid a heavy price for the violence and extremism of their leaders . the iranian people long to — and they just are longing , to reclaim their country's proud history , its culture , its civilization , its cooperation with its neighbors . subsequently , president trump issued statements of support for the december 2017-january 2018 protests in iran on twitter and in other formats . in his may 8 , 2018 , announcement of a u.s. withdrawal from the jcpoa , president trump stated finally , i want to deliver a message to the long - suffering people of iran . the people of america stand with you... . but the future of iran belongs to its people . they are the rightful heirs to a rich culture and an ancient land , and they deserve a nation that does justice to their dreams , honor to their history and glory to god . in his speech to the heritage foundation on may 21 , 2018 , secretary of state pompeo added that the united states expresses total solidarity with the iranian people . in his reagan library speech on july 22 , 2018 , pompeo recited a litany of iranian regime human rights abuses and governmental corruption that called into question its legitimacy and , in several passages and answers to questions , clearly expressed the hope that the iranian people will oust the current regime . the apparent support for a regime change policy was furthered by secretary pompeo's announcement during that speech that the broadcasting board of governors is launching a new full - time persian - language service for television , radio , digital , and social media to help "ordinary iranians inside of iran and around the globe can know that america stands with them.