cotton . in other words , the subsidy payment to buyers makes higher - priced u.s.cotton competitive in the marketplace with lower - priced foreign cotton . currently,step 2 requires that through july 31 , 2008 , payments in either cash or marketingcertificates be made to domestic users and exporters for documented purchases ofu.s. land cost . one reason for supply instability is low crop yield caused by natural disaster conditions ( such as drought , flood , pests , and disease ) . cotton producers can obtainsubsidized crop insurance to protect against these losses . in addition , congress hasauthorized crop disaster payments nearly every year since 1982 to provide extraassistance for growers suffering substantial crop losses . disaster payments wereavailable to qualifying growers who participated in the federally supported cropinsurance program as well as growers who chose to forego insurance . crop insurance . the fy2003 allocation for the cotton council internationalis $8,406,098 . appendix table 2 . major cotton producing,exporting , and importing countries , and share of the world market , crop year2003 / 04 source : primary data are from usda , fas , cotton: world markets and trade , june 2004 . * wca , west and central african country production including benin ( 685 ) , burkina faso ( 965 ) , cameroon ( 500 ) , centralafrican republic ( 30 ) , chad ( 225 ) , cote d'ivoire ( 400 ) , ghana ( 25 ) , guinea ( 40 ) , mali ( 1,200 ) , niger ( 5 ) , nigeria ( 415 ) ,senegal ( 100 ) , togo ( 325 ) . appendix table 3 . u.s. cotton area , production , and seasonaverage price receivedby farmers , crop years 1991-2003 source : usda , nass , crop production , april 2004 ; ers , cotton and wool situation outlook yearbook , november 2003 ; world board , world agriculturalsupply and demand estimates , may 2004 . appendix table 4 . cost of u.s. cotton production , crop years1991-2003 est . source : basic data for per acre costs from usda , ers , cost of cotton production . the precisecondition for a limited import quota is an average spot market price for a month inexcess of 130% of the average spot market price for the preceding 36 months . cotton , as well as other agricultural commodities , benefits from several export assistance programs . federal export credit guarantees are available to eligible foreignbuyers who want to purchase commodities with borrowed funds . additionally , theusda administers two promotion programs that operate on a cost - share basis withthe private sector . the foreign market development ( fmd ) cooperator program ( also widely known as the cooperator program ) focuses on generic commoditypromotion and the market access program ( map ) focuses on value - addedagricultural products . fmd and map are exempt from uruguay round agreementsubsidy reduction commitments . export credit guarantees . the usda's general sales manager ( gsm ) in the foreign agricultural service ( fas ) administers three credit guarantee programs for commercial financing of u.s. exportsof food and agricultural products . with funds from the ccc , the governmentunderwrites credit extended by the private lenders to finance exporter sales to eligibleforeign importers .