under sec . 6001 , any person , other than a u.s. person , who"engages in international terrorism or activities in preparation therefore" ( 2 ) is considered an agent of aforeign power . this language does not require the government to establish that the person wasconnected with an international terrorist organization , foreign government or group . the newlanguage is subject to the sunset provision in sec . 224 of the usa patriot act , p.l.107-56 ,including the exception provided in subsection ( b ) of sec . therefore , sec . 6001 as amendedwill sunset on december 31 , 2005 , except with respect to any foreign intelligence investigationbegun before that date or any criminal offense or potential offense that began or occurred before thatdate . ( 3 ) section 6002 created additional semiannual reporting requirements under fisa . under thenew language , the attorney general , on a semiannual basis , must submit to the house permanentselect committee on intelligence , the senate select committee on intelligence , the house judiciarycommittee and the senate judiciary committee , in a manner consistent with protection of nationalsecurity , reports setting forth with respect to the preceding six month period: " ( 1 ) the aggregatenumber of persons targeted for orders issued under this act , including a breakdown of those targetedfor - - ( a ) electronic surveillance under section 105 [50 u.s.c . â§ 1805] ; ( b ) physical searches undersection 304 [50 u.s.c . â§ 1824] ; ( c ) pen registers under section 402 [50 u.s.c . â§ 1842] ; and ( d ) access to records under section 501 [50 u.s.c . â§ 1861] ; ( 2 ) the number of individuals covered byan order issued pursuant to section 101 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( c ) [50 u.s.c . â§ 1801 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( c ) ] ; ( 3 ) the number oftimes that the attorney general has authorized that information obtained under this act may be usedin a criminal proceeding or any information derived therefrom may be used in a criminal proceeding ; ( 4 ) a summary of significant legal interpretations of this act involving matters before the foreignintelligence surveillance court or the foreign intelligence surveillance court of review , includinginterpretations presented in applications or pleadings filed with the foreign intelligence surveillancecourt or the foreign intelligence court of review by the department of justice ; and ( 5 ) copies ofall decisions ( not including orders ) or opinions of the foreign intelligence surveillance court orforeign intelligence surveillance court of review that include significant construction orinterpretation of the provisions of this act. 9 / 11 recommendations implementation act . introduced by representativej . dennis hastert on september 24 , 2004 , and referred to house permanent select committee onintelligence , and in addition to the house committees on armed services , education and theworkforce , energy and commerce , financial services , government reform , international relations,the judiciary , rules , science , transportation and infrastructure , ways and means , and selectcommittee on homeland security , for a period to be subsequently determined by the speaker , ineach case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committeeconcerned . sec .