according to e.o . 13010 , these critical infrastructures were: telecommunications ; electrical power systems ; gas and oil storage and transportation ; banking and finance ; transportation ; water supply systems ; emergency services ( including medical , police , fire , and rescue ) ; and , continuity of government . the list of critical infrastructure sectors in e.o . 13010 was much broader than that reported by the national council on public works improvement . in addition to transportation , water systems , and public services — sectors with "a tradition of public sector involvement" — e.o . 13010 included infrastructures predominantly owned by private companies: telecommunications , energy , and financial services . the u.s. government's definition of "critical infrastructure" has evolved over the years , and at any given time has left considerable room for interpretation . furthermore , since the 1980's , the number of sectors included under that definition has generally expanded from the most basic public works to a much broader set of economic , defense , government , social and institutional facilities , as illustrated in table 3 . unclear or shifting criteria for identifying individual critical assets and key assets may also lead to protection inefficiencies , especially where private companies are responsible for security spending . these criteria may become particularly important if federal agencies intend to implement and enforce any potential future security regulations related to critical infrastructure . various private sector representatives state that they need clear and stable definitions of asset criticality so they will know exactly what assets to protect , and how well to protect them . otherwise , they risk protecting too many facilities , protecting the wrong facilities , or both . either outcome would increase ultimate costs passed through to consumers without commensurate security benefits , and could potentially divert scarce private resources from better uses , such as public safety or environmental protection . as oversight of the federal role in infrastructure security continues , questions may be raised concerning the ongoing efforts of dhs to define and prioritize critical and key assets . in addition to this specific issue , however , congress may wish to assess how critical infrastructure identification fits in the nation's overall strategy to protect critical infrastructure . for example , if asset criticality is not clearly defined , increasing resources for infrastructure security inspections by dhs officials could be of limited value . likewise , diverting infrastructure resources away from safety to enhance security might further reduce terror risk , but not overall public risk , if safety programs become less effective as a result . u.s. infrastructure security necessarily involves many groups: federal agencies , industry associations , large and small asset operators , and critical and non - critical asset owners . reviewing how these groups work together to achieve common security goals is an oversight challenge for congress . the list may continue to evolve and grow as economic changes or geopolitical developments influence homeland security policy . should congress care if the overall list of critical infrastructures remains fluid ? one concern is that an unclear or unstable understanding of what constitutes a critical infrastructure ( or key resource ) could lead to inefficient security policies .