, structural unemployment ) . the notion that offshoring depresses job growth in the united states appears to underlie support among some policymakers for measures meant to encourage u.s. firms to expand employment domestically rather than abroad . while some members of the public policy community also support the adoption by other countries of trade and labor policies intended to level the playing field for u.s. companies and workers in the international marketplace , still others advocate for limited government intervention as the best means of promoting economic growth . milberg et al . suggest that companies engaged in offshoring of service activities may be its chief beneficiaries , using the profits gained from lower input costs to increase dividends to shareholders , raise stock prices through buybacks , and undertake more mergers and acquisitions rather than reinvesting and promoting growth in the u.s. economy . still others note that the movement of services jobs to other countries may have different implications for the labor market and public policy than the movement of production jobs . factory workers ( eg , textile machine operators ) have predominantly had less than 12 years of schooling or attained at most a high school diploma . administrative support and professional workers much more often have taken some college courses or obtained at least a bachelor's degree , according to data from the u.s. bureau of labor statistics . the change in the skill ( educational ) level of jobs being moved abroad has led some to wonder whether the offshoring of service , unlike production , activities will result in college graduates facing a dwindling supply of entry - level jobs that have traditionally served as stepping - stones to higher skilled and higher paying positions . they also question whether the existing trade adjustment assistance programs can satisfactorily meet the needs of comparatively well - educated office workers who lose their jobs to services offshoring . congress historically has tried to promote u.s. job growth and assist workers who lose jobs through no fault of their own , whether job losses are caused by economic downturns ( i.e. , cyclical unemployment ) or by shifts in the composition of jobs performed in the united states ( i.e. this report does not attempt to sort through all the issues raised above , some of which are addressed in the above - referenced crs reports . instead , it begins by briefly examining the development of outsourcing by u.s. companies to provide context for policymakers grappling with the business practices' latest iteration . it then synthesizes the information ( both empirical and anecdotal ) released since the early 2000s on offshore outsourcing's impact on u.s. employment to help policymakers evaluate the adequacy of the nation's retraining and income support programs for workers displaced by greater global economic integration . the overseas relocation of manufacturing work predates by decades the recent wave of services offshoring . major u.s. companies , initially responding to heightened competition from japanese and european multinational corporations , opened facilities abroad during the 1970s and 1980s that turned out goods formerly produced by comparatively well paid , often unionized u.s. factory workers ( eg , assembly - line workers in the auto industry ) .