cloture was sought on no other nomination until 1980 . that occurrence was the first in which cloture was sought on a nomination to an executive branch position , that of william g. lubbers to be general counsel of the national labor relations board . cloture was invoked , and the nomination was confirmed . in the meantime , the majority required for invoking cloture on most matters , including nominations , had been changed in 1975 from two - thirds of senators present and voting to three - fifths of the full membership of the senate ( 60 votes , assuming no more than one vacancy ) . this report was originally written prior to the reinterpretation of the rule . it presents data on all nominations on which cloture motions were offered from 1949 , when the senate altered the rule to allow cloture to be moved on any matter , including nominations , until november 20 , 2013 ( see table 6 ) . it also presents data on the outcomes of these attempts , the development over time of senate practice in seeking cloture on nominations until the rule was reinterpreted , and the positions in relation to which cloture has been offered . before entering into these discussions , the report sketches some general features of cloture and considerations pertinent to interpreting its meaning . senate rules place no general limits on how long consideration of a nomination ( or most other matters ) may last . owing to this lack of general time limits , opponents of a nomination may be able to use extended debate or other delaying actions to prevent a final vote from occurring . the use of debate and procedural actions for the purpose of preventing or delaying a vote is termed a "filibuster. the only procedure by which the senate can vote to place time limits on its consideration of a matter is the motion for cloture provided for in paragraph 2 of senate rule xxii . this motion , therefore , is the senate's most common means of attempting to overcome a filibuster . when the senate adopts a motion for cloture on a matter , known as "invoking cloture," further consideration of the matter becomes subject to a time limit , and upon the expiration of that time , a vote will occur . for most matters , the time limit prescribed by the cloture rule is 30 hours , although under a standing order that was in effect only in the 113 th congress ( 2013-2014 ) , this 30-hour limit was lowered for all but high - level executive and judicial nominations . by invoking cloture , the senate may be able to ensure that a question will ultimately come to a vote . until november 21 , 2013 , however , the senate could impose the constraints of cloture only by a supermajority vote . three - fifths of the full senate ( 60 votes , if there is no more than one vacancy ) was required to invoke cloture .