this report focuses on this option . 5122 ( conference report h.rept . a recent report from the rand corporation provides additional discussion of why navy ships cost much more today than they did decades ago , and of options for reducing the cost of navy ships . section 121 of s. 2766 would authorize 4-year incremental funding and economic order quantity ( eoq ) purchases of long - lead components for cvn - 21 class aircraft carriers . section 123 would increase a previously legislated cost limit on cvn - 77 to $6,057 million . regarding section 121 on procurement of aircraft carriers , the senate armed services committee , in its report ( s.rept . 109-254 of may 9 , 2006 ) on s. 2766 , stated: in reviewing the budget request for fiscal year 2006 , the committee received testimony from the navy and industry that the low rate of shipbuilding was driving higher costs , which in turn further reduced shipbuilding rates , creating a downward spiral . the committee believes that stable ship requirements , increased funding in the shipbuilding budget , and increased flexibility for funding large capital ships are critical elements of any strategy to reverse this trend... . elsewhere in this report , the committee has expressed concern with cost growth on the cvn - 77 program , and has urged the navy and the shipbuilder to identify opportunities to improve affordability of future aircraft carriers . procurement delays , excess inflation , and material escalation have been reported as significant contributors to cvn - 77 cost growth . the shipbuilder has proposed to achieve significant cvn - 21 class program savings through a stable procurement plan , and through procurement of economic order quantity material for cvn - 79 and cvn - 80 in conjunction with cvn - 78 procurement . in view of the potential for significant program savings , the committee recommends an increase of $50.0 million in scn for cvn - 21 class advance procurement , and directs the secretary of the navy to review economic order quantity and long lead time material procurement for the cvn - 21 class . the secretary is to submit a report to the congressional defense committees with the fiscal year 2008 budget request , outlining the advance procurement requirements to potentially optimize economic order quantity savings and escalation avoidance ( to include offsetting factors ) for the first three vessels of the cvn - 21 class . of the amount authorized to be appropriated for advance procurement for cvn - 79 and cvn - 80 , none of the funds are available for obligation prior to 30 days following receipt of the secretary's report . the conferees recognize that many uncertainties remain with regard to completion of cvn – 21 design and construction , including innumerable , inestimable events which will impact cost during the next 15 years of performance on the program . accordingly , the amendment would allow adjustment to the cost limitation for non - recurring design and engineering in order to enable the navy to reduce this risk in the execution of the design effort . the conferees expect that the navy will ultimately manage program execution within the bounds of the budget estimate .