appendix a . there were no sanctions . likewise , some kyoto signatories may not achieve their reduction targets in 2008-2012 . the sanctions are unclear . now , for the copenhagen accord , nations are asked to voluntarily commit to reductions . given the wide range of situations illustrated by the data , a flexible strategy that permits each country to play to its strengths may make it easier for diverse countries like the united states and china to reach some acceptable agreement . the problems raised above prompt the question: what alternatives to controls derived from historically based emissions levels are available ? alternative metrics for taking into account greenhouse gas emissions and economic development include per capita emissions and economic intensity of emissions . as stated above , the data on greenhouse gas emissions highlight issues of both effectiveness and fairness with respect to current efforts to address global climate change . differentiating responsibilities between annex i and non - annex i countries fails to focus efforts on all the largest emitters . in addition , contradictory issues of fairness arise , as annex i countries bear essentially all the direct economic costs of reducing emissions , and non - annex i countries are granted the right to increase emissions to meet developmental needs . finally , the focus on historical emissions as a baseline for regulation has differential and arbitrary impacts on individual nations . the result of the unfccc and kyoto protocol's setting emissions targets for only developed nations and focusing on returning their emissions to a specific baseline is twofold: ( 1 ) the current regime has had little effect on global emissions , and will have little effect in the near future ; and ( 2 ) the largest emitters , the united states and china , have not found it in their interests to join in the international effort to a significant degree . indeed , the united states pulled completely out of the kyoto process under the george w. bush administration . this process has continued to be difficult , as the recent copenhagen meetings illustrate . this history of the unfccc and the kyoto protocol raises serious questions about how to develop greenhouse gas targets , time frames , and implementation strategies . with respect to targets , the unfccc recognized the right of developing countries to develop and the responsibility of all countries to protect the global climate . these goals of the unfccc suggest that if there is to be any permanent response to climate change that involves controlling greenhouse gases , then a regime that combines some measure reflecting the right of developing countries to develop , such as per capita emissions , and some measure reflecting the need to be efficient , such as carbon intensity , may be necessary to move the world toward a workable and effective climate change framework . as shown above a global target focused on per capita emissions generally rewards developing nations , providing them room for economic growth ; the target's balance between limiting emissions and permitting growth determines the individual winners and losers .