these statutory grounds may be waived by immigration authorities in certain circumstances . attempts to circumvent these document requirements have been prohibited and punishable since at least 1924 . under the ina , an alien who uses , acquires , or produces fraudulent documents for immigration - related purposes may be subjected to civil penalties and denied certain immigration benefits , including the ability to enter or remain in the united states . further , certain fraudulent actions may carry criminal penalties under both the ina and the united states criminal code . in the case of first - time offenders under ina § 274c ( a ) ( 5 ) ( relating to the preparation or filing of a fraudulent ina document ) or § 274c ( a ) ( 6 ) ( failing to present entry documents upon arrival in united states ) , the penalty is between $275 and $2,200 for each fraudulent document or proscribed activity ( and between $250 and $2,000 for each violation prior to march 27 , 2008 ) . subsequent offenses are punishable by between $2,200 and $5,000 for each violation ( and between $2,000 and $5,000 for each violation prior to march 27 , 2008 ) . immigration authorities may investigate allegations of document fraud either on their own initiative or upon receiving third - party complaints with a substantial probability of validity . immigration authorities may issue subpoenas to examine evidence against persons or entities being investigated . if immigration authorities conclude that a person or entity has violated § 274c , they may issue a notice of intent to fine the alleged offender . if the alleged offender contests the issuance of the notice of intent to fine , the respondent may request a hearing regarding the alleged violation within 60 days . hearings are conducted by administrative law judges under the supervision of the chief administrative hearing officer of the department of justice's executive office of immigration review . if a hearing is not requested within this period , or the respondent otherwise waives the right to a hearing , a final order may be issued by immigration authorities . if a hearing is requested , an immigration judge may issue a final order imposing civil penalties if the preponderance of evidence indicates that the accused has violated the requirements of ina § 274c . the civil penalties for violating § 274c may be waived in limited circumstances for aliens who failed to show the same immigration documents to u.s. immigration authorities as were used to board the carrier to travel to the united states , if the alien is granted asylum or withholding of removal . an alien's unauthorized presence within the united states — that is , being an "illegal alien" — is generally not a crime in and of itself . however , many types of immigration - related document fraud that may facilitate an alien's entry into or continued presence within the united states are criminal offenses . the following sections discuss the primary criminal statutes covering immigration - related document fraud , many of which are overlapping in coverage with civil statutes prohibiting immigration - related document fraud .