law . changes in this law will provide for an improvedcomputer - supported identification system . this will help prevent the use of bogusidentification documents . encrypted biometric identification codes will be added tophotographs and signatures . act on the protection of the constitution . the federal bureau for the protectionof the constitution ( bfv ) is given authority to track any activities of extremist groupsthat seek to intensify ideological or religious differences . the law calls for combiningseveral databases with civil information to make computerized searches moreeffective . federal bureau for criminal investigation . the bka now has the right to lead itsown investigations , replacing the former system which required formal requests bythe bfv . federal border guard act . armed officers of the federal border guard ( bgs ) arenow deployed aboard german airplanes . several other measures have been taken . an agreement on bilateral cooperation for theprotection of computer systems and networks was reached in june 2003 . this effort is aimed atdefending critical infrastructure such as power supplies , and transportation and telecommunicationsgrids in both the united states and germany . steps are being taken to extend this cooperation to theprotection of nuclear facilities . ( 58 ) moreover , the united states and germany reached an agreementon increased legal cooperation in criminal matters in october 2003 . bilateral cabinet - level meetingsare frequent . germany plays an active role in the u.s. container security initiative ( csi ) . officials inwashington , dc and berlin signed an agreement to improve bilateral cooperation on containersecurity with the aim of stopping terrorists from smuggling weapons of mass destruction in sea - cargocontainers . u.s. customs agents are stationed in germany to monitor suspicious containers beforethey leave german harbors . ( 59 ) furthermore , germany is an active member of the 14-countrycore group of the proliferation security initiative ( psi ) . this initiative is aimed at preventing thespread of materials that could be used to build weapons of mass destruction . u.s. and germanintelligence cooperation led to seizure of a ship bound for libya in the mediterranean sea in october2003 . illicit nuclear material aboard was confiscated . ( 60 ) some believe that bilateral cooperation is weaker in the field of information sharing for avariety of reasons . the united states has security concerns about sharing sensitive information.german authorities in turn fear that the united states will use sensitive shared information in waysthat might conflict with germany's practices with regard to data protection and civil liberties . ( 61 ) also , german critics claimthat the u.s. expectation of information sharing by others is not matched by a u.s. willingness toshare with them . a recent example of the problems created by inadequate information sharing concerned twotrials of suspects in the 9 / 11 attacks . mounir el motassadeq and abdelghani mzoudi were eventuallyacquitted by a german federal court with the explanation that the united states had not madecrucial evidence available . ( 62 ) after the department of justice forwarded the evidence requestedby the german government , the motassadeq trial was reopened on august 10 , 2004 . what effect theinformation might have on the outcome of the new trial is unclear .