663 by unanimousconsent . during the first session of the 109th congress , senator jeffords introduced s. 544 , the patient safety and quality improvement act of 2005 . s. 544 was identical to thesenate - passed patient safety bill , s. 720 . it established a system for the voluntarysubmission and analysis of medical error data , and prohibited the use of patient safety data inadministrative , civil , and criminal proceedings . the senate amended and passed s. 544unanimously on july 21 , 2005 . six days later , the house voted overwhelmingly to pass the bill . s.544 became p.l . 109-41 on july 29 , 2005 . ( 61 ) while the majority of patient safety and medical malpractice bills address problems relatedto only one of these issues , a few bills have included provisions that address both issues . forexample , s. 1337 would authorize the hhs secretary to award grants to states todevelop , implement , and evaluate alternatives to tort litigation for the purposes of resolvingmalpractice claims and utilizing patient safety data . each state must demonstrate how the alternativeapproach encourages prompt and fair resolution of malpractice claims , promotes disclosure ofmedical errors , increases patient safety , and preserves access to medical malpractice insurance . some havesuggested that serious deviations from quality care can be addressed by strengthening licensure andaccreditation requirements , and modifying physician disciplinary procedures . this new federal program would analyze information submitted by program participants aboutmedical errors and patient safety events , provide grants for the development and implementation ofprograms to disclose medical errors to patients , and require program participants to offer to negotiatewith individuals injured by medical errors for some level of compensation . others recommenda less - punitive , less - adversarial approach of assessment , feedback , and ongoing professionaleducation . with the majority of medical error studies based on inpatient data and the iom report'semphasis on addressing system failures , most patient safety initiatives thus far have focused onhospitals . an abundance of solutions have been proposed , such as reporting hospital performance,disseminating clinical protocols , and adopting innovative technology to aid hospitals in the creationof a "culture of safety. this endeavor was further energized by the implementation of patient safetystandards by the nation's largest hospital accrediting body , the joint commission on accreditationof healthcare organizations ( jcaho ) . the jcaho standards stressed not only a hospital's role inthe prevention of medical errors , but also its responsibility for disclosing to patients when they havebeen harmed by such errors . the specific challenges associated with it adoption reflect the larger concerns regardingadoption of patient safety programs in general . individual initiatives have resulted in promisingoutcomes , but the overall impact of these efforts has been mixed . to some degree , this is the casebecause implementation has not been as pervasive as initial intentions suggested , and also becausenot enough research has been done to identify , enumerate , and assess patient safety efforts . congressional interest in activities at the federal and state levels has evolved from genericquality issues to concerns related specifically to medical errors and patient safety . as part of thisevolution , the development and implementation of legislative proposals has varied in scope , focus,and purpose .