this is true in both expansions and recessions . the rate of job gains increased steadily from the beginning of the series in 1992 until the end of 1999 ; at the same time , job losses increased steadily from 1992 to 2001 . some , but not all , of the long run increase in gross job gains and losses can be attributed to a growing labor force . the rest of the increase indicates that the u.s. labor force is becoming more mobile over time , but the data do not indicate whether this is the worker's or the firm's decision , or both . most of the gross job flows occur at existing firms , and are not due to new firms opening or old firms closing . clearly , gross job loss is not incompatible with a healthy labor market: during an expansion in which the unemployment rate was lower than it had been in three decades , gross job losses steadily increased as the expansion progressed . and even during the 2001 recession and subsequent "jobless recovery," gross job gains continued to average about 8 million per quarter ; but gross job gains in this period were more than offset by gross job losses . in the current expansion , job gains and losses have been modestly lower than in the second half of the 1990s . although gross job gains stayed relatively constant , net employment began to rise again because gross job losses fell . there is not yet data available on whether net job loss in 2008 has been driven primarily by gross job gains or losses . it is often claimed that small businesses are the engine of job creation in the u.s. economy . to an extent , this is a misconception based on the confusion between net and gross job flows . firms with 99 employees or fewer , which account for 38.1% of total private employment , accounted for 61.1% of gross job gains between 1992:3 and 2005:1 . but while these firms had a disproportionate share of gross job gains , they also had a disproportionate share of gross job loss , 62.1% of the total . on net , they accounted for 46.3% of net job gains over that time period — modestly more than their share of total employment , but significantly less than gross flows would indicate . ( recent employment trends followed a similar pattern. ) interestingly , in the 2001 recession and jobless recovery , very large firms accounted for a disproportionate share of net job loss . overall , these data provide a picture , during expansions , of a highly dynamic u.s. labor market in which labor rapidly shifts from firm to firm to its most efficient use . although it has social costs , gross job loss is part of the normal functioning of a market economy , and has the beneficial role of reallocating resources to their most efficient use when tastes , technology , or comparative advantage changes . even in expansions , gross job loss is sizeable , between 6.5 million and 8.5 million per quarter from 1992 to 2000 , but it is more than offset by gross job gains .