these projects are: a . improve stakeholder participation and maintain high qualifications of spectrum managers b . reduce international barriers to u.s . innovations in technologies and services c. modernize federal spectrum management processes with advanced information technology d. satisfy public safety communications needs and ensure interoperability e. enhance spectrum engineering and analytical tools f. promote efficient and effective use of spectrum g. improve long - term planning and promote use of market - based economic mechanisms in spectrum . project d , dealing with public safety needs , has two components . as part of project d , dhs , as directed by the president , will conduct an inventory of the spectrum requirements of the public safety community , identify the major public safety requirements for spectrum - dependent services at local , regional and state government agencies , and analyze the efficiency and effectiveness of the spectrum used by the public safety community . the ntia , in coordination primarily with the fcc , will examine the feasibility of sharing spectrum among commercial , federal and local public safety , and critical infrastructure applications . the fcc is seeking comment on goals for the test - bed , which will designate radio frequencies for shared use between federal and non - federal users . the lead federal program for fostering interoperability is administered by the wireless public safety interoperable communications program , dubbed project safecom , part of the department of homeland security . the key federal agencies for spectrum management in first responder communications are the federal communications commission ( fcc ) and the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) . among other responsibilities , the fcc supervises spectrum for non - federal public safety agency communications . the ntia — part of the department of commerce — administers spectrum used by federal entities . safecom has not to date played a major role in spectrum policy . dhs has created an office of interoperability and compatibility ( oic ) of which safecom is a part . in june 2004 dhs announced the creation of a regional technology integration initiative . dhs has also announced the organization of a national incident management system ( nims ) in response to a presidential directive ( hspd - 5 ) . a nims integration center is planned to deal with compatibility and could be responsible for at least some interoperable communications . national telecommunications and information administration to address the need for interoperability spectrum , in june 1999 the ntia designated certain federally - allocated radio frequencies for use by federal , state , and local law enforcement and incident response entities . the frequencies are from exclusive federal spectrum , and are adjacent to spectrum used by state and local governments . ntia's "interoperability plan," — developed in coordination with the interdepartmental radio advisory committee ( irac ) — is used to improve communications in response to emergencies and threats to public safety . in 1996 , the ntia created a public safety program to coordinate federal government activities for spectrum and telecommunications related to public safety . today , its successor , the public safety division of the office of spectrum management , participates in various initiatives to improve and coordinate public safety communications .