as discussed below , p.l . 108-203 eliminated the last - day exception clause by requiring those workers switching from non - covered positions to social security - covered positions to work in the covered position for at least 60 months ( five years ) before being exempt from the gpo . the new gpo provision became effective for social security spousal benefit applications filed after march 31, 2004 . about 82% of all affected persons were women . table 5 provides a breakdown of the affected beneficiaries by state and type of benefit . in december 2017 , the average non - covered government pension amount for persons affected by the gpo was $2,396 per month ( $2,177 for women and $3,383 for men ) . the average pre - offset social security spousal benefit at that time was $832 per month ( $899 for women and $529 for men ) . the average reduction caused by the gpo was $674 per month ( $709 a month for women and $516 for men ) . the average social security spousal benefit component after application of the gpo was $158 per month ( $190 a month for women and $13 a month for men ) . among the beneficiaries affected by gpo in december 2017 , 73% of them had their potential social security spousal or widow ( er ) 's benefit fully offset by gpo reduction . for the average beneficiary who received some social security spousal benefit after gpo reduction ( partially offset ) , the spousal benefit comprised about 40% of the total payment received ( non - covered government pension amount and social security spousal benefit after gpo reduction ) . in comparison , in 2017 , the dual entitlement rule affected approximately 7.2 million beneficiaries . about 6.9 million ( 97% ) of all affected beneficiaries were women . wives made up 43% of all affected , and widows made up 54% . among dually - entitled workers , the average social security total benefit ( retired worker plus spouse or survivor benefit ) received was $1,261 . of this amount , $715 was the retired worker component of the benefit . the spousal benefit component was $546 ( after reduction for dual entitlement ) . for the average dually entitled worker , therefore , the spousal benefit comprised about 43% of the total social security benefit received . opponents argue that the gpo is not well understood and that it harms lower - income workers . defenders of the gpo maintain that it helps ensure that only financially dependent spouses receive the social security spousal benefit , while curtailing what otherwise would be an unfair advantage for government workers who are not covered by social security . a burgeoning controversy arose in the 108 th congress with the revelation that a growing number of state and local government workers had been making use of a little - known provision of the law that allowed them to escape the application of the gpo if they switched jobs at the very end of their government careers . that provision granted an exception to the gpo if , on the last day of one's government service , he or she worked in a social security - covered position .