the "fund" is the sum of those remittances . the president of the national conference of insurance guaranty funds ( ncigf ) notes that funds have paid out about $21 billion in claims that would have gone unpaid in the last four decades . the term "guaranty fund" can also refer to insurers' statutory obligation to participate in this protection system . in general , each state's guaranty fund is responsible for the policyholders residing in that state , and the protection extends only to policyholders of licensed insurers within the limits of statutory coverage in that state of residence . the fdic protects deposits in banks and savings associations . the pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) protects participants in defined benefit pension plans . the domiciliary insurance commissioner also appoints the lead receiver . the similarities and differences among the various protection systems are summarized in a chart in the appendix . there would be technical issues , too , such as whether to maintain separate funds for life insurers and property - liability insurers and how to calculate an appropriate fund balance . if congress were to create a federal policyholder protection system , should an insurer ' s assessments be based on its risk profile ? opinions differ markedly over whether the current insurance guaranty fund system functions well or poorly . supporters say that the current system has been very effective . the national organization of life and health guaranty associations ( nolhga ) indicates that , since 1983 , guaranty funds have protected 2.2 million policyholders by guaranteeing more than $21.2 billion in benefits and contributed $4.4 billion to ensure that policyholders received their benefits . some critics of the current state insurance guaranty fund system say it is inefficient , slow , parochial , and fragmented , and they urge that it be replaced with a federal system or significantly reformed . other critics say the existence of guaranty funds distorts incentives by allowing some insurers to increase risk - taking behavior and by imposing the costs of that behavior on more conservative insurers . insurers are required currently to hold additional capital based on their risks . the critics say that the current system "provide[s] a powerful risk subsidy incentive that [solvency] monitoring does not entirely offset. whether analogous calculations would be feasible for guaranty fund assessments has not been studied . other issues would include whether insurers should have access to the federal reserve board's discount window and the relationship of any federal system of policyholder protection to the fdic . whether to maintain some level of policyholder protection against insolvency may be a significant issue in any congressional consideration of federal regulation of insurers . how to offer that protection will likely entail more difficult decisions . policy considerations could include whether to offer federal protection or to require federally regulated insurers to participate in the existing state system . insurance regulators in the other states where the insurer operated will appoint ancillary receivers , after entries of orders of liquidation in those states . the lead and ancillary receivers cooperate , with the assistance of the guaranty funds and the national associations of guaranty funds .