and international support . child labor , as derived from ilo convention 138 , is any economic activityperformed by a person under the age of 15 . not all work is considered harmful to or exploitative ofchildren . child labor is work that prevents children from attending and participating effectively inschool or is performed by children under hazardous conditions that place their healthy physical,intellectual , or moral development at risk . the worst forms of child labor , as defined in ilo convention 182 , is the useof any individual under the age of 18 for the purposes of debt bondage , armed conflict , commercialsexual exploitation , drug trafficking , and other types of work identified as hazardous to children byratifying members . working children are those who carried out at least one task / activity on thecocoa farm , i.e. , clearing ground ; weeding ; maintaining cocoa trees ; applying pesticides ; spreadingfertilizer ; harvesting ; piling / gathering up ; pod breaking ; fermenting ; transporting ; drying ; and otheractivities . they are all implemented through the ilo withu.s . italso discusses potential policy options that might accomplish that end . congress has consistently expressed interest in and supported efforts to abolish and counterchild labor , particularly the worst forms of child labor . congress has funded programs to combatchild labor , expand the united states' role in the global fight against child labor , and include clausesthat require eliminating child labor in trade agreements . in 1997 , congress prohibited theimportation of goods made with forced or indentured child labor . ( 18 ) later in 2000 , congressamended section 307 of the tariff act of 1930 - - which prohibited the importation of goods madewith forced or indentured labor - - to ensure that the statute applied to goods made with forced orindentured child labor . ( 19 ) congress also added child labor stipulations to foreign aidlegislation through the export - import bank re - authorization act of 1997 . ( 20 ) this law integrates childlabor into the list of criteria for denying credit by the export - import bank . another law relating tochild labor abuses is the victims of trafficking and violence protection act of 2000 . ( 21 ) the law providespunishment for traffickers , as well as assistance and protection to trafficking victims , with a specialemphasis on women and children , both in the u.s. and abroad . congress has used various international trade agreements to fight child labor . thegeneralized system of preferences ( gsp ) is a program that extends duty - free entry to a wide rangeof products from more than 140 countries and territories . the trade and development act of 2000expanded the gsp ineligibility criteria to include the worst forms of child labor . ( 22 ) the act prohibits anycountry from gsp consideration if "[s]uch country has not implemented its commitments toeliminate the worst forms of child labor.