border management is an extremely complex task . as the second report in the part series will illustrate , even the current u.s. border management regime with its bevy of institutions , policies , and programs can seem overwhelmingly complex and difficult to approach in a systematic way . seemingly simple notions such as what is the border ; where is it ; and when should we be concerned about it are not as straight forward as they appear on the surface . the first two questions , the what and the where of the border , are related and somewhat interdependent . for example , if the what of the border is simply the physical geographic boundary and limited to u.s. ports of entry , then the where and the when are self explanatory: people or goods enter the united states when they have physically crossed the territorial boundary , and they need not be addressed until they reach the border . this approach to border control might work in a situation where the flow of cross - border traffic was small , and the resources available to process this traffic were plentiful . however , the current environment for securing u.s. borders is far more complicated , as noted above in the introduction with the statement of admiral james loy , former deputy secretary of the dhs . if the border is envisioned not merely as a physical boundary but rather as a flexible concept that allows for the possibility that the border begins at the point where goods or people commence their u.s. - bound journey , a significantly wider array of options for border management policies becomes available . what follows are a series of conceptualizations intended to assist in answering the above questions and when combined with a discussion of current border policies , may be useful in seeking new directions for more effective border management policies . it is important to note that this series of conceptualizations is cumulative , in the sense that each one builds off of the concepts illustrated in the previous section . we have some 422 primary airports and another 124 commercial service airports that see 30,000 flights and 1.8 million passengers every day . there are approximately 110,000 miles of highway and 220,000 miles of rail track that cut across our nation , and 590,000 bridges dotting america's biggest cities and smallest towns . that is just a thumbnail of the vast infrastructure that supports the largest and most efficient economy in the world — with more than $11 trillion in gross domestic product . this report utilizes several graphical presentations to better understand the points of vulnerability in the border security system , before discussing one , integrated approach . it should be noted that the approach in this report is but one of a number of possible approaches to this issue . this report is the first in a three - part series of crs reports that make use of analytical frameworks to better understand complex problems in border security and cast them in terms that facilitate the consideration of alternative policies and practices .