supporting or advisoryactivities . the question confronting policy makers is how much emphasis shouldbe placed on involving airpower directly against non - state actors , compared to advising andsupporting allied airpower activities , or allocating resources mainly to ground units and securitypersonnel searching for terrorist leaders . exploring and resolving this question could have profoundimpact on procurement , training , and o&m budgets . direct action vs . one challenge for air forces engaged in direct action against non - state actors is that they oftenoperate in politically charged environments , where their presence can exacerbate tensions betweengovernments friendly toward the united states and local populations that may be sympathetic toterrorists . might they become targets for budget cutters in the fy2006 budget process ? indecember , electronic media outlets made available an internal dod program budget decision ( pbd753 ) , that recommended termination of the air force's c - 130j program and trimming 20 aircraftfrom the navy's planned purchase over the future years defense plan ( fydp ) . the pbd 753 obtainedby the press also recommended cutting 22 aircraft from the planned purchase of v - 22s over the sametime period . ( 107 ) suchrecommendations may be an indication that the upcoming budget cycle will be contentious . also,if implemented , such recommendations could have a direct impact on sof - relatedinsertion / extraction aircraft by reducing funds , driving up costs , or potentially cancelling programs . proponents justify many of the programs described above by the perception that today'saircraft are increasingly vulnerable to growing threats . the air force , and outside analysts oftenpoint out that many countries have access to surface - to - air missiles ( sams ) and informationtechnologies that can be combined to form integrated air defense systems ( iads ) . the potentialproliferation of iads is one of the primary justifications put forth for developing and fieldingadvanced combat aircraft like the f / a - 22 raptor . ( 108 ) it is not clear to others , however , that iads will be asthreatening to low - flying helicopters , already fielding self - protection equipment , as they will be tohigh flying fixed - wing aircraft . prior to operation desert storm , for example , iraq was thought tohave a robust and sophisticated iads . the first shots in that war , however , were fired by ah - 64apache helicopters , led by special operations' mh - 53 helicopters . ( 109 ) in this case , helicopterswere deemed more survivable than fixed - wing aircraft , and were used to degrade iraq's iads soother aircraft could more freely operate . it also appears that there may be different perspectives among the services regarding thevulnerability of today's helicopters . the air force , for example , seeks the csar - x , in part , becauseit is said to be more survivable than the hh - 60 helicopters it will replace . ( 110 ) however , armyspecial operations forces initiated a service life extension program ( slep ) in 2004 for all their h - 60aircraft . this suggests that army leaders believe that h - 60 helicopters are sufficiently survivable,albeit with upgrades , and don't require near term replacement .