( sec . section 6 was added in response to the administration's concerns that the bill "would have unintended and intolerable consequences for crucial and necessary national security activities and operations. ordered placed on the senate legislative calendar under general orders october 5 , 2007 . s. 674 would require the secretaries of defense , state , and the interior ; the administrator of the u.s. agency for international development ; and the director of national intelligence to provide information to the congress within 90 days of enactment on u.s. government contractors and subcontractors working in afghanistan and iraq , with particularly detailed requirements for information on private security contractors . this information would include the number of persons performing work in iraq and afghanistan under contracts and subcontracts ; the companies awarded such contracts and subcontracts ; the total cost of these contracts ; and a method for tracking the number of persons killed and wounded while serving under such contracts . also contains provisions intended to improve coordination between the u.s. armed forces and contractors performing private security functions , and to clarify the legal status of contract personnel by expanding meja ( similar to h.r . introduced february 16 , 2007 . referred to the senate armed services committee . 369 would require the secretaries of defense and state and the administrator of the u.s. agency for international development to prescribe minimum hiring standards and issue equipment guidance for contracts regarding private security contractors and would require contractors to provide specified information on costs and personnel and update it during the period of contract performance . also contains provisions intended to improve coordination between the u.s. armed forces and contractors performing private security functions , and to clarify and extend the military extraterritorial jurisdiction act ( meja ) . would extend meja to cover contractors "while employed under a contract ( or subcontract at any tier ) awarded by any department or agency of the united states , where the work under such contract is carried out in a region outside the united sates in which the armed forces are conducting a contingency operation. meja covers contractors only if employed by "the armed forces outside the united states," or if employed by other federal agencies or provisional authority , to the extent their employment is related to the support of the dod mission overseas . ( this last provision is also included in h.r . introduced january 10 , 2007 . ( similar to s. 674 . ) referred to the house armed services committee ( has ) and the judiciary committee . referred to the has subcommittee on readiness , february 1 , 2007 . referred to the judiciary committee's subcommittee on crime , terrorism , and homeland security , february 2 , 2007 . the subcommittee held hearings on june 19 , 2007 . 3695 would prohibit the dod and the department of state from increasing the number of private security contractors it uses to perform security functions in iraq . a modified h.r . 1585 was reintroduced as h.r . 4986 and passed by the house on january 16 , 2008 , and by senate january 22 , 2008 . section 841 of p.l .