2477 claims . the articulation of criteria and the definitions of key terms are central issues that have generatedcontroversy in the past . for many years as the west was being settled , there was little attention paidby the united states to r.s . 2477 grants . meanwhile , state courts applying state laws establishedtheir own standards by which to judge whether a grant had been accepted by each state for publicmaintenance and liability . in some instances , state law or judicial interpretation went beyonddetermining when a right of way was accepted by a state or county for those purposes to alsoarticulating what constituted "construction" or a "highway" for purposes of determining when thefederal grant was completed however , these cases typically did not involve the federal governmentas a party , and after the repeal of the 1866 act in 1976 , attention was increasingly focused on theelements of the federal grant: the "construction" of "highways" over "public lands" "not reserved" - - as matters of federal law . 1906 , a bill that would have imposed a cutoff date for claims and specified how thedepartment of interior was to process them , but no senate action was taken . then , in conferencereport language on p.l . 102-381 , congress deleted a prohibition on using funds to process r.s . 2477 , for a discussion of recent events . the potential impacts of claimedr.s . 2477 rights of way on the management of federal and non - federal lands and on state roadsystems could be significant . ( 2 ) validated roads could continue across private lands as well,possibly to the surprise of current landowners . ( 3 ) still other rights of way may threaten water quality if they passthrough critical watersheds . ( 4 ) on the other hand , others assert that motorized access to the federallands , which comprise about 44 percent of utah , is important for ranching , recreation , mining , andother economic activities deemed vital to rural utah and that the roadways will promote economicprosperity generally . ( 5 ) incommenting on a bill in the 104th congress that would have legislated a validation process verydifferent from that proposed in regulations , sen. hatch stated: [t]his matter is critical to communities and citizens inthe rural west . in many cases , these roads are the only routes to farms and ranches ; they providenecessary access for schoolbuses , emergency vehicles , and mail delivery . the interior departmentregulations would significantly confound transportation in the western states , jeopardizing thelivelihoods of many citizens and possibly their health and safety as well . ( 6 ) on january 6 , 2003 the department of the interior published new final regulations on"disclaimers of interest. ( 7 ) a disclaimer is a recordable document in which the united states declares that it does not have aproperty interest or interests in lands . the issuance of a disclaimer can help remove a cloud fromland title because it has the same effect as though the united states had conveyed any interest it has . on april 9 , 2003 , the department of the interior and utah entered into a memorandum ofunderstanding ( mou ) to establish a process to acknowledge as valid certain r.s .