3010 , discussed below . an across - the - board rescission of 1% was applied to discretionary programs funded under p.l . good start , grow smart: the bush administration's early childhood initiative , was first announced by the president in april of 2002 and has been reflected in budget proposals and program initiatives since that date . not all the proposals have been adopted , however . good start , grow smart focuses on three overall areas: ( 1 ) strengthening head start ; ( 2 ) partnering with states to improve early childhood education ; and ( 3 ) providing information to teachers , care givers , and parents . in the president's fy2004 budget , he proposed to transfer the head start program to the department of education , as well as to provide states with the option to administer the program . the head start reauthorization bill passed by the house during the 108 th congress ( h.r . 2210 ) did not include the proposal to transfer the program to ed , but did include provisions to allow a maximum of eight states to administer the program ( provided they meet designated requirements ) . the head start reauthorization bills of this ( 109 th ) congress ( h.r . 109-287 ) one month later . the committees' proposed funding levels for child care and select related programs are shown in table 3 , alongside the funding levels requested by the president . 2123 and s. 2206 ) emphasized increased coordination among early childhood programs , but neither proposed either a departmental transfer of the program or state demonstration projects . the administration has moved ahead with two other efforts that are in keeping with the good start , grow smart initiative , but that did not require legislative changes to the head start act . one is the strategic teacher education program , also known as project step , described by the head start bureau as "a comprehensive , multi - faceted , sequential professional development endeavor to ensure teachers use research - based strategies to implement early and emergent literacy. as part of this development , during summer and fall 2002 , 3,000 head start staff and 100 state child care administrators received 32 hours of training in strategies to support children's emerging literacy . those who were trained are expected to serve as "mentor coaches" for staff within their respective head start programs . the second effort is the development and implementation of a national reporting system that can be used to assess the effectiveness of head start programs in achieving successful outcomes for children in terms of school readiness—particularly the areas of literacy and number knowledge . this national reporting system was implemented starting in the fall 2003 , and assesses head start 4- and 5-year - olds twice a year on educational performance measures—using indicators that were included in legislation as part of the 1998 reauthorization of head start . following hurricane katrina , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) issued a series of information memoranda alerting head start grantees and state child care administrators to various efforts being made to assist their respective programs in helping children and families affected by hurricane katrina .