this report provides background on indian reserved water rights under winters . indian reserved water rights are subject to adjudication by federal and state courts . federal courts have historically been authorized via federal question jurisdiction to determine indian reserved water rights under the winters doctrine . in 1952 , however , congress enacted an appropriations rider known as the mccarran amendment that waived federal sovereign immunity in specified forms of water adjudications . at the time , the government had a policy seeking to transform native americans from "a nomadic and uncivilized people … to become a pastoral and civilized people" by providing them lands to develop for such purposes . by 1905 , the area experienced water shortages that ultimately resulted in the winters lawsuit being filed to enforce tribal rights to water against non - indian water users who had been diverting water from the region . in announcing its decision , the court explained that the lands provided under the agreement for the purpose of developing an agrarian society "were arid and , without irrigation , were practically valueless. the court also noted that ambiguities in the agreement , such as the status of the water rights related to the land , are to be "resolved from the standpoint of the indians," as a rule of interpretation . the court held that: the power of the government to reserve the waters and exempt them from appropriation under the state laws is not denied , and could not be . that the government did reserve them we have decided , and for a use which would be necessarily continued through the years . the court has continued to recognize the principle derived from winters in both indian and non - indian contexts . in 1976 , the court noted that it "has long held that when the federal government withdraws its land from the public domain and reserves it for a federal purpose , the government , by implication , reserves appurtenant water then unappropriated to the extent needed to accomplish the purpose of the reservation. under the winter s doctrine , the priority and extent of indian reserved water rights is affected by the purposes of the indian reservation , the date when the indian reservation was created , the quantification of water sufficient to accomplish those purposes , and the sources of water that may be used to fulfill the particular water rights . while the supreme court recognized indian reserved water rights in winters , it only provided that the extent of such rights were those necessary to fulfill the purpose of the reservation . quantification of reserved rights was left for later judicial interpretation . although the language does not explicitly mention indian water rights , the mccarran amendment gives consent to join the federal government in state lawsuits regarding adjudication of water rights in river systems and the administration of those rights . the supreme court has held that the mccarran amendment allows state courts to adjudicate indian reserved water rights . as a result , the mccarran amendment has had a significant effect on indian water law .