b . new york chose not to receive promoting safe and stable families ( pssf ) funds in fy2001-fy2003 . for fy2001 the statute did not provide forre - allotment of that money . thus the $20.9 million that was allotted to new york was returned to the federal treasury . ( this is the reason thatthe total funds distributed in fy2001 is shown as $284 million rather than the $305 million that was appropriated. ) 107-133 provided forre - allotment of any unclaimed pssf funds beginning with fy2002 . c. tribes eligible to receive child welfare services funding receive an amount based on their population and which is drawn out of the initial allotmentof the state in which the tribe is located . the program authorizations for both the promoting safe and stable families and capta'scommunity - based grants provide for certain funds to be set aside for eligible tribes prior to allotment of remaining funds to eligible states . tribesare not eligible to receive capta's state grants . d. as used here , the territories refer to - - american samoa , guam , the northern mariana islands , puerto rico and the virgin islands . each of thesejurisdictions received some funding under each one of the programs included in this table . e. other generally refers to technical assistance and / or program evaluation and support . in the case of promoting safe and stable families , it also includesa set - aside for court improvement grants . the totals for these court grants ranged in value from $10 million to just over $13 million betweenfy2001 and fy2004 . there are no set asides for program evaluation , technical assistance or other purposes included in the program authorizationsfor child welfare services or capta state grants . table c - 2 . dedicated federal child welfare funding for the foster care program , fy2001-fy2003 , bystate ( by fiscal year in millions of dollars ) source: table prepared by the congressional research service ( crs ) . based on annual expenditure file prepared by the u.s. department of health andhuman services ( hhs ) . this file includes federal share of state claims as made by each state , including certain claims which may subsequently bedisallowed . if a state is shown as receiving a negative amount of dollars for a given kind of claim this means that an adjustment in federal funding wasmade in the given fiscal year for prior claims . note: title iv - e of the social security act does not authorize tribes to receive direct foster care funding from the federal government . tribes that wishto receive such title iv - e funds must seek these funds through an agreement with the state ( or states ) in which they are located . with regard to theterritories , title iv - e permits american samoa , guam , puerto rico and the virgin islands to directly operate title iv - e foster care programs . it doesnot give this authority to the northern mariana islands . of the territories , only puerto rico is currently operating a title iv - e foster care program .