it had no revenue effect in 2004 . table 1 gives the estimated revenue loss of the tax cuts and their key provisions as scored by the joint committee on taxation at the time the tax cuts were enacted . estimates of the cost of the tax cuts based on ex post data do not exist . 107-147 ) was signed into law . its major revenue - side provision was accelerated depreciation for business investment . in 2003 , the jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act ( jgtrra , p.l . 108-27 ) was signed into law . it accelerated the phase in of the main egtrra provisions , with the exception of the estate tax provisions , and extended and expanded the accelerated depreciation in jcwaa . it also reduced the tax rates on dividend and capital gains income . typically , the trade deficit declines when growth has been low . for a mild recession , the contraction in employment and rise in unemployment was unusually long lasting — the longest period of employment decline since the great depression . employment declined throughout and for 21 months after the recession — a post - war record by 10 months . since the employment contraction was so prolonged , it is difficult to argue it would have been even longer in the absence of the tax cuts . in addition , the 2004 working family tax relief act ( wftra , p.l . 108-311 ) extended some provisions of the earlier acts that were slated to expire . egtrra was the largest of the tax cuts and most of egtrra's costs are to occur in the out years . most of the costs of jgtrra and jcwaa occurred in the short - term . in fact , because accelerated depreciation is a revenue loser in the short - term and revenue raiser in the medium - term , the 10-year cost of jcwaa is smaller than the short - term cost . in the long run , it was by far the smallest of the three , but of comparable size in the time period considered here . jgtrra's costs are mainly short - term because it mostly accelerates tax cuts that would have occurred later under egtrra . all of the tax cuts are temporary and scheduled to expire , although it was the intention of their supporters that egtrra / jgtrra be permanent . consistent with the goal of short - term stimulus , this report focuses on the effects of the tax cuts through 2004 . certain provisions that are large in the long run are small to date and will not be explored , most notably the repeal of the estate tax . other provisions , such as accelerated depreciation , were large in the short run , but not in the long run . although the costs of the tax cuts are large as a fraction of total receipts , particularly in the out years , the costs as a percentage of gross domestic product ( gdp ) in the years of interest are small . the small size of the tax cuts places a low ceiling on their potential economic effects .