we know all . the "we know all" approachinvolves making a source believe that the interrogator already knows everything about thesource . ( 132 ) theinterrogator compiles all available data on the source and his unit . the interrogator then asksquestions to which he already has the answer . when the source refuses to answer or provides anincomplete or false response , the interrogator himself supplies the correct answer . the interrogatortries to convince the source that all information is already known , so he may as well cooperate . when the source begins to give accurate and complete information , the interrogator beginsinterjecting questions for which he does not have the answers . this appears to be an unobjectionabletactic involving more wile than coercion , and seems to be widely accepted as legitimate . establish your identity . in the "establish youridentity approach," the interrogator insists that the source has been identified as an infamous criminalwho is merely posing as someone else to avoid punishment . ( 133 ) the source may betricked into giving detailed information on his unit to establish or substantiate his true identity inorder to refute the interrogator's allegations . the technique appears to involve trickery that mightbe acceptable under the geneva conventions , but could conceivably be applied in a threatening orcoercive manner . repetition . the interrogator may repeat the samequestion many times in order to get a hostile source to cooperate . ( 134 ) the source becomesbored with the procedure and may give more complete and candid answers simply in order to gainrelief from the monotony . ( 135 ) taken to extremes , for example , during prolongedinterrogations , it might be said to induce mental suffering file & dossier . the "file and dossier" approachis a variation of the "we know all approach," but uses a prop . prior to the session , the interrogatorprepares a dossier containing all available information obtained from records and documentsconcerning the source or his organization , possibly padding it with extra paper to create the illusionthat it contains much more information than is really there . the interrogator confronts the sourcewith the dossier , exploiting the known facts about the source to convince him that resistance wouldbe futile . rapid fire . fm 34-52 describes the "rapid fire"approach as a "psychological ploy based upon the principles that everyone likes to be heard whenhe speaks , and it is confusing to be interrupted in midsentence with an unrelated question. ( 136 ) one or twointerrogators ask a series of questions without allowing the source time to answer them completelybefore the next question is asked . the source may become confused and contradict himself , whichthe interrogator can exploit by confronting the source with the inconsistencies . the source mayreveal more than he intends in attempting to clarify his answers . silence . the silence approach involves aninterrogator who says nothing to the source , but "looks him squarely in the eye , preferably with aslight smile on his face," in an effort to make the subject nervous and force him to break eye contactfirst ( 137 ) . the sourcemay begin to talk or ask questions to break the tension .