another resolution , h.res . 822 ( mccollum ) , was introduced recognizing the efforts of afro - colombian and other peace - building communities in colombia and urging the secretary of state to monitor acts of violence committed against them . in the 110 th congress , there have been several bills with provisions related to afro - latinos . the program has benefited more than 51,000 individuals . usaid funds have also built bridges in esmeraldas and in imbabura , two provinces with significant afro - descendant populations , which have benefited roughly 23,692 and 2,400 individuals respectively . usaid has provided $25,000 to support training of a core group of 40 afro - ecuadorian human rights promoters and the establishment of a network of afro - ecuadorian community advocates . it has also supported agricultural training and small grants programs that have benefited some 1,799 afro - ecuadorians . it also prohibited the use of andean counterdrug funds for investment in oil palm development if it causes displacement or environmental damage ( as it has in many afro - colombian communities ) . in the explanatory statement to the consolidated appropriations act , the conferees stipulate that up to $15 million in alternative development assistance to colombia may be provided to afro - colombian and indigenous communities . on july 11 , 2007 , the house passed h.res . 426 ( mcgovern ) , recognizing 2007 as the year of the rights of internally displaced persons ( including afro - colombians ) in colombia and offering u.s. support to programs that seek to assist and protect them . another resolution , h.res . 618 ( payne ) , recognizing the importance of addressing the plight of afro - colombians , was introduced on august 3 , 2007 . on september 9 , 2008 , the house passed ( engel ) , supporting the values and goals of the "joint action plan between the government of the federative republic of brazil and the government of the united states of america to eliminate racial and ethnic discrimination and promote equality," which was signed by secretary of state condoleezza rice and brazilian minister of racial integration edson santos in march 2008 . in addition to considering legislation with provisions related to afro - latinos , the 110 th congress discussed the situation of afro - colombians during its consideration of the u.s. - colombia trade promotion agreement . if the trade agreement is taken up again in the 111 th congress , these concerns are likely to re - surface . the obama administration is viewed with some optimism by afro - latinos in the region , with some expectations for increased attention to afro - latino issues . in general , u.s. foreign aid has not addressed afro - latinos as a unique and specific category of beneficiaries aside from the unique case of afro - colombians . afro - latinos are not treated in the aid program the way "women in development" are — that is , as a group requiring special attention , including the need to enumerate those served in order to demonstrate and encourage progress .