the version of h.r . 3058 passed by the senate granted the irs the samelevel of funding in fy2006 requested by the administration: $10.679 billion , or $443 millionmore than the amount enacted for fy2005 and $123 million more than the amount approvedby the house ( see table 2 ) . like the house , the senate rejected the administration'sproposed restructuring of the irs budget on the grounds that it was "overly simplistic" andhampered the ability of the appropriation committee to hold the irs accountable for how itused appropriated funds . under the senate - passed version of h.r . 3058 , the irswould have received $4.137 billion for processing , assistance , and management ( or $80million more than the amount enacted for fy2005 but $45 million less than the amountapproved by the house ) ; $4.726 billion for tax law enforcement ( or $362 million more thanthe amount enacted for fy2005 and $145 million more than the amount approved by thehouse ) ; $1.598 billion for information systems ( or $20 million more than the amount enactedfor fy2005 and $23 million more than the amount approved by the house ) ; $199 million forthe bsm program ( or $4 million less than the amount enacted for fy2005 but the sameamount requested by the administration and approved by the house ) ; and $20 million foradministering the health insurance tax credit ( or $15 million less than the amount enacted forfy2005 but the same amount requested by the administration and approved by the house ) . like the house - passed version of h.r . 3058 , the senate - passed version alsoincluded a provision that would have barred the irs from using any of the funds appropriatedby the bill to implement any planned reduction in taxpayer services tigta had completeda study "detailing the impact of the irs's plans to reduce services on taxpayer compliance andtaxpayer assistance. the irs is soliciting bids for the first phaseof the private debt collection initiative . it intends to award three contracts in february 2006and launch a limited collection program involving the three contractors the following june . all firms approved by the general services administration to undertake debt collection forfederal agencies under federal supply schedule 520-4 are eligible to submit bids . if noproblems arise in the first phase of the initiative , the number of contractors could be expandedto 12 in january 2008 . the proposal to allow the irs to use pcas has been controversial since it was firstunveiled . critics contend that the use of pcas would violate the well - established and widelyaccepted principle that the collection of taxes is an inherently governmental function , threatentaxpayer privacy , undermine the security of irs jobs , and serve as an invitation to taxpayerabuse by giving private debt collectors a financial incentive to use aggressive tactics with thetaxpayers they contact . supporters of the proposal retort that these concerns are largelyunfounded , and that the proposed use of pcas plan offers several advantages over hiringadditional irs staff to pursue the targeted individual tax debt . first , no appropriated fundswould be used to pay for the services rendered by the pcas . second , the private collectionagencies would augment and not replace the irs's own collection staff .