table 10 . summary of proposed changes to government - wide general provisions 1 unless otherwise indicated , all references to sections in the "2004 act" in this table refer to the general provisions in division f , title vi of the fy2004 consolidatedappropriations act ( p.l . arc: amtrak reform council aip: airport improvement program ( faa ) air21: the wendell h. ford aviation investment and reform act for the 21st century ( p.l . 106-181 ) , the current aviation authorizing legislation araa: the amtrak reform and accountability act of 1997 ( p.l . 105-134 ) , the current amtrak authorizing legislation atsa: the aviation and transportation security act ( p.l . 107-71 ) , legislation which created the transportation security administration within the dot brr: bridge replacement and rehabilitation program ( fhwa ) bts: bureau of transportation statistics cg: coast guard cmaq: congestion mitigation and air quality program ( fhwa ) dot: department of transportation eas: essential air service ( faa ) f&e: facilities and equipment program ( faa ) faa: federal aviation administration fahp: federal - aid highway program ( fhwa ) fair21: the wendell h. ford aviation investment and reform act for the 21st century ( p.l . 106-181 ) , the current aviation authorizing legislation fhwa: federal highway administration fra: federal railroad administration fta: federal transit administration hazmat: hazardous materials ( safety program in rspa ) hpp: high priority projects ( fhwa ) htf: highway trust fund im: interstate maintenance program ( fhwa ) its: intelligent transportation systems ( fhwa ) mcsap: motor carrier safety assistance program ( fmcsa ) new starts: part of the fta's capital grants and loans program which funds new fixed - guideway systems or extensions to existing systems nhs: national highway system ; also a program within fhwa nhtsa: national highway traffic safety administration nmcsa: national motor carrier safety administration o&m: operations and maintenance program ( faa ) oig: office of the inspector general of the dot ost: office of the secretary of transportation raba: revenue - aligned budget authority rd&t: research , development and technology program ( fhwa ) re&d: research , engineering and development program ( faa ) rspa: research and special projects administration scasd: small community air service development program ( faa ) stb: surface transportation board stp: surface transportation program ( fhwa ) tcsp: transportation and community and system preservation program ( fhwa ) tea - 21: transportation equity act for the 21st century ( p.l . 105-178 ) , the current highway and transit authorizing legislation tifia: transportation infrastructure finance and innovation act program ( fhwa ) tsa: transportation security administratio . transportation is function 400 in the annual unified congressional budget . it isalso considered part of the discretionary budget . funding for the dot budget isderived from a number of sources . the majority of funding comes from dedicatedtransportation trust funds . the remainder of dot funding is from federal treasurygeneral funds . the transportation trust funds include the highway trust fund , whichcontains two accounts , the highway trust account and the transit account ; the airportand airway trust fund ; and the inland waterways trust fund . all of these accountsderive their respective funding from specific excise and other taxes .