b . 2001 japanese export figure does not include the 499,999 mt , worth over y112 billion ( $900million ) , of husked brown rice that japan sent to north korea as food aid . on june 22 , 1965 , japan and south korea signed a treaty of basic relations , normalizingrelations between the two countries for the first time since japan annexed the korean peninsula in1910 . as part of the final settlement , japan agreed to provide south korea with a total sum of $800million ( 41 ) , which consisted of: a ) an outright grantof $300 million , to be distributed over a 10-yearperiod ; b ) a $200 million loan to be distributed over a 10-year period and repaid over 20 years at3.5% interest ; c ) $300 million in private credits over 10 years from japanese banks and financialinstitutions . prior to the 1965 agreement , the normalization negotiations between tokyo and seoul had dragged on for over fourteen years , and had triggered strong emotions in both countries . throughoutthe 1950s , south korean president syngman rhee adopted a confrontational approach toward japan,and successive japanese governments showed little enthusiasm for accepting rhee's demands thatjapan apologize and compensate for its colonization of the korean peninsula . relations warmed dramatically following a military coup in 1961 , led by general park chung - hee , who established rapid industrialization - - following the japanese model of export - leddevelopment - - as his country's paramount economic goal . to this end , park was eager for japaneseeconomic assistance , and adopted conciliatory postures on most outstanding issues . theapproximate size and composition of the compensation package was one of the first issues to beresolved following park's coup . the south korean side , which at one point had asked for as muchas $2 billion , lowered its demands to $700 million in grant aid before agreeing to the $800 milliontotal package . reportedly , until late 1962 , japan had offered only $70 million in total compensation,a figure the u.s. state department at the time described as "unrealistically low. ( 42 ) furthermore , thetreaty on basic relations did not contain any reference to a japanese apology . instead , japan'sreparations payment was characterized as "economic assistance. the terms of the treaty enraged many south koreans . charging that the agreement amounted to a "sellout," korea's opposition parties boycotted the ratification process in the national assembly.violent anti - government protests erupted throughout the country , and the park government imposedmartial law to suppress anti - government protests around the country , the second time in less than ayear troops were mobilized to curtail protests against the government's japan policy . the agreementalso faced strong but eventually ineffectual opposition in japan , where the socialist party - - whichhad friendly ties with north korea - - argued that the treaty would impede korean unification andwas a prelude to an anti - communist alliance in asia . there are a wide range of estimates for the present value of the 1965 japan - south korea settlement . at the low end is a method that adjusts for inflation in the u.s. economy , yielding avalue of approximately $3.4 billion in 1999 dollars .