such legislation ( h.r . 2126 ) was introduced again in the 112 th congress by representative john campbell . risk retention groups are required by current federal law to be state - chartered insurance companies ; they are allowed to insure commercial liability risks , such as the risk that a physician will be found liable for medical malpractice , but not other property / casualty risks , such as the risk that a physician's office might burn down . this means complying with up to 51 different sets of state or district laws and regulations in order to do business across the country . the impact of this multiplicity of regulation is particularly high in insurance , as compared with other businesses , because both the prices and the content of insurance policies are highly regulated in most states . this perceived burden of multiple state regulatory systems is also the primary argument cited currently by some in the insurance industry for creating a federal charter to replace or supplement the current state system . risk retention groups are exempted by federal law from the requirement to be licensed in all states in which they operate as well as from other state laws regulating the business of insurance . they must register and file documentation with a state's insurance regulator , but after this filing , they are essentially free to do business in that state . this exemption from state law extends to most laws on the business of insurance , but laws such as those on fraudulent trade practices , nondiscrimination , and unfair claim settlement practices still apply . risk retention groups must also pay state premium taxes as regular insurers do . in addition , a non - domiciliary state's insurance regulator is empowered to monitor the financial solvency of a group , including requiring that a group submit to a financial condition examination if the chartering state regulator refuses to do such an exam , and seeking an injunction to force it to cease doing business if the group is in hazardous financial condition . this regulatory oversight is less than that accorded regular insurance companies , however , and some observers fear that this might lead to an increased danger of such groups becoming insolvent . in the case of a risk retention group insolvency , the policyholders have no recourse to a state guaranty fund because membership in these funds is specifically prohibited by the federal statute . risk purchasing groups are given a similar , but more limited , exemption from state law . many states have laws , known as "fictitious grouping laws," that specifically prohibit or limit groups from purchasing insurance for the members of the group , particularly if the group exists solely for the purchase of insurance . state insurance regulators use these laws to protect consumers and ensure solvency . risk purchasing groups are exempted from these laws and from countersignature laws , which are laws requiring a local broker's or agent's signature on an insurance contract . the insurance that such groups purchase on behalf of their members must meet the laws and regulations of the state that is designated as the domicile of that group .