for the prc . in previous years there have been other known crises involving leadership cover - ups and government failings , the blame for which hasbeen largely contained at the local or regional level . these cases have included mass food - poisonings ( both accidental and deliberate ) , contaminated milk for school children , fireworks factory explosions,mining disasters , and other instances involving official malfeasance , incompetence , or poorjudgement . given the nature and extent of the sars crisis , however , communist party and centralgovernment officials were forced publicly to make fuller disclosure , and in doing so to embraceseveral radical concepts they had not addressed before: the right of the public to know aboutinformation that directly concerns their daily lives , and the need for government to hold officialsaccountable for their mistakes and failings . neither concept has been an endemic feature of prcgovernance . ( 80 ) prc authorities didconsent to a who team visit to taiwan to investigate sars early in may 2003 , and the prc raisedno objections when taiwan scientists were invited to attend a two - day who sars conference inkuala lumpur on june 17-18 , 2003 . but generally , the prc continues to insist that any taiwanhealth official wishing to take advantage of who's medical expertise should do so only as part ofa prc delegation . some feel that the prc's objection to who help for taiwan allowed taiwan's president , chen shui - bian , to gain political mileage for his ongoing reelection campaign by claiming that the prcdidn't care about the health of the 23 million people on taiwan . ( 81 ) in addition , beijing's own cover - up of sars and its initial reluctance to ask for who assistance appeared toweaken the long - standing argument of chinese leaders that the prc can responsibly represent taiwan's healthinterests in the who . finally , the fatality rates associated with the 2003 sars outbreak , therecurrence of the disease in 2004 , and the implications of the 2004 avian flu outbreak appear likelyto reinforce the already strong support of u.s. members of congress for taiwan's whomembership . u.s. foreign policy specialists are confronting the lingering political and economic consequences that global health crises in the prc could have for u.s. policy and for u.s. - chinarelations . the 2003 sars outbreak and the emerging 2004 avian flu outbreak demonstrate thatincreasing pressures are working on the authoritarian prc system , pressures involving greater publicdemand for information ; increasing government vulnerability to domestic and international opinion ; the prc's growing "buy - in" into the international system ; and the continually closer link betweenall these things and the prc's predominant goal of rapid economic growth . some american observers believe that new public demands in the prc are likely to emphasize funding for domestic social services - - public health , the quality of medical care , education , andother programs - - and could lead to a lesser emphasis on military spending . some in this group alsosee the crisis as having reinforced for prc leaders the importance of communication , cooperation,and transparency in confronting issues that transcend national borders , and they view thesereinforcements to be in u.s. interests .