vacancies . the time for holding elections in any state , district , or territory for a representative or delegate to fill a vacancy , whether such vacancy is caused by a failure to elect at the time prescribed by law , or by the death , resignation , or incapacity of a person elected , may be prescribed by the laws of the several states and territories respectively . section 1 . time of appointing electors . the electors of president and vice president shall be appointed , in each state , on the tuesday next after the first monday in november , in every fourth year succeeding every election of a president and vice president . section 2 . failure to make choice on prescribed day . whenever any state has held an election for the purpose of choosing electors , and has failed to make a choice on the day prescribed by law , the electors may be appointed on a subsequent day in such a manner as the legislature of such state may direct . section 5 . determination of controversy as to appointment of electors . amendment seventeen . the senate of the united states shall be composed of two senators from each state , elected by the people thereof , for six years ... . when vacancies happen in the representation of any state in the senate , the executive authority of such state shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies: provided , that the legislature of any state may empower the executive thereof to make temporary appointments until the people fill the vacancies by election as the legislature may direct . article i , section 4 , clause 1 . the times , places and manner of holding elections for senators and representatives , shall be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof ; but the congress may at any time by law make or alter such regulations , except as to the places of chusing senators . article i , section 5 , clause 1 . each house shall be the judge of the elections , returns and qualifications of its own members .... presidential elections . article ii , section 1 , cl . the executive power shall be vested in a president of the united states of america . he shall hold his office during the term of four years , and , together with the vice president , chosen for the same term , be elected , as follows: article ii , section 1 , cl . each state shall appoint , in such manner as the legislature thereof may direct , a number of electors , equal to the whole number of senators and representatives to which the state may be entitled in the congress... . article ii , section 1 , clause 4 . the congress may determine the time of chusing the electors , and the day on which they shall give their votes ; which day shall be the same throughout the united states . amendment xii .