for most purposes , the exercise of this power is relatively noncontroversial . for instance , in july 2003 , an amendment was passed by the house to limit the use of funds to enforce a federal court decision regarding the pledge of allegiance . then , in july 2004 , the house passed h.r . 3313 , the marriage protection act , which would have limited federal court jurisdiction over questions regarding the defense of marriage act . finally , in september 2004 , the house passed h.r . 2028 , the pledge protection act , which was intended to limit the jurisdiction of the federal courts to hear cases regarding the pledge of allegiance . these proposals are often referred to as "court - stripping" proposals , and some of these proposals may raise significant constitutional questions . regulation of the procedures and remedies available to a litigant are clearly within congress' authority . however , just as an exception or a regulation of jurisdiction can constrain the courts in the performance of their duties , so restrictions on judicial processes , such as the ability to afford injunctive relief , can equally constrain the courts . while major interpretive differences have arisen between congress and the courts regarding the construction of these legislative enactments , the supreme court has never expressed any doubt that congress has the power to enact them . the court has , however , always left open the possibility that congress might go too far . for instance , in 1793 , for reasons lost to history , congress enacted a statute to prohibit the issuance of injunctions by federal courts to stay state court proceedings . while construction of this statute has varied over the years , it remains as an indication that congress has the power to regulate such judicial process and remedies . during this century , the propensity of the federal courts to issue injunctions to limit labor unions in disputes with management , led congress to adopt the norris - laguardia act , forbidding the issuance of injunctions in labor disputes except after compliance with a lengthy hearing and fact - finding process . although earlier case law appeared to recognize a due process objection to such a restraint , the supreme court had no difficulty sustaining the constitutionality of the law in lauf v. e. g. shinner & co . congress' power to confer , withhold , and restrict both jurisdiction and equity authority was also powerfully revealed in the cases arising from the emergency price control act of 1942 . fearful that the price control program might be nullified by injunctions , congress provided for a special court in which persons could challenge the validity of price regulations issued by the government from which appeals from the court to the supreme court could be taken . the constitutionality of the act was sustained in lockerty v. phillips , although those skeptical of the breadth of the law note that the court itself referred to the fact that it arose in "the exigencies of war. one modern example of congressional control over the processes of the federal courts is the prison litigation reform act ( plra ) of 1996 .