, the third ship in the program]. also that month , the program plans to complete its cyber security vulnerability evaluation along with the remainder of a 2-year regimen of certifications and several different tests . the navy expects this regimen to demonstrate the full functionality of the ship's systems . both parts of the dbr have been in development for the past several years . an attachment to the june 1 , 2010 , letter stated that , as a result of the program's restructuring , the ship is now to be equipped with "an upgraded multifunction radar [mfr] and no volume search radar [vsr]. the change eliminates the lockheed - built s - band spy - 4 vsr from the ship's design . the ship might retain a space and weight reservation that would permit the vsr to be backfitted to the ship at a later point . the navy states that as part of the nunn - mccurdy certification process , the volume search radar ( vsr ) hardware was identified as an acceptable opportunity to reduce cost in the program and thus was removed from the current baseline design... . modifications will be made to the spy - 3 multi - function radar ( mfr ) with the focus of meeting ship key performance parameters . the mfr modifications will involve software changes to perform a volume search functionality . shipboard operators will be able to optimize the spy - 3 mfr for either horizon search or volume search . while optimized for volume search , the horizon search capability is limited . ( raytheon is the prime contractor for the overall dbr. ) without the vsr , ddg 1000 is still expected to perform local area air defense... . the removal of the vsr will result in an estimated $300 million net total cost savings for the three - ship class . these savings will be used to offset the program cost increase as a result of the truncation of the program to three ships . the estimated cost of the mfr software modification to provide the volume search capability will be significantly less than the estimated procurement costs for the vsr . regarding the figure of $300 million net total cost savings in the above passage , the navy during 2011 determined that eliminating the spy - 4 vsr from the ddg - 1000 increased by $54 million the cost to integrate the dual - band radar into the navy's new gerald r. ford ( cvn - 78 ) class aircraft carriers . subtracting this $54 million cost from the above $300 million savings figure would bring the net total cost savings to about $246 million on a navy - wide basis . a july 26 , 2010 , press report quotes captain james syring , the ddg - 1000 program manager , as stating the following: "we don't need the s - band radar to meet our requirements [for the ddg - 1000]," and "you can meet [the ddg - 1000's operational] requirements with [the] x - band [radar] with software modifications.