medical services . provides fundsfor treatment of veterans and eligible beneficiaries in va medical centers , nursinghomes , outpatient clinic facilities , and contract hospitals . hospital and outpatientcare is also provided by the private sector for certain dependents and survivors ofveterans under the civilian health and medical program of va ( champva ) . funds are also used to train medical residents , interns , and other professional,paramedical and administrative personnel in health science fields to support va'smedical programs . provides fundsfor the operation and maintenance of vha's infrastructure . funds are used for costsassociated with utilities , engineering , capital planning , leases , laundry , food services,groundskeeping , garbage disposal , facility repair , and selling and buying of property . medical and prosthetic research . provides funds for medical , rehabilitative , and health services research . the medicaland prosthetic research program is an intermural program . in addition to funds fromthis appropriation , reimbursements from the department of defense ( dod ) , grantsfrom the national institutes of health ( nih ) , and private sources supports varesearches . medical research supports basic and clinical studies that advancesknowledge so that efficient , and rational interventions can be made to prevent , carefor , or alleviate disease . the prosthetic research program is involved in thedevelopment of prosthetic , orthopedic and sensory aids to improve the lives ofdisabled veterans . the health services research program focuses on improving theoutcome effectiveness and cost - efficiency of health care delivery for the populationof veterans . overhead costs associated with medical and prosthetic research are alsofunded by the medical services account . typical major construction projects are replacements of hospital buildings,addition of large ambulatory care centers , and new hospitals or nursing homes . construction minor projects . va collects fees for use of these parkingfacilities . the consolidated appropriations act , 2004 authorized collections fromthe parking program to be deposited in mccf and be used for medical services . funds for construction or alterations of parking facilities will now be included underthe construction major projects and construction minor projects accounts . ( 30 ) sale of assets ( formerly the nursing homerevolving fund ) . this fund provides for construction , alteration,and acquisition ( including site acquisition ) of nursing home facilities as provided forin appropriation acts . collections to this revolving fund are realized from the transferon any interest in real property that is owned by va and has an estimated value inexcess of $50,000 . no budget authority is required for this revolving fund , and fundsare available without fiscal year limitation . overhead costs associated with medical and prosthetic researchis also funded by this account . medical administration . providesfunds for the management and administration of va's health care system . funds areused for the costs associated with the operation of va medical centers , otherfacilities , vha headquarters , costs of veterans integrated service network ( visn ) offices , billing and coding activities , and procurement . ( 31 ) medical facilities . medical administration . providesfunds for costs associated with operation of medical centers , other facilities and vhaheadquarters as well as visn offices .