appendix a . top 50 sending countries in fy2010 , by category of lpr appendix b . processing dates for immigrant petitions appendix c. fy2001-fy2010 immigrants , by preference category appendix d. recent legislative history issues in the 108 th congress legislation reforming permanent immigration came from a variety of divergent perspectives in the 108 th congress . the sheer complexity of the current set of provisions makes revising the law on permanent immigration a daunting task . this discussion focuses only on those bills that would have revised the permanent immigration categories and the numerical limits as defined in ยง201-ยง203 of the ina . on january 21 , 2004 , senators chuck hagel and thomas daschle introduced legislation ( s. 2010 ) that would , if enacted , potentially yield significant increases in legal permanent admissions . the immigration reform act of 2004 ( s. 2010 ) , would have among other provisions: no longer deduct immediate relatives from the overall family - sponsored numerical limits ; treat spouses and minor children of lprs the same as immediate relatives of u.s. citizens ( exempt from numerical limits ) ; and reallocate the 226,000 family preference numbers to the remaining family preference categories . in addition , many aliens who would have benefited from s. 2010 's proposed temporary worker provisions would be able to adjust to lpr status outside the numerical limits of the per country ceiling and the worldwide levels . several bills that would offer more targeted revisions to permanent immigration were offered in the house . representative robert andrews introduced h.r . 539 , which would have exempted spouses of lprs from the family preference limits and thus treated them similar to immediate relatives of u.s. citizens . representative richard gephardt likewise included a provision that would have treated spouses of lprs outside of the numerical limits in his "earned legalization and family unity act" ( h.r . representative jerrold nadler introduced legislation ( h.r . 832 ) that would have amended the ina to add "permanent partners" after "spouses" and thus would have enabled aliens defined as permanent partners to become lprs through the family - based immigration categories as well as to become derivative relatives of qualifying immigrants . legislation that would have reduced legal permanent immigration was introduced early in the 108 th congress by representative thomas tancredo . the "mass immigration reduction act" ( h.r . 946 ) would have zeroed out family sponsored immigrants ( except children and spouses of u.s. citizens ) , employment - based immigrants ( except certain priority workers ) and diversity lottery immigrants through fy2008 . it also would have set a numerical limit of 25,000 on refugee admissions and asylum adjustments . representative j. gresham barrett introduced an extensive revision of immigration law ( h.r . 3522 ) that also included a significant scaling back of permanent immigration . legislation passed in the 109 th congress recaptured visa numbers for nurses section 502 of division b , title v of p.l . 1268 , the emergency fy2005 supplemental appropriation ) amended the american competitiveness in the twenty - first century act of 2000 ( p.l .