it does not address the security of freight rail operations . but the risk to passengers on these systems from terrorist attack is quite small , relative to the number of trips these systems provide daily , and travel on passenger rail systems is safer overall than the primary alternative , the automobile . passenger rail service takes four forms: heavy rail ( eg , subway systems like washington d.c.'s metro ) , commuter rail ( eg , maryland's maryland rail commuter , or marc , and virginia's virginia railway express , or vre , trains ) , light rail ( eg , dallas's dart ) , and intercity passenger rail ( amtrak ) . one approach is to make changes in passenger rail systems to lower their vulnerability to attack ( eg , hiring more police officers , introducing random screening of passengers and bags , installing security cameras ) . another is to reduce the potential consequences of an attack ( eg , through coordinated emergency response training exercises with local first responders ) . yet another is to make changes elsewhere that reduce the level of threat to those systems ( eg , putting more money into intelligence and law enforcement to combat terrorism ) . congress passed comprehensive passenger rail security legislation as part of the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( h.r . 1 ) , which was signed into law august 3 , 2007 ( p.l . titles xiv ( the national transit systems security act of 2007 ) and title xv ( surface transportation security ) of this legislation expand the federal role in securing passenger rail , both by authorizing significant increases in federal grants to passenger rail operators for security improvements and by authorizing federal regulation of certain security - related activities of transit and rail operators , such as employee training . passenger rail security - related provisions in the legislation include authorization for several new grant programs: a total of $3.4 billion over the period fy2008-fy2011 for grants for public transportation security , for which commuter rail agencies will be among the eligible recipients ( â§ 1406 ) ; a total of $1.2 billion over the same period for grants for railroad security , for which eligible recipients include rail carriers , amtrak , and state and local governments ( â§ 1513 ) ; a total of $650 million over the same period for grants to amtrak for systemwide security upgrades ( â§ 1514 ) ; and a total of $200 million over the same period for grants to amtrak for safety improvements to rail tunnels in new york , baltimore , and washington , dc ( â§ 1515 ) . these grants are to be administered by dhs , except that the amtrak systemwide security grants are to be awarded by dhs but disbursed by dot , and the amtrak tunnel safety grants are to be administered by dot .