34 by a vote of 235-193 . the committee report includes illustrative examples to achieve budget savings , such as a change in the structure of the medicare and medicaid programs and the repeal of many of the provisions in aca . one of the proposals would restructure the medicaid program from an individual entitlement to a block grant , starting in fy2013 . according to cbo's long - term analysis of the proposal , when compared to long - term estimates of current law , federal spending for medicaid would be 35% lower in fy2022 and 49% lower in fy2030 . proponents of the block grant model suggest that this design would make federal medicaid spending more predictable and provide states with stronger incentives to control the cost of their medicaid programs . additionally , this design could relieve some of the cost burden to states by removing certain federal medicaid requirements . however , this proposal would shift the responsibility for the growth in medicaid spending over the federal block grant amount to states . according to cbo , the magnitude of the federal medicaid spending reductions under this proposal would make it difficult for states to maintain their current medicaid programs . as a result , states would have to weigh the impact of maintaining current medicaid service levels against other state priorities for spending . they could choose to constrain medicaid expenditures by reducing provider reimbursement rates , limiting benefit packages , or restricting eligibility . these types of programmatic changes could also impact access to and the quality of medical care for medicaid enrollees . in a typical year , the federal government funds roughly 57% of the total cost for medicaid , and federal medicaid expenditures account for almost 8% of all federal spending . in fy2012 , federal medicaid payments to states are estimated to amount to $260 billion . federal medicaid payments are anticipated to grow significantly beginning in fy2014 due to the expansion of medicaid eligibility provided in the aca . as a percentage of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , federal medicaid expenditures are expected to increase from about 1.9% of gdp in fy2011 to 2.5% of gdp in fy2021 . as a result , controlling federal medicaid spending has been a focus of federal deficit reduction proposals , such as the house budget resolution ( discussed above ) and the national commission on fiscal reform . the national commission on fiscal reform final report included savings from medicaid totaling $58 billion over 10 years . the savings came from eliminating states' ability to fund medicaid through provider taxes , covering dual - eligibles under managed care arrangements , and giving states additional fiscal responsibility for administrative costs . additionally , in february 2012 , the president's fy2013 budget was released , and the budget proposal included a number of medicaid provisions estimated by the administration to reduce federal medicaid expenditures by $55.7 billion over the next 10 years .