this legislation is examined below . the bill has three main provisions: to amend the employment discrimination provisions of the civil rights act of 1964 to protect breastfeeding by new mothers ; to provide tax incentives to encourage breastfeeding ; and to provide for a performance standard for breast pumps . title i of the bill would amend title vii ( equal employment opportunity ) of the civil rights act of 1964 ( "act" ) and is cited to as the pregnancy discrimination act amendments of 2005 . section 102 deals with various findings and purposes . this section recognizes that women with infants are a significant part of the labor force ; cites to studies that indicate the benefits of breastfeeding for both mother and child ; and observes that some courts have not applied the protection of title vii to mothers who are breastfeeding and expressing milk in the workplace . the stated purpose of the proposed amendment to title vii is to promote the health and well - being of infants whose mothers return to the workplace after childbirth and clarify that breastfeeding and expressing breast milk in the workplace are protected conduct under the amendment made by the pregnancy discrimination act of 1978 to title vii of the act . section 103 of title 1 would amend section 701 ( k ) of the civil rights act of 1964 , which defines sex discrimination for employment purposes , to insert the phrase "including lactation" after the term "childbirth," and by adding at the end , the following: "for the purposes of this subsection , the term 'lactation' means a condition that may result in the feeding of a child directly from the breast or the expression of milk from the breast. title ii of the bill would provide a tax credit under the internal revenue code for an employer's expenses in providing an appropriate environment on business premises for employed mothers to breastfeed or express milk . the provisions of the bills and the resolution are summarized below . 2122 was introduced by representative carolyn maloney and is based upon some of the provisions of h.r . 2790 of the 108 th congress , discussed above . the provisions of the bill are summarized below . the credit for a taxable year would equal 50% of qualified expenditures , up to a credit limit of $10,000 . "qualified breastfeeding promotion and support expenditure" is to include breast pumps and related "exclusive use property," if such materials meet prescribed standards , and consultation services related to breastfeeding . the term "other exclusive use property" is defined to mean any amount paid or incurred for the acquisition or lease of tangible personal property used by mothers who are employees of the taxpayer to breastfeed or to express milk for their children , unless the property is located in any residence of the taxpayer or any employee of the taxpayer . the amendments made by this section would be applicable to taxable years beginning after december 31 , 2004 . title iii of the bill deals with safe and effective breast pumps and is entitled the safe and effective breast pumps act .