proposals currently under discussion include . other points raised during discussion of the cloture issue include the following: some argue that a number of senators might view proposed changes to the cloture rule as a diminution of their rights , by making it much more difficult to block confirmation of a nominee . as a result , if the rules change is adopted , it raises the question whether it would increase pressure to require senate confirmation for more executive branch positions , so as to allow the senate to retain a robust role in the confirmation process . the rule change proposed by the frist and miller resolutions would apply to all presidential nominations . some have wondered whether nominations for the courts , the third branch of government , should be treated the same as those to the executive branch or whether the two groups of nominations should have different thresholds for approval or different procedures for stopping debate . could stronger enforcement of existing rules — such as the two speech rule — and disallowing informal but time consuming practices — such as suggesting the absence of a quorum — permit more efficient action on nominations or other matters ? is the greater use of filibusters a sign that traditional checks and balances in the nomination and confirmation system , such as the blue - slip which affords home - state senators a great deal of say in selecting individuals for the federal bench , are no longer working as they were intended or have in the past ? printed amendments that have been available for at least 24 hours are not read when called up . time for votes , quorum calls , and other actions is charged against the 30-hour limit on consideration . this time limit may be extended by joint leadership motion if three - fifths of all senators vote for a non - debatable motion to do so . senators who have not used or yielded ten minutes of their hour are guaranteed up to ten minutes to speak . when all time expires , the senate immediately votes on any pending amendments and then on the underlying matter . one hour after the senate meets on the second calendar day after a cloture motion has been filed and after a quorum has been ascertained , the presiding officer puts the question , "is it the sense of the senate that the debate shall be brought to a close ? in the 108 th congress several resolutions were introduced on the subject . the cloture motion is then subject to a yea - and - nay vote . if three - fifths of senators — 60 if there are no vacancies in the body — vote for the cloture motion , the senate must take final action on the matter on which it has invoked cloture by the end of 30 total hours of additional consideration . proposals to limit senate debate are as old as the senate itself . over the 216-year history of the body , numerous procedures have been proposed to allow the senate to end discussion and act .