intelligence agencies . ( 97 ) after the november2003 bombings in istanbul , deputy secretary ofstate richard armitage told the turks , "our enemy is your enemy.... we are very much closer now,in the wake of this tragedy. ( 98 ) turkey's large army is among the most experienced in the world in peacekeeping . turkish forces have served in somalia , bosnia , kosovo , macedonia , east timor , and led isaf inafghanistan from july 2002 to february 2003 . ( 99 ) turkey lost several soldiers in afghanistan , andsome of its civilian workers were kidnaped there . after its period of command , turkey reduced itsforces in afghanistan and , as of june 15 , 2004 , only 161 turkish soldiers remained there . innovember 2003 , respected former foreign minister hikmet cetin became nato's senior civilianrepresentative in afghanistan . in may 2004 , turkey dispatched three helicopters and 56 flight andmaintenance personnel to assist isaf . deputy chief of staff general ilker basbug said that turkeymay command isaf again from february to august 2005 . turkey also participates in the u.s. - initiated southeast europe brigade ( seebrig ) , black sea naval group ( blackseafor ) , and provides nato partnership for peace ( pfp ) training forcountries of the balkans , caucasus , and central asia . finally , turkey is an example of a predominantly muslim , democratic country at a time when u.s. policy is to encourage democratization in the muslim world . in this area , turkish officials echothe u.s. agenda , sometimes with caveats . on may 28 , 2003 , foreign minister gul delivered alandmark speech at the organization of the islamic conference foreign ministers' meeting inteheran . he called for the group to act with "a refreshed vision" in which good governance,transparency and accountability would reign , and fundamental rights and freedoms as well as genderequality are upheld . ( 100 ) in june 2004 , primeminister erdogan attended the g - 8 summit in seaisland , georgia , as a "democratic partner" for the formal launching of the broader middle east andnorth africa initiative . turkish officials have cautioned that reforms should be generated from within societies , not imposed , that the agenda and pace of reform must be decided by each country to suit the needs andsensitivities of its society , that it is a gradual process , and that it cannot be thought of in isolationfrom international problems such as the arab - israeli conflict and iraq . ( 101 ) gul has noted that reformswould not come automatically even if the arab - israeli conflict were solved , and urged that they bestarted without delay . he argued that the islamic world must address both issues . gul hasacknowledged that turkish reforms demonstrate that islam and modernism can be integrated and thatturkey could not prevent itself from being used as a model . ( 102 ) in contrast , turkish secularists findinappropriate the idea that turkey should be a model for islamic countries . president sezerreportedly lectured president bush at the nato summit in june 2004 that "turkey is a country withpredominantly muslim population , but it is not an islamic country ... religion is separated from stateaffairs.