the national strategy for combating terrorism addresses these issues . what is the impact of an act ofterrorism on the economy of a nation or on global economic networks ? what is the impact onbehavioral patterns of a target population ? might the public pressure government to pursue policiesthat appease terror ? the question arises , how long can democratic governments pursue policies thatpressure terrorists if such policies are seen as bringing on terrorist retaliation ? breaking orweakening this political will is likely to be a central terrorist goal . some well thought out strategies promote holding the line on terrorism or setting it back . but a potential danger in formalized strategies such as the national strategy for combatingterrorism ( 31 ) is that thestrategy may rigidly dictate the response instead of the threat dictating the response - - as the threatis often rapidly evolving . one option for policymakers charged with combating terrorism is todesign flexibility into strategies , organizational structures , and funding utilization . while strategies or changes in governmental organizational structures such as thoserecommended for the intelligence community by the 9 / 11 commission may accelerate successagainst global terrorism , other factors are equally critical as well . strong national leadership and ahigh quality of rank - and - file personnel and technology are central , as is the strong political will ofleadership and the general population . hence , one potential pitfall of relying on strategies andreforms involving restructuring of government organizations is that a focus on implementingstrategies or administrative changes may overshadow other important factors such as quality ofpersonnel and technology . in particular , this human factor may warrant more attention in anenvironment where organizations may feel pressed to find personnel to fill a plethora of newlycreated counter - terror related positions . overall , the 9 / 11 commission recommendations share many features of the administration'snational strategy for combating terrorism . both emphasize a need for pre - emptive strategy , for attackingterrorists and their organizations , for international cooperation , for foreign economic assistance , forwinning hearts and minds , for strengthening counter - proliferation efforts , for attacking terroristfinancing , for denying sanctuaries , and for border security . ( 32 ) pursuit of governmentpolicies that draw potential recruits away from terrorist agendas is a core recommendation of the9 / 11 commission report . ( 33 ) some , however , see certain commission recommendations as incomplete , if not flawed . they suggest that the commission is often focused on the "last war" and not a future one , and likenthe commission's recommendations to picking the "low hanging fruit on the tree while avoidinggoing after the higher - - more difficult to reach , yet richer - - clusters. ( 34 ) for example , thecommission , as its first recommendation , suggests identifying and prioritizing terrorist sanctuarieswith a focus on failed states . some assert , however , that terrorists increasingly return to theirpolitically stable home countries for sanctuary where they blend into local communities , where theirtraining camps are in civilian housing complexes , and where their bomb factories are in privateresidences .