policy. on august 11 , 2003 , however , the consortium declined to accept the $1 million grant due to the exclusion of marie stopes international . the united states was an important actor in the launch of unfpa in 1969 . during the mid - to - late 1960s , congress began to express heightened concern over the impact of rapid population growth on development prospects in poor countries , noting that the world's population was growing by about 2% annually compared with only a 1% growth in food production . in 1967 , for the first time , congress amended the foreign assistance act of 1961 to specifically authorize and earmark funds for population assistance programs , urging the united states especially to channel family planning resources through the united nations and other international organizations . some members believed that such earmarks were necessary because the state department and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) had not been giving the issue adequate attention . these initial u.s. contributions , however , were conditioned on the requirement that other donors match the american payment in an equal amount . some believe that this represented a state department warning to unicef , the world health organization , and other organizations that continued involvement in joint programs with unfpa might jeopardize their funding support from the united states . in 2003 , the state department decided that it would fund a $1 million hiv / aids program supporting african and asian refugees only if the implementing ngo group — reproductive health for refugees consortium — did not include marie stopes international among its members . this incentive helped unfpa exceed its 1970 projected resource goal when 22 other countries contributed a combined $7.7 million . in 1971 , with the same matching requirement tied to the u.s. pledge of $15 million , unfpa received donations of $14.5 million from 45 nations . as shown in table 3 , u.s. contributions continued to climb throughout the 1970s and early 1980s . at the same time , however , the number and size of transfers from other donors rose faster , so that the share of unfpa resources from the united states declined from 50% to around 27% . in fy2009 , the u.s. contribution to unfpa peaked at $50 million . for fy2010 , unfpa is expected to receive $55 million from the united states , the largest u.s. contribution to date . as previously mentioned , initial unfpa programs in china concentrated on bolstering china's capacity for data collection and analysis , and maternal and child health / family planning activities . following the cairo population conference in 1994 and the conclusion of unfpa's third chinese program , unfpa and beijing officials began to discuss significant changes for a fourth agreement that would more closely follow the principles set out in cairo . the subsequent unfpa program , launched in 1998 , concentrated efforts in 32 counties where birth targets and quotas had been eliminated by the chinese government .