under present law , i.e. the senate version of h.r . 6 , the energy policy act of 2005 , proposes to notonly expand the small ethanol producer credit , but to introduce a renewable fuels standard ( whichis effectively an ethanol standard ) , a requirement that gasoline suppliers ( refiners and blenders ) blendat least 8 billion gallons of renewable fuels per year in producing gasoline . such a requirement , ifenacted , would more than double the amount of ethanol blended with gasoline above the currentprojected baseline level of ethanol use , and significantly increase federal tax revenue losses . this report explains the provisions of the new alcohol fuels mixtures tax credit and comparesthe tax benefits under the new credit with the tax benefits under the old exemption . an exampleillustrates the mechanics of the new credit and compares it with the old exemption . the secondsection examines the revenue and highway trust fund implications of the new tax incentive bothwith and without a renewable fuels standard . the final section discusses the remaining three taxsubsidies for alcohol fuels , which , although little used , are nevertheless part of the current federaltax laws and might be used in the future . under the new alcohol fuels mixtures tax credit , â§40 of the internal revenue code ( irc ) ,gasohol blenders may claim a 51â¢ / gallon tax credit for alcohol used to produce a qualified mixture ( a mixture of alcohol and gasoline , or a mixture of alcohol and any other special motor fuel ) . ( 3 ) unlike most tax credits , which are claimed against income tax liability ( because the incometax otherwise owed is reduced or "credited" by the amount of the credit ) , the new alcohol mixturescredit is claimed against the motor fuels ( gasoline ) excise tax . however , both approaches reduce theeffective excise tax burden on each gallon of ethanol used to make a 90:10 gallon of a mixture bythe same amount - - 5.1â¢ / gallon of a blend or 51â¢ / gallon of ethanol - - regardless of whether thereduction is called a tax credit or excise tax exemption . this new excise tax credit , which becameeffective on january 1 , 2005 , will replace the old excise tax exemption as the basic tax incentiveclaimed on most sales of fuel ethanol - - it will provide the biggest subsidy to the industry . ( 4 ) as under the previous exemption , to qualify for the full 51â¢ tax credit , the alcohol must beat least 190 proof ( 95% pure alcohol , determined without regard to any added denaturants orimpurities ) . the credit is 37.78â¢ per gallon if the ethanol is between 150 and 190 proof ; no creditis provided for alcohol below 150 proof . this mixture credit is available only to the blender , whomust not only produce the mixture but must either use the mixture as a motor fuel in a trade orbusiness or sell it for use as a fuel . the blender may be the producer , the terminal operator , or thewholesaler , distributor , or marketer .