fee collection . concerns have been raised aboutthe methods available for students to pay the sevis fee , specifically that it may be difficult for someforeign students to pay the fee in either of the prescribed manners: electronically with a credit card,or by mail with a check or money order drawn on a u.s. bank and payable in u.s. dollars . dhsaddressed this issue in the regulation contending that the fee payment rules will not be much of aburden on students as most have already made similar types of payments to apply to schools , and totake standardized tests that are sometimes required for admission . dhs also noted that many foreignbanks are able to issue checks or money orders drawn on u.s. banks . in addition , dhs said that itwill accept payment from a third party and will explore other payment possibilities in the futureincluding conducting a pilot program with dos to collect the fee at consular offices . ( 27 ) furthermore , some areconcerned that the fee is excessive and will discourage students from studying in the united states . others note that immigration services are supported by fees , not by appropriations , and that theforeign students , not the taxpayers , should be responsible for funding sevis . dhs contends thatit studied the fee issue , and will reexamine the fee every two years to determine if the fee amountis appropriate . ( 28 ) delays in visa issuances . lastly , one issuetangentially related to sevis , which has been receiving interest , is reports of delays in issuingstudent visas . ( 29 ) nonetheless , the delays appear to be the result of increased screening by dos consular officers andnot the implementation of sevis . in may 2003 , dos released a notice on the current visaprocessing situation which stated: responding to the attacks of september 11,2001,...[v]isa applications are now subject to a greater degree of scrutiny than in the past . for manyapplicants , a personal appearance interview is required as a standard part of visa processing.additionally , applicants affected by these procedures are informed of the need for additionalscreening at the time they submit their applications and are being advised to expect delays . the timeneeded for adjudication of individual cases will continue to be difficult to predict . ( 30 ) for example , the government accountability office ( gao ) released a study examining thelength of time for a science student or scholar from a foreign country to get a visa . ( 31 ) gao found that dos isunable to easily identify the amount of time that it takes to process visas for science students orscholars , and that the time it takes to adjudicate a visa depends largely on whether the applicant hasto undergo a visa mantis check . visa mantis is a type of specialized clearance procedure , knownas the security advisory opinion ( sao ) used to screen visa applicants for employment or study thatwould give the foreign national access to controlled technologies , eg , those that could be used toupgrade military capabilities .