he called for russia to "return to democratic reform. much controversy has attended the restructuring of the political system . on the one hand , some russian and international observers have supported the restructuring as compatible with russia's democratization . they have accepted putin's argument that his moves counter chechen and international terrorists intent on destroying russia's territorial integrity and political and economic development . on the other hand , critics of the restructuring moves have branded them as the latest of putin's democratic rollbacks since he came to power in 2000 . in a sensational move , putin declared in april 2005 that he would not seek re - election , stating that "i will not change the constitution and in line with the constitution , you cannot run for president three times in a row. according to several observers , this declaration has spurred the maneuvering of putin's supporters to fine tune a system of "managed democracy" ( see below for definitions ) , if not authoritarianism , in order to gain substantial influence over electoral processes ahead of state duma elections scheduled for december 2007 and the russian presidential election set for march 2008 . the u.s. administration and congress have welcomed some cooperation with russia on vital u.s. national security concerns , including the non - proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) , strategic arms reduction , nato enlargement , and since september 11 , 2001 , the global war on terror . at the same time , the united states has raised concerns with russia over anti - democratic trends , warning that a divergence in democratic values could eventually harm u.s. - russian cooperation . following putin's beslan proposals , then - secretary of state colin powell urged russia not to allow the fight against terrorism to harm the democratic process , and president bush raised concerns about "decisions ... in russia that could undermine democracy. in the wake of russia's cutoff of gas supplies to ukraine in early 2006 , vice president dick cheney appeared to reflect an administration consensus that authoritarianism was deepening in russia . he stated that russia's "government has unfairly and improperly restricted the rights of her people" and that such restrictions "could begin to affect relations with other countries. some u.s. observers have urged circumspection in criticizing lagging democratization in russia , lest such criticism harm u.s. - russian cooperation on vital u.s. national security concerns . others have urged stronger u.s. motions of disapproval , regardless of possible effects on bilateral relations . the putin government and state - controlled media have criticized such u.s. administration statements as "interfering in russia's internal affairs," as not recognizing the grave threat of terrorism in russia , and as misrepresenting sensible counter - terrorism measures as threats to democratization . this paper assesses russia's progress in democratization , including in the areas of elections , media rights , civil society , and federalism . four scenarios of possible future political developments are suggested — a continuation of the current situation of "managed democracy," deepening authoritarianism , further democratization , or a chaotic interlude — and evidence and arguments are weighed for each .