outlook . there continues to be few signs thatthe government of president musharraf and its supporters in parliament and the military will moveto relinquish power before scheduled 2007 general elections . a continuing lack of unity amongopposition groups remains a serious constraint on their ability to pressure the musharraf - ledgovernment . beyond obvious differences over the role religion should play in pakistan's governance,the mma and the ard find themselves with opposing views on such sensitive issues as proposedamendments to the controversial blasphemy law and hudood ordinances ( related to women's rights ) ,both of which are criticized as unjust and oppressive by human rights groups , but which areconsidered sacrosanct by the islamists . some analysts identify less obvious factors behindopposition disunity , including an active campaign of "divide - and - rule" by the military , and previoushints of an accommodation between musharraf and the ard have not panned out . there are,however , signs that a below - board accommodation between the pakistani military and the islamistparties is disintegrating . ( 107 ) pakistan's unstable and even deteriorating domestic security circumstances - - seen in stilltense relations with pashtun tribesmen in border regions near afghanistan , and continuing sectarianviolence and islamic militancy in urban centers - - can have the effect of improving the army'sstanding among some sectors of the pakistani public . one u.s. scholar suggests that criticism ofpakistan's apparently slow movement toward democracy is arbitrary and ignores the potential costto u.s. policy interests that faster movement might entail . such cost could include a moreconstrained pakistani military and political leaders in islamabad whose greater responsiveness topublic opinion might mean reduced cooperation with the united states . ( 108 ) however , and as notedabove , this view is disputed by numerous observers who insist that the strengthening of pakistan'sdemocratic institutions and civil society is itself a fundamental requirement for the creation of astable and prosperous pakistani state . ( 109 ) pakistan has come a long way since the 1990s , when "potential failed state" was not anunusual label for this important country . during president musharraf's tenure , pakistan'smacroeconomic indicators are greatly improved and relations with india have warmed . the country'sinternational standing is at least partially rehabilitated , especially with the government's status as akey member of the international anti - terrorism coalition . even some of musharraf's most vocalcritics have acknowledged the concrete benefits of his leadership . ( 110 ) yet , despite thepotentially brightened prospects for future civilian governance in pakistan , military rule substantivelycontinues , and most analysts foresee little or no power being transferred to the country's civilianpolitical leaders in the near - and middle - term . when , in may 2005 , musharraf declared his intention to seek to remain in office beyond2007 , many analysts saw him following a nondemocratic path similar to that taken by previouspakistani military rulers . in the same month , a senior pakistani journalist and editor declared onbehalf of his staff , "we are tired of pious lectures on democracy and constitutionalism" from officialswho pursue neither with sincerity . in addition , fewer and fewer independent onlookers findmusharraf's repeated pledges to defeat pakistani religious extremism as anything more than"rounding up the usual suspects.