the committee is an advisory body , and its rulings are not binding . however , in 1999 , the israeli supreme court sitting as the israeli high court of justice prohibited the use of "brutal or inhuman means" of interrogation , including five specific interrogation techniques at issue in the petitions before it , namely: the shaking of a detainee ; placing the detainee in the "shabach" position , which involves cuffing of the suspect , seating him on a low chair , covering his head with a sack , and playing loud music in the area ; placing the detainee in a "frog crouch" position , during which a detainee is forced to crouch while on the tips of his toes , for repeated , five - minute intervals ; the use of excessively tight handcuffs ; and the use of sleep deprivation ( by design and not merely as "a side effect" of the interrogation ) . in finding that these techniques were impermissible under israeli law , the court noted that "[t]his conclusion is in accord with international treaties , to which israel is a signatory , which prohibit the use of torture , 'cruel , inhuman treatment' and 'degrading treatment.' "severe" pain or suffering constituting torture is not defined by either cat or the federal torture statute . the committee concluded , however , that such tactics were "completely unacceptable" given israel's obligations under cat articles 2 and 16 . in response to committee concerns about its interrogation techniques , israel submitted additional information concerning the nature of the interrogation techniques it employed against security detainees . according to the cat committee , these interrogation techniques included: restraining in very painful conditions ; hooding under special conditions ; sounding of loud music for prolonged periods ; sleep deprivation for prolonged periods ; threats , including death threats ; violent shaking ; and using cold air to chill . in 1997 , after examining a special report by israel discussing these tactics , the committee concluded that the tactics described violated israel's obligations as a party to cat , representing a breach of cat article 16 and constituting torture as defined by cat article 1 . the committee opinion suggests that some of the interrogation techniques employed by israel might constitute torture when employed singularly , although the committee did not specify how particular methods constituted torture . despite acknowledging that israel faced a "terrible dilemma ... in dealing with terrorist threats to its security," the committee noted that cat provides that no exceptional circumstances permit state parties to engage in torture . accordingly , the committee recommended that israel immediately cease its use of the interrogation tactics described above . in doing so , the high court did not expressly determine whether the prohibited techniques were unlawful because they constituted "torture," or some other form of cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment prohibited under domestic law and international treaties . according to a 2003 report by the u.s. state department , israel was reported to have used "extraordinary interrogation methods , some of which included physical pressure" at least 90 times since the israeli high court's ruling .