opponents of the ban have questioned the reliability of such data . bills have been introduced in the 108 th congress to extend or make permanent the ban on saws and large capacity ammunition feeders . other bills would modify the definition of "semiautomatic assault weapon" to cover a greater number of firearms by reducing the number of features that would constitute such firearms , and expand the list of certain makes and models of firearms that are statutorily enumerated as banned . the expiration of the saw - lcafd ban has been , and is likely to remain , controversial . a key consideration for congress is whether violent gun crimes , particularly crimes involving multiple gunshot victims and gunshot wounds per victim , were reduced by the ban . as in 1994 , an underlying question for congress is whether saws are more dangerous than other semiautomatic firearms and , if so , should the ban be extended or made permanent , and possibly expanded to include other "military style" firearms . as noted in the report , however , there is a lack of definitive data on saws and lcafds . for example , report forms issued to state and local law enforcement by the fbi for purposes of compiling the annual report on law enforcement officers killed and assaulted could be modified to capture additional information about incidents in which firearms are used . in addition , as part of the national incident based reporting system ( nibrs ) , which is the basis for uniform national crime reporting , the fbi could modify its data collection and submission requirements for firearm - related homicides — particularly in regard to those incidents that involve multiple shots , multiple victims , and multiple gunshot wounds per victim . in regard to firearm traces , it may be possible to revamp the atf's firearm tracing system to improve the quality of data . for example , besides modifying data submission procedures , controlled firearm trace surveys could be conducted in certain geographic areas to determine whether saws , or other firearms , are the guns - of - choice for youth gangs and drug traffickers . similar surveys are already underway as part of the youth crime gun interdiction initiative and have yielded useful data on crime guns to assist local law enforcement agencies in formulating city - wide or regional firearms - related violence reduction strategies . in conclusion , improved incident - based reporting and firearm trace data could provide useful insights into the lethality and criminal use of saws and other military - style firearms , as well as other crime guns . in the interim , until more definitive data are available , congress faces exercise of its collective value judgement on the lethality and relative dangers posed to society by these firearms versus the diminution of the freedom to bear arms as set out in the constitution . while most saws are rifles , handguns were used in 75% of the firearm - related officer killings .