108-458 difficult . ( 40 ) media accounts indicate that another key issue was day - to - day operational control of the collection assets of intelligence agencies in dod . some observers suggest , however , that this issueis not clear - cut . the legislation gives the dni authority to apportion funds and the apportionmentprocess affects the timing and rate of the flow of funds . nevertheless , the authority to apportion andallocate appropriated funds does not automatically translate into the authority to direct day - to - dayoperations . there are already well - established distinctions between responsibilities for acquisitionprograms on the one hand , and responsibilities for operational command on the other . the militarydepartments ( the departments of the army , navy and air force ) have major responsibilities for theacquisition of systems to be used by the operating forces , but ongoing operations are controlled bythe unified commands ( e.g . central command , european command , pacific command ) at thedirection of the secretary of defense and the president . analogously , the dni would haveresponsibilities for acquisition of systems that are part of the national intelligence program ; theheads of defense intelligence agencies would be responsible to the secretary of defense for operatingthe systems . day - to - day tasking of the national systems operated by intelligence agencies in dod has been coordinated among "consumers" from throughout the government , including dod , the statedepartment , the while house , etc. the dci has long had authority to coordinate such tasking inresponse to nsc guidance . ( 41 ) for geospatialimagery , for example , the source operations andmanagement directorate of nga routinely meets with representatives of agencies outside dod tocoordinate production priorities . nga acknowledges that authority to establish priorities derivesfrom the authorities of the dci rather than solely from those of the defense department . ( 42 ) similararrangements exist in regard to other intelligence disciplines , such as signals intelligence . the intelligence reform act also established a joint intelligence community council ( jicc ) composed of the secretaries of state and defense and other senior officials , to advise the dni onestablishing requirements , developing budgets , financial management , and monitoring andevaluating the performance of intelligence agencies . the statute also provides for the submissionof advice or opinion of individual members of the jicc to the president along with therecommendations of the dni . ( 43 ) past relationships among defense agencies , the office of the secretary of defense , and the intelligence community management staff have been complex ; the new legislation establishes adni with stronger budgetary authorities than possessed by the dci . nevertheless , the requirementfor close coordination between the dni and dod agencies will remain . given the need for agenciesto meet different needs of different parts of the government , observers believe that this newrelationship will also be complicated and that considerable time will be required to developcoordinative procedures . these were strong words . rather than having a galvanizing effect , however , the joint inquiry record suggests that the intelligence community continued to be fragmented without a comprehensivestrategy for combating bin ladin .