appendix a . additional funding information this appendix provides additional funding information for community services block grants and related activities . table a - 1 shows funding amounts distributed to the states , tribes , and territories from fy2013 through fy2017 . table a - 2 shows funding for csbg ( not including related activities ) from its first year in fy1982 through fy2017 . table a - 3 shows funding for the various related activities that have been funded at different times from fy1982 to fy2017 . appendix b . government accountability office ( gao ) review the government accountability office ( gao ) released a report on the csbg program in july 2006 , in response to a request by the house education and the workforce committee . gao's review focused on three topics related to program monitoring and training and technical assistance: ( 1 ) hhs compliance with legal requirements and standards governing its oversight of state efforts to monitor local csbg grantees ; ( 2 ) efforts by states to monitor local grantee compliance with fiscal requirements and performance standards ; and ( 3 ) targeting by hhs of its training and technical assistance funds and the impact of such assistance on grantee performance . gao concluded that the office of community services ( ocs ) lacked "effective policies , procedures , and controls" to ensure its own compliance with legal requirements for monitoring states and with federal internal control standards . gao found that ocs had visited states as mandated by law but failed to issue reports to the states after the visits or annual reports to congress , which also are mandated by law . ocs failed to meet internal control standards because their monitoring teams lacked adequate financial expertise ; moreover , ocs lost the documentation from the monitoring visits to states . finally , ocs was not systematic in its selection of states to visit , and did not use available information on state performance or collect other data to allow more effective targeting of its limited monitoring resources on states at highest risk of management problems . in connection with its assessment of state efforts to monitor local grantees , gao visited five states and found wide variation in the frequency with which they conducted on - site monitoring of local grantees , although officials in all states said they visited agencies with identified problems more often . states also varied in their interpretation of the law's requirement that they visit local grantees at least once in a three - year period , and gao noted that ocs had issued no guidance on this requirement . states reported varying capacities to conduct on - site monitoring and some states cited staff shortages ; however , the states all performed other forms of oversight in addition to on - site visits , such as review of local agency reports ( eg , local agency plans , goals , performance data , and financial reports ) and review of annual single audits where relevant . several states coordinated local oversight with other federal and state programs , and also used state associations of community action agencies to help provide technical assistance .