second . there was the fy2005 appropriations bill for the department of labor that might have been amended to include language to eliminate ( or restrict ) funding for all or part of dol's contentious rulemaking process . on october 15 , 2004 , with only two months of experience behind them , the department of labor's solicitor howard radzely reportedly proclaimed a certain amount of satisfaction with the result of the overtime pay regulation . "the predictions were not accurate," radzely said , referring to critics of the plan . "almost without exception , the reports indicate people are gaining overtime protection. but , the reports were anecdotal and fragmentary . others agreed . in early november , thomas sullivan , chief counsel for advocacy at the small business administration , asserted that the new rule "has produced the greatest cost savings for small businesses since the administration began attempting to streamline its regulatory system. todd mccracken , national small business association president , "concurred with sullivan's assessment that the dol overtime rule had produced the single biggest cost savings to the small business community. tammy mccutchen , the author of the new rule ( and now with the law firm of dickstein shapiro morin & oshinsky ) , asserted that the rule was "still alive , despite "'an afl - cio misinformation campaign , misleading media reports , and eight congressional votes to revoke the changes.' she reported that "a substantial number of cases involving incorrect classifications ... of overtime is 'on the horizon.' first . there was the jobs act , s. 1637 ( with its counterpart in the house , h.r . 4520 ) , having already been passed by the senate with the harkin and gregg amendments included . mostly , she said , the cases involve calculation of the "'regular rate'" of pay . but , mccutchen suggested , the overtime reform was only the beginning of changes needed in flsa administration . in a speech in naples , florida , in early april 2005 , dol's radzely affirmed that the final rule has "clarified and significantly strengthened" the law . "we have not seen a single incident — let alone the predicted 6 million incidents — of an employee who has lost pay as a result of the regulations. he described the rule as "more user friendly" for both attorneys and human resources personnel and "at least as protective as the old" where workers were concerned . he observed: "[o]nce we got past the extreme rhetoric ... there have been surprisingly few issues" in contention . but , some problems still existed and , radzely affirmed: "when employees are 'on - the - line,' in terms of exempt / nonexempt status , you can change their job duties , so that they will become clearly exempt again.... . early in the 109 th congress , senator harkin rose to address "an issue that my colleagues have heard me speak about on numerous occasions during the course of the past two years. once more , he invoked the matter of overtime protection for america's workers . senator harkin reviewed the history of the fair labor standards act and of its importance to workers , especially to those at the margins of the economy .