failure of theu.s . effort in iraq has potentially great negative consequences: further disaffection with u.s.leadership of nato ; a renewal of radical islam in the middle east , with regimes hostile to westerngovernments ; and exacerbation of tensions in the arab - israeli peace process . for these reasons,these observers believe that european governments criticizing the united states should seek anaccommodation over iraq with the bush administration . ( 30 ) a wide range of european officials appears to be seeking a compromise . several options have been suggested . such a compromise might provide the united states with overall leadership of au.n. - approved administration and military force in iraq , but with individual allies in command ofdifferent geographic sectors , as is the case , for example , in bosnia and kosovo . it might containelements of the french position , particularly a timetable for elections and establishment of an iraqigovernment chosen by the iraqi people or representatives of various groups in iraq . in addition , thecompromise might include a transparent economic development regime that provides companiesfrom a range of countries access to contracts for reconstruction . such a compromise could free u.s.forces for availability elsewhere ; provide european ( and other ) governments with a voice in iraq'sfuture , and legitimacy through a u.n. imprimatur ; and shift part of the financial burden forreconstruction from the u.s. government to other governments and to the international privatesector . a key disadvantage for the bush administration might be the surrender of some of itspolitical objectives in iraq , such as the quest for a democratic government , that would be a modelfor the region . the bill is pending in the senate . in the house , mr. bereuter , mr. wexler , and mr. lantos proposed an amendment identical to thebiden amendment to h.r . it was adopted , and the bill was passed on july 16 . members in both houses and both parties have called upon the administration to send more u.s.troops to iraq as well . senator lugar said on july 29 that "overall the united states mission in iraqcontinues to hang in the balance," and added that "coalition efforts in iraq must undergo furtherinternationalization to be successful and affordable. the debate between the united states and some of its european allies over an enhancedeuropean role in iraq poses a range of problems with important implications . the administrationdesires international troop contributions , but on terms that do not dilute u.s. political and militarycontrol over iraq . administration officials wish to preserve pre - war political objectives: thedemocratization of iraq ; elimination of weapons of mass destruction and terrorist operations ; anda residual moderating effect upon the rest of the middle east , including possible settlement of thearab - israeli conflict . key europeans allies , to some extent including britain , seek an international force with a strong u.n. voice . some of these allies doubt , and even disparage as unrealistic , the administration's goalsof a democratic iraq and a consequent moderation of middle eastern politics by these means . theyhave openly doubted the existence of an active iraqi wmd program and any significant connectionbetween the hussein regime and terrorists .