syria is not a party to cat . it does not permit indefinite detention. the court found that the presumptively reasonable limit for the post - removal - period detention is six months , but indicated that continued detention may be warranted when the policy is limited to specially dangerous individuals and strong procedural protections are in place . subsequently , the supreme court ruled that aliens who have been deemed inadmissible ( i.e. , arriving aliens who have not been granted legal entry , as well as those aliens who have been "paroled" into the country by immigration authorities ) also could not be indefinitely detained , but the court's holding was based on statutory construction of the applicable immigration law , and it did not consider whether such aliens were owed the same due process protections as aliens who had been legally admitted into the united states . it is important to note , however , that despite generally rejecting the practice of indefinite detention , the zadvydas court nevertheless suggested that the continued detention of particular aliens past the statutory period for removal might be warranted in limited cases where the alien was "specially dangerous. though the court only specifically mentioned mental illness as a special circumstance perhaps warranting indefinite detention , it appears that aliens detained on security or related grounds , such as terrorists , might also be considered "specially dangerous" and warrant indefinite detention as well . following the court's ruling in zadvydas , new regulations were issued to comply with the court's holding . after a six - month detention period , which the zadvydas court found to be presumptively reasonable , an alien's request for release from detention , accompanied by evidence that his removal would not otherwise be effected in the reasonably foreseeable future , may be reviewed by the dhs's bureau of immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) . following consideration of this evidence , the ice is required to issue a written decision either ordering the alien released or continuing his detention . dhs regulations permit the continued detention of certain classes of aliens on account of special circumstances , including , inter alia , any alien who is detained on account of ( 1 ) serious adverse foreign policy consequences of release ; ( 2 ) security or terrorism concerns ; or ( 3 ) being considered specially dangerous due to having committed one or more crimes of violence and having a mental condition making it likely that the alien will commit acts of violence in the future . as a result of the zadvydas decision , some criminal aliens afforded non - refoulement protection under cat may be required to be eventually released from detention , even though such aliens would otherwise be subject to removal from the united states . according to the dhs , "in all but the most serious cases , a criminal alien who cannot be returned — regardless of the reason — may be subject to release after six months. in 2003 , the dhs stated that in practice less than one percent of criminal aliens who have received cat protection have been released from custody following a final order of removal .