this is a tragedy for us. ( 8 ) poles also have begun to ask themselves what they have received in return for their loyaltyto the united states ; in particular , poles had hoped for help in three areas: military assistance , iraqreconstruction contracts , and u.s. visa policy . in recent months , some iraq reconstruction businesshas begun to flow toward polish firms , and president bush pledged to seek $100 million in militaryassistance for poland . it is the visa waiver issue , however , that seems to resonate the most amongpoles , perhaps because it could be "fixed" without financial cost to the united states . warsaw hashoped to join 27 other countries which have been granted a waiver of the u.s. governmentrequirement to obtain a visa for short - term travel to the united states . according to one report,"[t]he political class were outraged at the us decision to treat poland differently from the eu - 15 byimposing visa regulations on polish nationals , as part of a general tightening of immigration controlsin the wake of [9 / 11.] in a radio interview that touched upon this issue , lech walesa maintainedthat americans "are making fun of us. ( 9 ) u.s. analysts , however , argue that there are some factors militatingagainst waiving visas for poles . first of all , poland's continued high unemployment rate ( close to20% in april ) might act as an incentive for poles to seek work outside of the country and overstaytheir visas . secondly , if the united states were to make an exception for poland , even though it doesnot meet the objective requirements , many other countries would also seek to make their case forbeing exempted . one observer has pointed out that , given continuing concerns over the threat ofterrorism , there is not much sentiment in congress to make it easier for people to enter the unitedstates . finally , poland is said to be lobbying to be a future location for a u.s. military base amidu.s . consideration of a global re - basing scheme . poles claim that such a move would represent goodpayback for their participation in iraq ; u.s. military bases would benefit local economies , as wellas poland's desire for american investment . lastly , having the u.s. military present on its soil , theyargue , would increase poland's sense of security . more than many countries , poland has a habit of asserting its independence ; one unwaveringconstant in poland's foreign policy has been its efforts to protect its perceived national interests ina region that more than once has devoured it as a state . poland has been a close ally of the unitedstates ; as a new member of the eu , it is now attempting to balance its transatlantic interests . because it views the united states as the main guarantor of its security , poland will likelycontinue to support the united states within nato . poland wants to modernize its armed forces,ensure alliance interoperability , and improve its own defense capabilities . however , the poles pointout that their resources have been severely strained by the iraq mission , forcing them to sideline theirplans to update their military .