table 2 . u.s. and foreign defense spending ( by country ) : datafrom the iiss and u.s. department of state ( current year u.s. dollars inmillions ) * these figures are based on purchasing power parity ( ppp ) estimates . ppps measure the relative purchasing power of different currencies over equivalent goods and services . this method betteraccounts for the substantial differences in relative prices for defense goods . e these figures were estimated by iiss and not based on reported data from the individual country . *countries #2 - #10: china , russia , france , united kingdom , germany , italy , india , japan , saudiarabia * countries #2 - #10: china , russia , france , united kingdom , germany , italy , japan , saudiarabia,china - taiwan *countries #2 - #25: china , russia , france , japan , united kingdom , germany , italy , saudi arabia,india , south korea , brazil , israel , turkey , spain , canada , australia , china - taiwan , netherlands,indonesia , greece , mexico , iran , ukraine , n. korea *countries #2 - #25: china , japan , france , united kingdom , russia , germany , italy , saudi arabia , china - taiwan , south korea , india , turkey , brazil , israel , canada , spain , australia , netherlands,poland , iran , greece , sweden , dem . estimates of military spending by foreign nations are available from a number of sources . this method betteraccounts for the substantial differences in relative prices for defense goods . thiscrs report lists and compares military expenditures of the united states and foreign countries usingtwo of the most commonly cited and readily available publications: the military balance , publishedin october of each year by the london - based international institute for strategic studies ( iiss ) andworld military expenditures and arms transfers ( wmeat ) , published about annually by the u.s.department of state , bureau of arms control . ( 1 ) although the iiss and u.s. state department aim to provide figures that are as consistent and accurate as possible , cross - national comparisons of defense spending are inherently imperfect . of state ( current year u.s. dollars in millions ) *non - u.s. nato: united kingdom , france , germany , italy , turkey , greece , czech republic,norway , portugal , poland , italy , netherlands , hungary , denmark , germany , belgium , canada,spain , luxembourg , iceland *non - u.s. nato: united kingdom , france , germany , italy , turkey , greece , czech republic,norway , portugal , poland , italy , netherlands , hungary , denmark , germany , belgium , canada,spain , luxembourg , icelan . u.s. and foreign defense spending ( by rank ) : data from the iiss and u.s. department of state ( current year u.s. dollars inmillions ) * these figures are based on purchasing power parity ( ppp ) estimates . ppps measure the relative purchasing power of different currencies over equivalent goods and services . e these figures were estimated by iiss and not based on reported data from the individual country .