however , art . iv , â§ 3 , cl . ( 23 ) section 16 of the federal highway act of 1921 ( 24 ) gave the consent of the united states to any railroad or canalcompany conveyance to the highway department of any state "any part of its right of way or otherproperty in that state acquired by grant from the united states. note that this provision did notmention the necessity for retaining the central right of way , and the legislative history offers noclarification on the point . the federal highway act included language stating "all acts or parts ofacts in any way inconsistent with the provisions of this act are hereby repealed ...," and courts thathave addressed the issue have found that the 1921 enactment amended â§ 913 , eliminating therequirement that the retained central core be 100 feet in width . ( 25 ) it is arguable , however,that because the railroad is only authorized to convey "property acquired" from the united states,neither a full fee title nor any retained interest of the united states could be conveyed . under suchreasoning , the railroad must continue to use the right of way for railroad purposes or , if that useceased , the railroad could not convey the central core . in addition , if the railroad were legallyabandoned , the public highway exception in section 912 would still allow one year for anyabandoned portion of a right of way to be "embraced in a public highway. ( 26 ) controversies have arisen as to the authority of the railroads to convey all or part of theirinterest in the rights of way aside from the highway context , and as to the authority of private citizensto obtain rights to property within the rights of way through adverse possession - - what might becharacterized as "squatter's rights. the supreme court interpreted the grant of a federal right of way as a unit , no portion ofwhich could be obtained for private purposes by adverse possession . by granting a right of way four hundred feet in width,congress must be understood to have conclusively determined that a strip of that width wasnecessary for a public work of such importance , and it was not competent for a court , in the suit ofa private party , to adjudge that only twenty - five feet thereof were occupied for railroad purposes inthe face of the grant .... ( 27 ) similarly , the court has held that the right of way purposes would be negated by the existenceof the power of the railroad to alienate the right of way or any portion of it . ( 28 ) despite the limitations on the alienability of federal rights of way , the railroads still purportedto convey , and adjacent landowners continued to encroach upon , rights of way and claim rightsthereto . over the years , congress has repeatedly legislated to legitimize particular conveyances andactivities to alleviate the hardships to innocent purchasers . ( 29 ) in doing so , congress hasconsistently asserted that congress , not the railroads , had the authority to dispose of rail corridors .