heroinmarket. a u.s. customs official stated , in march 2001 hearings , that 14% of the heroin seized inthe united states comes from mexico , while an independent study indicated that mexico is thesource of 29% of the heroin used in the united states . ( 6 ) in other areas , the incsr covering 2003 reports that mexico "is by far the leading foreignsource of marijuana consumed in the united states," and "is also a major producing and transit pointfor methamphetamine and other synthetic drugs. moreover , the report says that mexican drugtraffickers have steadily increased operations in all illicit drug sectors in the united states , and havecome to dominate most of the distribution centers . mexico continues to be a majormoney - laundering center , in which trafficking organizations exploit mexican banks and financialinstitutions to transfer significant amounts of illicitly obtained currency through the global financialsystem . favored money laundering methods include the smuggling of u.s. currency into mexicoand the movement of the funds back into the united states via couriers , wire transfers , and armoredvehicles . in short , mexico's share of illicit traffic has remained high over the years , and seemed toincrease in 2003 in major areas , especially in the supply of cocaine and heroin to the u.s. market . mexico's role as a base for drug traffickers and as a center for money - laundering persisted andperhaps increased as well . the following three tables show state department estimates of mexican drug control effortsin three areas - - seizures , arrests , and eradication - - from 1998 to 2003 . supplementary informationcovering the first six months of 2004 is also provided as reported in the written version of presidentfox's fourth report of the government . ( 7 ) caution should be exercised in considering the changes in thevarious areas as an indication of mexico's seriousness in controlling drug trafficking . the trendsmay also be affected by the demand for the drugs , the amount of drugs produced or available , thesophistication of the drug traffickers , the intelligence and capabilities of mexican counter - drugagencies , the effectiveness of reporting and monitoring methods , the effect of weather conditions oneradication efforts , and competition from alternative drug suppliers . u.s. - mexico counter - narcotics cooperation increased substantially during the administrationof president zedillo ( 1994-2000 ) , with the full range of law enforcement , military , and border anddrug control agencies being involved . acting through the annual cabinet - level meetings of thebinational commission , the twice yearly high level contact group ( hlcg ) on drug control , andthe roughly quarterly mexico - u.s. senior law enforcement plenary , the countries' leaders agreedon a joint anti - drug strategy with numerous cooperative arrangements . ( 15 ) following the inaugurations of new presidents in the united states and mexico , presidentbush , on his first foreign visit , met with president fox in guanajuato , mexico , in mid - february2001 , and the two leaders pledged to pursue a "partnership for prosperity.