a report ( s.rept . 109-218 ) was subsequently filed on february 28 , 2006 . it was not considered on the senate floor during the 109 th congress . both the house and senate bills would have made several changes related to accreditation issues . for example , both bills would have altered accountability requirements that accrediting agencies must use in evaluating institutions , adding a new requirement that accrediting agencies consider the stated mission of the institution , including religious missions , when applying and enforcing standards to ensure the courses and programs offered by an institution are of sufficient quality to achieve their stated objective . both bills would have added new requirements related to distance education , including requiring accrediting agencies to have standards that adequately evaluate distance education programs in the same areas as regular classroom - based programs and requiring accrediting agencies to ensure that ihes had implemented a process whereby the institution could determine that the student who registered for a distance education course or program was the same student who participated in , completed , and received credit for the course . 609 and s. 1614 would also have prohibited ihes from denying the transfer of credit based solely on the accreditation held by the sending institution and would have required ihes to publicly disclose their transfer of credit policies . finally , both bills would have modified existing due process requirements . for example , both bills would have prohibited the appeals panel from including current members of the accrediting agency's decision - making body that made the adverse decision , and the appeals panel would have been subject to a conflict of interest policy . this section provides a brief overview of relevant provisions contained in h.r . 609 , the college access and opportunity act of 2005 , and s. 1614 , the higher education amendments of 2005 — the primary vehicles for hea reauthorization in the 109 th congress . 609 was passed by the house on march 30 , 2006 , by a vote of 221-199 ( h.rept . s. 1614 was reported by the senate health , education , labor , and pensions committee on november 17 , 2005 , without a report . this process and its critical role in determining institutional eligibility to participate in title iv has sometimes been controversial . as the 110 th congress considers reauthorizing the hea , it may consider making changes to the role accreditation plays with respect to federal student aid or to the accreditation process itself , such as the factors accrediting agencies must consider when evaluating an institution . this report provides an overview of some of the possible accreditation issues that congress may address during the reauthorization process , a discussion of the findings and recommendations regarding accreditation from the secretary of education's commission on the future of higher education's final report , and a brief overview of relevant legislation from the 109 th congress that addressed accreditation issues . there are several key issues related to accreditation that may arise during the reauthorization of the hea .