somestates also use a ffs delivery system . under commercial insurance products , benefits are alwayslimited by medical necessity , but other limits , when applicable , vary by insurance product , as do thepoints at which each insurer monitors service delivery for medical need and appropriateness . payments to providers participating in these plans may be altered based on the outcome of suchservice utilization reviews , which can in turn affect access to care . in the crs - sponsored survey , some of the benefits for which data on limits were collected ( i.e. , residential treatment centers ) are commonly covered under medicaid , but not routinely includedin commercial insurance products , and hence , schip . there is no federal epsdt requirement underschip that would guarantee the availability of uncommon , but coverable benefits . in sum , a small , but significant proportion of children have mental health problems . somealso suffer from the consequences of substance abuse . medicaid and schip provide access to anarray of inpatient and outpatient services that can help such children in low to moderate incomefamilies overcome these difficulties . however , the breadth of benefits available under these twoprograms likely differs within and across states . limits on benefits for the lowest income childrenunder medicaid are seldom absolute , while restrictions on services for higher income children underschip may be . schip children have access to the same types of benefit packages available in theprivate sector as intended by congress . notes: in the two "programs" columns ( one for medicaid and one for schip ) , stateabbreviations are used . for schip , 28 states had a single separate schip programrepresented by the state abbreviation . the remaining five states with separate schipprograms each had two or three such programs with different benefit plans . in thiscase , an a , b , or c extension was added to the state abbreviation ( eg , ct - a , ct - b,ct - c ) to distinguish multiple programs as needed . in the "covered groups" column for medicaid , "cn only" means this benefit iscovered for categorically needy beneficiaries only , and "cn+mn" means this benefitis covered for both categorically needy and medically needy beneficiaries . under the schip columns , n / a means that the state had no separate schip programat the time of the survey , and thus , coverage of this benefit is not applicable .