military targets . ( 78 ) ( a connection to alqaeda has not been independently verified. ) there havealso been uncorroborated reports , attributed to the arab television network al - jazeera , of trainingcamps for arab volunteers willing to carry out suicide bombings against u.s. forces . how can the united statescounter such a threat ? in short , the goal of this report is to summarize the key lessons of theinternational experience with suicide attacks in the modern era and examine their relevance to theunited states in the current threat environment . some argue that the language used to describe terrorism plays a role in how it is perceived , sowords used in describing it must be very carefully chosen . for example , there are many phrases usedto describe the phenomenon to be discussed here . some people use the phrase "suicide bombings,"but that is too restrictive for this report , as it seems to refer only to attacks that are carried out withthe use of explosives . suicide attacks can occur with other types of weapons , including jetliners . "genocide bombings" and "homicide attacks" are phrases frequently used by those who identify withthe unwilling victims of attacks ; these terms emphasize the criminal nature of the violence andde - emphasize the self - inflicted death of the perpetrator . on the other hand , "martyrdom operations"places the emphasis upon the cause of the perpetrators , implying a connection to the notions of "holywar" and / or self defense , even in the killing of civilians . ( 2 ) finally "suicide operations" places theemphasis on the organization's role in staging the episodes , implying a military - type character tothem . none of the currently used terms is perfect . for the purposes of this report , the phrase used will be "suicide attacks," by which is meant , in the sense used here , events where the "success" ofthe operation cannot occur without the death of the perpetrator , and he or she is apparently aware ofthis in advance . ( 3 ) likewise , this report concentrateson suicide attacks that are carried out by"terrorists," by which is meant nonstate actors whose goal is the threat or use of violence for politicalends against noncombatant or civilian targets . ( 4 ) theseare off - the - battlefield episodes , with theattackers not integrated into units in a formal military sense . therefore , specifically excluded arehigh risk military operations , where , although the perpetrator may expect his chances of survival tobe virtually nil , he or she is not deliberately seeking his or her own death . and this report also doesnot include self - inflicted deaths that occur without any violence directed outward , like hungerstrikes or cult suicides . the phenomenon of suicide attacks cannot be fully understood without placing it within itsbroader historical context . self - sacrifice in the interest of a broader cause is not unusual in humanhistory , especially in military settings ; but terrorist suicide attacks as they are defined here also havea lengthy pedigree .