appendix a . supplementary tables appendix b . state table . this standard can also be lowered by caseload reduction . figure 7 shows whether each state met its two - parent work participation standard for fy2006 through fy2017 . the work participation rate increased since then . in fy2016 , it exceeded 50% for the first time since tanf was established . these states are denoted on the table with an "na," indicating that the two - parent standard was not applicable to the state in that year . before the changes made by the dra were effective , a number of states had their two - parent families in separate state programs that were not included in the work participation calculation . fy2012 was the year that arra's "freeze" of the caseload reduction credit expired , and states were generally required to meet higher standards than in previous years . it is intended to serve as a quick reference to provide easy access to information and data . appendix b presents a series of tables with state - level data . this report does not provide information on tanf program rules ( for a discussion of tanf rules , see crs report rl32748 , the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant: a primer on tanf financing and federal requirements , by gene falk ) . there are no federal rules that help determine the amount of tanf cash benefits paid to a family . ( there are also no federal rules that require states to use tanf to pay cash benefits , though all states do so. ) benefit amounts are determined solely by the states . most states base tanf cash benefit amounts on family size , paying larger cash benefits to larger families on the presumption that they have greater financial needs . the maximum monthly cash benefit is usually paid to a family that receives no other income ( eg , no earned or unearned income ) and complies with program rules . families with income other than tanf often are paid a reduced benefit . moreover , some families are financially sanctioned for not meeting a program requirement ( eg , a work requirement ) , and are also paid a lower benefit . figure 4 shows the maximum monthly tanf cash benefit by state for a single mother caring for two children ( family of three ) in july 2016 . the benefit amounts shown are those for a single - parent family with two children . for a family of three , the maximum tanf benefit paid in july 2017 varied from $170 per month in mississippi to $1,201 per month in new hampshire . the map shows a regional pattern to the maximum monthly benefit paid , with lower benefit amounts in the south than in other regions . only new hampshire ( at 60% of the federal poverty guidelines ) had a maximum tanf cash assistance amount for this sized family in excess of 50% of poverty - level income . tanf's main federal work requirement is actually a performance measure that applies to the states , rather than individual recipients . states determine the work rules that apply to individual recipients .