the conference version of h.r . 3058 was passed by the house on november 18 , and by the senate on november 21 , 2005 . it was signed into law on november 30 , 2005 ( p.l . the conference bill provided $137.6 billion in net budgetary resources . this was $2.4 billion less than the house bill and $4.4 billion less than the senate bill , but $4.1 billion ( 3.0% ) more than the fy2005 enacted level and $7.3 billion ( 5.6% ) more than the administration requested . the largest increases went to hud ( $2.1 billion over fy2005 funding and $4.8 billion more than requested ) and dot ( $1.0 billion over fy2005 funding and $2.4 billion more than requested ) . conferees included directives to amtrak ( the administration had threatened to veto the bill if it provided funding for amtrak in the absence of any reform measures ) and language that limits outsourcing of federal jobs performed by more than ten people unless the savings would exceed the lesser of 10% of or $10 million . conferees did not include provisions passed by both chambers easing restrictions on agricultural exports to cuba , which had elicited veto threats from the administration . conferees also did not include house language that would have prohibited the use of federal or d.c. funds to enforce certain gun laws in the district of columbia . conferees added language prohibiting the use of funds in this bill for projects using eminent domain to acquire land for projects that primarily benefit private entities . conferees also added language that amended provisions in the recently - passed surface transportation reauthorization legislation ( safetea - lu , p.l . 109-59 ) regulating household moving companies . safetea - lu allowed state consumer protection agencies to enforce federal laws regulating moving companies ; conferees added language limiting the ability of state agencies to enforce these laws ( the limitation would expire after one year ) . the transportation , treasury , et al. , appropriations act customarily includes general provisions which apply either government - wide or to specific agencies or programs . there also may be general provisions at the end of each individual title within the appropriations act which relate only to agencies and accounts within that specific title . the administration's proposed language for government - wide general provisions is included in the fy2006 budget , appendix . most of the provisions continue language which has appeared under the general provisions title for several years . for various reasons , congress has determined that reiterating the language is preferable to making the provisions permanent . presented below are some of the government - wide general provisions that were proposed for elimination in the fy2006 budget . inclusion of the provisions in the house - passed and senate - passed bills and the conference report is noted . section 609 , which prohibits payment to political appointees functioning in jobs for which they have been nominated , but not confirmed . included as section 909 of the house bill as passed , section 807 of the senate bill as passed , and section 809 of the conference report .