these provisions are temporary . although the 5% rate will be reduced to 0% in 2008 , the lower rates will expire at the end of 2010 , absent legislative change , and the rates will revert to their previous levels , generally 10% and 20% . a special relief provision for military families and the foreign service allows them to expand the five - year period for the ownership and use tests to up to 10 years while on qualified official duty . another provision that may influence a taxpayer's decision about selling a residence is a long - standing provision that allows the gain to be forgiven entirely if the taxpayer does not sell the home and leaves it as part of his or her estate . if an individual keeps his house until death and leaves it to heirs , no tax on gain accumulated would be due , since the heir would be able to deduct the fair market value at time of death from sales price , when the house is sold ( resulting in a zero capital gain with instantaneous sale ) . this rule is called a step - up in basis . the gain realized upon the sale of a personal residence was taxed as capital gain until the passage of the revenue act of 1951 ( p.l . at that time , congress enacted a rollover provision that allowed for the deferral of capital gains tax if the proceeds of the sale were used to buy another residence of equal or greater value within a year before or after the sale of the old residence . congress stated that the rollover provision was in response to transactions that were: necessitated by such facts as an increase in the size of the family or a change in the place of the taxpayer's employment . in these situations the transaction partakes of the nature of an involuntary conversion . cases of this type are particularly numerous in periods of rapid change such as mobilization or reconversion . at that time , the economy had grown as a result of industrialization and residential moves were more frequent due to business transfers and other employment related changes . congress also recognized that capital gains from home sales were , in part , a result of general inflation . during the congressional debate , the rollover provision was justified on the grounds that homeowners were changing homes , not to make a profit as investors , but rather in response to employment and / or family size changes . the first exclusion from taxation for capital gains on the sale of a primary residence was enacted by the revenue act of 1964 ( p.l . the provision was available only for the elderly ( age 65 and over ) and applied to residences sold after 1963 . it was available on a one - time basis only , and was at the same level for both single and married individuals . to qualify , the house had to be occupied for five of the previous eight years . the exclusion of gain was limited to the amount attributable to the first $20,000 of sales price .