corn graded no . 1 , for example , may contain up to 2% foreign material . as more crops and acreage are devoted to ge varieties , it becomes increasingly difficult , if not impossible , to avoid their trace presence in non - ge varieties . no internationally recognized standards have existed for what amounts , if any , of ge material should be permitted in a non - ge crop , especially if that crop or a food derived from it will be labeled as non - ge . what are the environmental and food safety impacts of ge crops and animals ? the lack of consistent , scientifically sound standards is confusing consumers and disrupting trade , the biotech industry has asserted . is the current u.s. regulatory framework , which is based primarily upon statutory authorities enacted before the rise of agricultural biotechnology , adequate for these new technologies and products ? after a ge variety is approved for release into the environment on a test basis , the owner of the ge seed generally petitions aphis for "deregulated status" of the particular ge "event" that has been approved . this is the last step to full - scale commercialization of the ge plant . once the ge plant is deregulated , it is no longer subject to aphis regulation under the ppa ( 7 c.f.r . part 340 ) . a significant step in the deregulation process involves an assessment of the plant's environmental impact . the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) requires federal agencies to prepare a detailed environmental impact statement ( eis ) for all "major federal actions significantly affecting the quality of the human environment. nepa requires that environmental analyses use an interdisciplinary approach "which will insure the integrated use of the natural and social sciences and the environmental design arts in planning and in decisionmaking. the regulations governing the finding of a significant effect are promulgated by the council on environmental quality ( ceq ) . when an eis is not categorically required , an agency may determine , from the data already at hand , that the environmental impacts are not significant enough to warrant an eis . this judgment permits the agency initially to prepare an environmental assessment ( ea ) rather than the lengthier and more detailed eis . an ea is a public document that briefly provides the basis for determining whether to move forward with an eis or to make a finding of no significant impact ( fonsi ) . several cases over the past several years have raised issues about the adequacy of aphis's regulatory structure in moving to deregulate a ge plant . aphis on several occasions has issued a fonsi on the basis of an ea and deregulated a ge plant , only to have that decision decisively challenged in court . in april 2011 , aphis announced that it was soliciting letters of interest to participate in its national environmental policy act pilot project to explore ways of improving the eas and eiss to mitigate the increasingly contentious deregulation process . the u.s. approach to biotechnology regulation contrasts with that of many major trading partners .