most recently , p.l . current regulation of prescription drug importation consists of a patchwork of federal and state laws in an array of areas . at the federal level , the fda regulates prescription drugs under the ffdca , which governs , among other things , the safety and efficacy of prescription medications , including the approval , manufacturing , and distribution of such drugs . it is the ffdca that prohibits the importation — sometimes referred to as "reimportation" — of certain prescription drugs by anyone other than the manufacturer and that requires that prescription drugs may be dispensed only with a valid prescription . after a change in enforcement policy by cbp , the fda assumed the primary responsibility for determining whether foreign drug imports may legally enter the country . in addition , the drug enforcement agency ( dea ) administers the controlled substances act , which is a federal statute that establishes criminal and civil sanctions for the unlawful possession , manufacturing , or distribution of certain addictive or dangerous substances , including certain prescription drugs that share these properties , such as narcotics and opiates . at the state level , state boards of pharmacy regulate pharmacy practice , and state medical boards oversee the practice of medicine . thus , some of the laws that govern pharmacies and doctors vary from state to state . finally , although foreign laws are beyond the scope of this report , it is important to note that such laws may also affect the importation of drugs from those countries . at the federal level , the fda regulates prescription drugs under the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) , which governs , among other things , the safety and efficacy of prescription medications , including the approval , manufacturing , and distribution of such drugs . although many states also have their own laws that regulate drug safety , the fda maintains primary responsibility for the premarket approval of prescription drugs , while the dea and cbp have somewhat more limited regulatory authority over such drugs . the ffdca contains several provisions that apply to prescription drug imports . first , the statute contains an outright prohibition that forbids anyone other than the manufacturer from importing prescription drugs . this prohibition affects drugs originally made in the united states . second , the ffdca contains a number of other provisions relating to drug approvals and labeling that make it nearly impossible for prescription drugs made for foreign markets to comply with the extensive statutory requirements , in part because the fda considers any drugs not made on an fda - inspected production line to be unapproved and therefore illegal . these provisions generally affect foreign versions of drugs that are approved for domestic sale . importation of both u.s. - manufactured prescription drugs and unapproved foreign versions of u.s. - approved prescription drugs are discussed in this next section . that section also discusses the change in cbp policy with regard to the seizure of mail order prescription drugs , the penalties under the ffdca , the fda's personal importation procedures , state plans to import prescription drugs , and businesses that facilitate the importation of prescription drugs .