in late 2003 , energy legislation ( h.r . major non - tax provisions related to agricultural energy use and production in the conference measure and s. 2095 include: renewable fuels standard ( rfs ) — both versions of pending energy legislation include an rfs requiring that 3.1 billion gallons of renewable fuel be used in 2005 , increasing to 5.0 billion gallons by 2012 ( as compared to 2.1 billion gallons used in 2002 ) . alaska gas pipeline — alaska's north slope currently holds 30 trillion cubic feet of undeveloped proven natural gas reserves , about 18% of total u.s. reserves ( or a little less than one - and - a - half years of u.s. consumption at current rates ) . both bills presume a public need for the gas and would provide $18 billion in loan guarantees for construction of a natural gas pipeline from alaska to alberta , where it would connect to the existing midwestern pipeline system . energy efficiency standards — new statutory efficiency standards would be established for several consumer and commercial products and appliances . for certain other products and appliances , doe would be empowered to set new standards . for motor vehicles , funding would be authorized for the national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) to set corporate average fuel economy ( café ) levels as provided in current law . energy production on federal lands — to encourage production on federal lands , royalty reductions would be provided for marginal oil and gas wells on public lands and the outer continental shelf . provisions are also included to increase access to federal lands by energy projects — such as drilling activities , electric transmission lines , and gas pipelines . it is noteworthy that neither bill includes a provision for a renewable energy portfolio standard ( rps ) . an rps aims to encourage electricity production from renewable energy resources such as from wind energy systems . a btu ( british thermal unit ) is a measure of the heat content of a fuel and indicates the amount of energy contained in the fuel . because energy sources vary by form ( gas , liquid , or solid ) and energy content , the use of btu's allows the adding of various types of energy using a common benchmark ( see table a - 1 ) . in addition , oils and lubricants are needed for all types of farm machinery . because of measurement difficulties , energy used to produce other inputs for agriculture , such as farm machinery and equipment , is not included in usda's definition of indirect energy . several provisions of the 2002 farm bill are designed to encourage the production and use of renewable energy sources such as biofuels , wind energy systems , solar energy , and small - scale hydropower systems . in addition , other federal and state laws provide incentives for renewable energy research and production . however , agricultural energy production remains very small by any standard . in 2002 , the combined production of biofuels , wind , and solar energy systems contributed only about 0.5% of total u.s. energy consumption .