sec . app . the purpose of the act is to provide for,strengthen , andexpedite the national defense through protection to servicemembers , to enable them to "devote theirentire energy to the defense needs of the nation. the scra protects servicemembers bytemporarily suspending certain judicial and administrative proceedings and transactions that mayadversely affect their civil rights during their military service . the insurer is not obligated to pay any claim that is based on a professional's actions ( or inaction ) during a period when a policy is suspended . in the case of claims involving obligationsimposed by state law on a professional person to assure that his or her patients or clients will receiveprofessional assistance in his or her absence to serve on active duty , the section clarifies that thefailure of the professional person to satisfy such an obligation will generally be considered to be abreach that occurred before the professional person began active duty . in such a situation , the insurerwould be liable for the claim . in the event a claim arises while the patient is receiving alternate careas arranged by the servicemember for patients during his or her absence , the insurer would not beliable for the claim . actions against policy holder during suspension of coverage . in the event a malpractice suit ( or administrative action ) is filed during the period when the insurance is suspended , the litigation will be stayed until the end of the suspension period . the stayonly applies where the malpractice is alleged to have occurred before the suspension began , andwould thus be covered by the policy . litigation stayed under this rule is deemed to be filed on thedate the suspended insurance is reinstated . the period of any stay granted under this provision is notcounted when computing whether or not the relevant statute of limitations has run . in the event that a professional person whose malpractice insurance coverage has been suspended under the section should die during the period of the suspension , any stay of litigation oradministrative action against the person under this section is lifted . in addition , the insurer providingthe coverage that was suspended is to be liable under the policy just as if the deceased person haddied while covered by the policy but before the claim was filed . reinstatement of coverage . the insurer is required to reinstate the insurance coverage on the date the servicemember transmits a written request for reinstatement , which must occur within 30 days after the coveredservicemember is released from active duty . the insurer must notify the policy - holder of the duedate for payment of any premium required for reinstatement of the policy , and that the premium mustbe paid within 30 days after the notice is received by the professional person . income taxes ; residence for tax purposes . sec . app . the collection of income taxes ( excluding social security ( fica ) taxes ) owed by a person in military service either before or after he or she entered intomilitary service is deferred while the person is in military service , and for up to six months thereafter,if the servicemember's ability to pay the taxes is impaired because of his or her military service .