he signed p.l . 101-168 afterinsisting that congress include language prohibiting the use of district revenues topay for abortion services except in cases where the mother's life wasendangered . ( 10 ) the district successfully sought the removal of the provision limiting districtfunding of abortion services when congress considered and passed the district ofcolumbia appropriations act for fy1994 , p.l . the fy1994 act alsoreinstated rape and incest as qualifying circumstances allowing for the public fundingof abortion services . the district's success was short - lived , however , the district ofcolumbia appropriations act for fy1996 , p.l . 104-134 , and subsequent district ofcolumbia appropriations acts limited the use of district and federal funds forabortion services to cases where the mother's life is endangered or cases where thepregnancy was the result of rape or incest . the final version of the fy2004appropriations for the district of columbia included a provision that continued to restrict the use of district and federal funds for abortion services except in cases ofrape or incest , or when the life of the mother is endangered . the district's fy2005 appropriation bill , as approved by the house , the senate,and the conference committee , continues to prohibit the use of both district andfederal funds for abortion services , except in instances of rape , incest , or whenpregnancy endangers the health of the mother . 107-96 includes a provision lifting the congressional prohibition on the useof district funds to implement its health care benefits expansion act . ( 11 ) theprovision permits unmarried heterosexual and homosexual couples to register asdomestic partners . under the health care benefits expansion act , which wasapproved by the city's elected leadership in 1992 , an unmarried person who registersas a domestic partner of a district employee hired after 1987 may be added to thedistrict employee's health care policy for an additional charge . the act had not beenimplemented until 2002 because of a congressional prohibition first included in thegeneral provisions of district of columbia appropriations act for fy1994 . the city's health care benefits expansion act allows two cohabiting,unmarried , and unrelated individuals to register as domestic partners with the districtfor the purpose of securing certain health and family related benefits , includinghospital visiting rights . under the law , district government employees enrolled inthe district of columbia employees health benefits program are allowed to purchasefamily health insurance coverage that would cover the employee's family members,including domestic partners . in addition , a district employee registered as a domesticpartner may assume the additional cost of the family health insurance coverage forfamily members , which would include the employee's domestic partner . opponents of the act maintain that it devalues the institution of marriage , andthat the act grants unmarried gay and heterosexual couples the same standing asmarried couples . congressional proponents of lifting the ban on the use of districtfunds argue that the implementation of the act is a question of home rule and localautonomy . supporters of health care benefits for domestic partners note that as of2003 , 10 states , 175 local governments , and more than 7,000 companies , colleges,and universities offered health insurance benefits to domestic partners . ( 12 ) the house , senate , and final conference versions of h.r .