appendix a . selected trade and admissions data for top u.s. trading partners , 2004 ( millions of u.s. dollars , customs basis ) appendix b . year of arrival for non - mexican foreign - born residents the march supplement of the current population survey offers limited data on migration by year of arrival . the cps is a representative sample of all persons living in the united states and , thus , includes unauthorized aliens , long - term nonimmigrants , and legal permanent residents , as well as u.s. citizens . specifically , the cps asks foreign - born residents: "when did you come to the u.s. to stay ? the cps data represent a sample of those foreign born who still remain in the united states as of march 2004 . the data understate the earlier migration trend because of the emigration and death of earlier migrants . the united states' economic recession in 2001 and initially slow recovery , moreover , may have also slowed down migration . as a result , the slope of the trend line depicted in figure b - 1 is biased upward . as figure b - 1 illustrates , the estimated number of non - mexican foreign - born residents of the united states who report that they came after 1995 tracks fairly closely to the trend line based upon the numbers who came prior to 1996 . migration to the united states dropped sharply after the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks . these provisions are discussed below . negotiators for the uruguay round agreements of the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) , completed in 1994 and known as the general agreement on trade in services ( gats ) , included specific language on temporary professional workers . this language references §101 ( a ) ( 15 ) ( h ( i ) ( b ) of ina and commits the united states to admitting 65,000 h - 1b visa holders each year under the definition of h - 1b specified in gats . in addition , gats includes very specific language on "intra - corporate transfers. this language is similar but not identical to the definitions of intracompany transferee found in the regulations governing the l visa . classical trade theory presents trade and migration as substitutes , that is , a country where labor is abundant and inexpensive is assumed to have the option of exporting either labor - intensive goods or its workers . another construct — the multinational corporation — emphasizes the value of relocating managers and technical experts to facilitate production , which has led to the theory that trade liberalization increases the migration of knowledge - based workers . obviously , the similarities of the economies of the trading partners ( eg , relative level of development and size of the economy ) are factors that would affect the assumptions underlying any theory of the nexus between trade and migration . one analyst summed up the research on these relationships as follows: the question of whether trade and migration are complements or substitutes has been the focus of numerous studies , the results of which differ markedly according to the hypotheses selected .