february 2003 . estimates for fy2003 were provided to crs by the department of state . these data include fundingfrom accounts that comprise the andean regional initiative: international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) , andeancounterdrug initiative , development aid , child survival and health aid , and foreign military financing . the ari has not included ( andconsequently these figures do not include ) international military education and training funds , food aid , peace corps funds , ordepartment of defense counternarcotics funds . totals may not add due to rounding . note: amounts for colombia include the fy2003 emergency wartime supplemental . not included here , because it is not part ofthe ari , is $34 million from dod's counternarcotics program . prepared by [author name scrubbed] , analyst in latin american affairs , july17 , 2003 . fy2004 request by purpose and functional accounts ( $ millions ) source: office of the secretary of state , resources , plans and policy . international affairs function 150 summary and highlights,fiscal year 2004 budget request . prepared by [author name scrubbed] , specialist in international security affairs , and [author name scrubbed],analyst in latin american affairs , updated july 17 , 2003 . note: the budget documents submitted by the administration make reference to the andean counterdrug initiative only . it does notreference the andean regional initiative , which has since its inception , included funding for development assistance , children survivaland health , and economic support fund programs . for purposes of this report , both are included for comparative purposes withprevious years' funding levels . the ari for fy2002 also did not include foreign military finance funding ( fmf ) . the small amount for bolivia is included here,even though it was not specifically for counternarcotics purposes , in order to facilitate comparisons with the fy2003 request , whichincludes fmf for andean regional initiative countries . amounts for colombia do not include funds from the fy2002 supplemental:$4 million for aci ; $25 million in counter - kidnaping training ; and $6 million to protect the cano - limon oil pipeline . similarly,amounts for ecuador do not include $3 million in fmf funds . fy2003 request and fy2003 allocations by purpose and by functionalaccounts ( $ millions ) source: office of the secretary of state . international affairs function 150 fiscal year 2004 budget request summary andhighlights . totals may not add due to rounding . international affairs function 150 fiscal year 2003 budget request summary andhighlights . these data include funding from accounts that comprise the andean regional initiative: international narcotics controland law enforcement ( incle .

 ) , andean counterdrug initiative , development aid , child survival and health aid , and foreign militaryfinancing . the ari has not included ( and consequently these figures do not include ) international military education and trainingfunds , food aid , peace corps funds , or department of defense counternarcotics funds . prepared by [author name scrubbed] and connieveillette , updated july 17 , 2003 . fy2002 request and fy2002 allocations by purpose and by functionalaccounts ( $ millions ) source: office of the secretary of state . while the designatedcountries have diverse trading relationships , the united states is the major trading partner by far forall of them .