bills have been introduced in congress to impose such asystem . ( 49 ) finally , the promulgation of cair may raise questions about the future of the bushadministration's legislative initiative - - clear skies . clear skies represents a complete rewrite oftitle iv of the clean air act and would impose a comprehensive cap - and - trade system on utilityso 2 , nox , and hg emissions . in addition , it would have altered , deleted , or held in abeyance forsome time existing sections of the clean air act with respect to affected electric generating unitsand industrial sources that chose to opt into the program . ( 50 ) with the promulgation of cair that achieves nox and so 2 emissions reductions from most of the country's electricity generating facilities , and of the final hgrule , it is unclear what impetus remains for clear skies . decision not to finalize any determinations with respect to section 126petitions or bart . although these changes may be important in specific cases , they do not represent a majorshift in the thrust and scope of cair . unlike the recently promulgated mercury ( hg ) rule , ( 48 ) cair has not beenparticularly controversial , so major changes were not anticipated . that the rule has not had the visibility of the hg rule should not be interpreted to mean thatthe underlying issue of pm 2.5 and eight - hour ozone compliance has been solved . in particular , epais currently reviewing the stringency of the pm 2.5 naaqs , a process that could result in a morestringent standard and more counties out of compliance . given the lengthy time frame of cair , itseems likely that efforts will be made to strengthen its provisions well before 2015 , if the pm 2.5 standard is strengthened . likewise , cair does not address the most potent environmental issue surroundingfossil - fuel - fired electric generating facilities - - global warming and the possibility of carbon dioxidereductions . movement on that issue over the next decade could result in a modification of cair,or a new multipollutant control regime . accelerating compliance with phase 1 of the two nox caps from 2010 to2009 . five states - - arkansas , kansas , delaware , new jersey , and massachusetts - - were removed from the list of states contributing to pm 2.5 nonattainment . that model scheme achieves a state's emissions budget through emissionlimitations solely on electric generating units . as noted above , epa decided in its final rule to create three emissions caps: two are annualemissions caps that address the interstate contribution of so 2 and nox to pm 2.5 nonattainment ; thethird is a seasonal cap to address interstate nox contribution to ozone nonattainment . one state - - kansas - - was removed from the rule . one state - - georgia - - was removed from the list of states contributing toeight - hour ozone nonattainment , but remained on the list of states contribution to pm 2.5 nonattainment . one state - - florida - - was added to the list of states contributing to eight - hourozone nonattainment in addition to remaining on the list of states contributing to pm 2.5 nonattainment .