further , p.l . 108-447 included three other provisions requiring across - the - board rescissions focused on particular divisions of the act: ( 1 ) a 0.54% rescission in the commerce - justice - state appropriations division , ( 2 ) a 0.594% rescission in the interior appropriations division , and ( 3 ) a rescission of $18 million in the labor - hhs - education appropriations division , applicable to administrative and related expenses for departmental management ( except for the food and drug administration and the indian health service ) . 2 ) but was expanded in coverage and redesignated during senate floor action . 108-447 ; and 0.032% rescission for security budget authority and 0.2% rescission for nonsecurity budget authority for fy2013 in p.l . most recently , the vehicles for the fy2014 and fy2015 omnibus acts were originally non - appropriations measures ( h.r . thus , omnibus appropriations acts have sometimes been used as vehicles to address substantive legislative concerns . 83 , respectively ) that were amended to include omnibus appropriations . several issues pertaining to the use of omnibus appropriations have been the focus of debate in recent years . these issues include the extent to which regular appropriations that are enacted in omnibus measures have been passed by the house and senate prior to final congressional action , the use of across - the - board rescissions , and the inclusion of legislative provisions . clauses 2 ( b ) and 2 ( c ) of house rule xxi prohibit the inclusion of legislative provisions on regular appropriations bills reported by the committee or added during the floor process . however , continuing resolutions are not considered by house rules to be regular appropriations bills and thus do not fall under the purview of these restrictions . in the senate , rule xvi prohibits the inclusion of legislative provisions in general appropriations legislation but allows exceptions in specified circumstances . the rules in the house and senate barring the inclusion of legislation in appropriations are not self - enforcing , can be waived , and allow some exceptions . over the past two decades , there are some instances of the incorporation of significant legislative provisions within omnibus appropriations acts . for example , the consolidated appropriations resolution for fy2003 ( p.l . 108-7 ) included the agricultural assistance act of 2003 , amendments to the price - anderson act and the homeland security act , and provisions dealing with the u.s. - china economic and security review commission , among other legislative matters . the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 ( p.l . 110-161 ) included such items as the emergency steel loan guarantee act of 1999 amendments , the harmful algal bloom and hypoxia research and control act of 1998 amendments , the ed 1.0 act , and the kids in disasters well - being , safety , and health act of 2007 . most recently , divisions m through p of the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .