this special deduction has since expired . all else equal , increasing the value of the standard deduction would increase the federal tax code's simplicity , as more filers would benefit from taking the standard deduction instead of using a combination of deductions available through itemization . standard deduction expansion would , all else equal , reduce revenues ( and increase budget deficits ) relative to current law . that change results from the fact that rational taxpayers would only switch from itemizing deductions to an expanded standard deduction if it would lower their total tax liability . two concepts or issues were not directly addressed in this report yet will likely arise during the debate surrounding the federal income tax treatment of state and local taxes . one , are the tax expenditures for state and local taxes paid truly federal tax "expenditures ? before sales tax deductibility was eliminated in 1987 , one researcher estimated that "the overall responses are on the order of zero to ten percent , much less than estimates used in the political debate. in contrast , another economist found that the "level of state and local spending is significantly affected by deductibility. in contrast , if one views state and local taxes as lost income resulting in a reduced ability to pay federal income taxes ( a loss ) , then a deduction for those taxes seems reasonable . the more tangible , less theoretical , tax - on - a - tax issue arises from this last observation . there is not a clear consensus on which view is "correct. for some state and local taxes and taxpayers , the fee - for - specific - services view is more accurate . taxpayers with government - provided trash collection who pay property taxes for government spending on trash collection , for example , are receiving a tangible quasi - private benefit . similar federal taxpayers in two otherwise equivalent jurisdictions — except that one jurisdiction provides garbage collection and the other does not — would face different federal tax burdens . generally , this would contradict the concept of horizontal equity across federal taxpayers . the reduction - in - ability - to - pay view seems more reasonable for those paying general sales taxes for general government provision of public goods such as fire and police protection . note that a federal deduction for sales taxes and not property taxes would theoretically seem more desirable . the foundation of these arguments can be traced to the difference between a theoretically ideal income tax and the federal income tax as it currently exists . the ideal federal income tax would include wage income plus all accretions to wealth ( including imputed income ) over a designated time period — one calendar year , for example . this definition of income should , theoretically , accurately measure an individual's ability to pay income taxes . in addition to possible spending changes , some researchers have found preliminary empirical evidence that state taxes became more progressive in response to changes in the federal tax structure . there are two ways to view taxes paid for state and local government services under an ideal income tax .