this is commonly referred to as the base guarantee . in general , an ihe's base guarantee is equal to some portion of the funds it received in fy1999 ; however , there are also procedures for allocating a base guarantee to ihes that began participating in a campus - based program after fy1999 . in the second stage , any funds remaining after the allocation of base guarantees are allocated to ihes according to need - based formula allocation procedures . under the allocation formulas for the programs , each ihe receives funding in proportion to its share of the national total of institutional need that is in excess of the amount it received as its base guarantee . ( institutional need is a program - specific measure of the total financial need of all eligible students at an ihe ) . these allocation procedures are specified in the authorizing statute of each program . while there are slight differences between programs , the allocation procedures all share the same basic framework . 609 as passed by the house would have retained the current allocation procedures . the senate bill to reauthorize the hea in the 109 th congress , s. 1614 , also would have retained the current allocation procedures . while the 110 th congress will likely consider bills to amend and extend the hea , it is unclear whether substantive changes to the allocation procedures to the campus - based programs will be proposed . ( additional information on the campus - based programs , including a history of appropriations and basic program data for each of the three programs , and a review and analysis of proposals to amend the programs under bills that would reauthorize the hea can be found in crs report rl31618 , campus - based student financial aid programs under the higher education act , by [author name scrubbed]. ) the capacity of an ihe to award campus - based aid to eligible students is directly related to the amount of funds it receives . the major factors determining each ihe's allocation are its base guarantee , its cost of attendance ( coa ) , the number of fsa applicants , and the expected family contributions ( efcs ) of those students . the remainder of this first part of the report describes the major components of the campus - based allocation procedures . this part of the report analyzes the allocation of funds to ihes according to the current campus - based allocation procedures . this analysis draws upon information from both the fiscal operations report and application to participate ( fisap ) and from 2004-2005 award year ( fy2004 ) allocations data . the two major components of the allocation procedures are analyzed: the base guarantee and the fair share increase . the primary unit of analysis used throughout the remainder of the report is categories of institutions grouped by average coa . cost of attendance is used as the primary unit of analysis because , as a variable in the fair share allocation formulas , coa has an important impact in affecting the allocation of funds to institutions .