implementation . not later than 12months after enactment , ferc would be required to promulgate regulations necessary to implementthis subtitle and submit to congress recommendations for technical or conforming amendments tofederal law that would be necessary to carry out this subtitle . a similar provision was included inthe conference report of h.r . 6 in the 108th congress . section 1273 . transfer of resources . thesecurities and exchange commission would be required to transfer all applicable books and recordsto ferc . however , no time frame for transfer of books and records is provided . currently , thesecurities and exchange commission maintains books and records and regulates securitytransactions . ( 21 ) asimilar provision was included in the conference report of h.r . 6 in the 108th congress . section 1274 . effective date . twelve monthsafter enactment , this subtitle would take effect . section 1275 . service allocation . ferc wouldbe required to review and authorize cost allocations for non - power goods or administrative ormanagement services provided by an associate company that was organized specifically for thepurpose of providing such goods or services . this section would not preclude ferc or statecommissions from exercising their jurisdiction under other applicable laws with respect to reviewor authorization of any costs . ferc would be required to issue rules within six months of enactmentto exempt from the section any company and holding company system if operations are confinedsubstantially to a single state . a similar provision was included in the conference report of h.r . 6 in the 108th congress . section 1276 . authorization of appropriations . necessary funds to carry out this subtitle would be authorized to be appropriated . a similar provisionwas included in the conference report of h.r . 6 in the 108th congress . section 1277 . conforming amendments to the federal poweract . the federal power act would be amended to reflect the changes to the publicutility holding company act of 1935 . section 1281 . market transparency rules . within 180 days after enactment , ferc would be required to issue rules to establish an electronicsystem that provides information about the availability and price of wholesale electric energy andtransmission services . ferc would exempt from disclosure any information that , if disclosed , couldbe detrimental to the operation of the effective market or jeopardize system security . ferc wouldbe required to assure that consumers in competitive markets are protected from adverse effects ofpotential collusion or other anti - competitive behaviors that could occur as a result of untimely publicdisclosure of transaction - specific information . this section would not affect the exclusivejurisdiction of the commodity futures trading commission with respect to accounts , agreement,contracts , or transactions in commodities under the commodity exchange act . ferc would notbe allowed to compete with , or displace , any price publisher or regulate price publishers or imposeany requirements on the publication of information . creation of market transparency rules wasincluded in the conference report of h.r . 6 in the 108th congress . section 1282 . market manipulation .