agents . onjanuary 3 , 2006 , the mexican embassy in washington , d.c. , requested an investigation of theshooting of mexican citizen guillermo martinez by a border patrol agent near san diego , and onjanuary 15 , 2006 , the mexican consulate in mcallen , texas , requested an investigation of theshooting of mexican citizen ismael segura by a texas police officer . u.s. officials promised a fullinvestigation of the incidents but suggested little tolerance for violations of the law . u.s. reacts to border incursion . on january 23,2006 , texas department of public safety ( dps ) troopers and hudspeth county sheriff deputiespursued three suvs believed to be loaded with marijuana toward the border where a humvee ofarmed men dressed in military style uniforms was sighted on the u.s. side of the border . followingpursuit by the sheriff deputies and dps troopers , the suvs turned back toward mexico , and ahumvee of men in what appeared to be mexican military uniforms arrived to protect the suvs andthe drug shipment . in the context of theu.s . legislation outlined above , the administration of president william clinton ( 1993-2001 ) pursued a number of initiatives on its own and with the administration of president ernesto zedillo ( 1994-2000 ) in the migration , border security , and drug control areas . the countries formalizedregular bilateral consultations between consulates and border agencies through the border liaisonmechanisms , and they issued a binational study on migration in 1997 that found that unauthorizedmigration carries costs for both countries . they also pursued a border safety campaign to reduceviolence and deaths on the border through public information campaigns , and search and rescueprograms . in mid - may 2000 , following expressions of concern over private ranchers detainingmexican migrants in arizona , the governments announced that they would prosecute any unlawfulbehavior by private citizens , combat migrant smugglers , and expand regular consultationmechanisms . in the counter - narcotics area , the countries established the high level contact group ( hlcg ) for cabinet - level anti - drug coordination twice a year . acting through this and othermechanisms , the countries developed a joint anti - drug strategy in early february 1998 , adoptedextensive anti - money laundering measures in 2000 , and facilitated the vastly expanded u.s. trainingof law enforcement and military units involved in counter - narcotics activities . ( 5 ) legal immigration family equity ( life ) act of2000 . beginning around the year 2000 , the u.s. congress began to shift thedirection of policy from the 1996 immigration legislation . in february 2000 , the afl - cio calledfor amnesty for established illegal immigrants in the united states , a more lenient immigrationpolicy , and universal enforcement of workers rights , and this approach was generally supported bythe clinton administration . while some members attempted to pass variations of the latino andimmigrant fairness act ( lifa ) , embodied in s. 3095 ( sponsored by senator edwardkennedy ) , in the end it was the legal immigrant family equity ( life ) act , incorporated in h.r . 4942 , supported by representatives henry bonilla and lamar smith and bysenator hatch that prevailed and was signed into law ( p.l .