title i of p.l . 110-358 does expand and subtitle d of title ii of s. 3297 would expand the authority of the federal government to prosecute crimes relating to child pornography and the sexual exploitation of children . subtitle d would , among other things , amend current law so that anyone who uses any means or facility of interstate or foreign commerce to commit an act that is a crime under 18 u.s.c . §§2251 ( sexual exploitation of children ) , 2251a ( selling or buying of children ) , 2252 ( certain activities relating to material involving the sexual exploitation of minors ) , or 2252a ( certain activities relating to material constituting or containing child pornography ) could be prosecuted for offenses under those sections . both bills would also amend current law so that for someone to be prosecuted for a crime under 18 u.s.c . should the federal government weigh in on what should be the proper treatment of juvenile offenders ? should the federal government provide additional and new funding for programs that support mentally ill offenders ? should federal jurisdiction over crimes related to child pornography and the sexual exploitation of children be broadened ? should the federal government expand grant funding to aid state and local governments analyze and decrease the backlog in dna evidence ? should certain products produced and services provided by federal inmates be opened to a competitive bidding process ? should the federal sentencing scheme be reformed in light of the 2005 u.s. supreme court case u.s. v. booker ( 125 s.ct . should the federal government provide funding to aid state , local , and tribal governments maintain the fugitive database ? should congress exercise its oversight role of several department of justice grant programs , including the edward byrne memorial justice assistance grant ( jag ) and the community oriented policing services ( cops ) grant program ? this report focuses on the aforementioned crime - related issues and legislation that have been acted upon in the 110 th congress . this report , however , does not cover issues related to homeland security , terrorism , abortion , and gun control . as previously mentioned , the prevention and control of domestic crime has traditionally been a responsibility of state and local governments , with the federal government playing a more supportive role . the federal government began to take a more direct role in crime control , however , as the violent crime rate increased and some questioned the ability of state and local law enforcement to combat the growing problem with limited resources at their disposal . the federal bureau of investigation's ( fbi ) uniform crime report ( ucr ) program compiles data from monthly reports transmitted directly to the fbi from approximately 17,000 local police departments or state agencies . of interest to lawmakers are the two indices of crimes that are the basis of the ucr . the part i index includes the four major violent crimes of homicide and non - negligent manslaughter , forcible rape , robbery , and aggravated assault . the part ii index includes the property crimes of burglary , larceny - theft , motor vehicle theft , and arson .