basic practice series . chicago , il , aba publishing , 2002 . 156 p. u.s. environmental protection agency , office of pollution prevention and toxics . 20 1 0 tri national analysis . available at http: / / www.epa.gov / tri / tridata / tri10 / nationalanalysis / index.htm , visited april 5 , 2012 . wolf , sidney m. 1996 . "fear and loathing about the public right to know: the surprising success of the emergency planning and community right - to - know act. journal of land use & environmental law , v. 11 , n. 2 , pp . this report describes key provisions of epcra . in addition , it provides several references for more detailed information about the act , and a table that cross - references sections of the u.s. code with corresponding sections of the act . the report highlights key provisions rather than providing a comprehensive inventory of the act's numerous sections , and addresses authorities and limitations imposed by the statute , rather than the status of implementation or other policy issues . it requires manufacturing facilities that manufacture , use , or process "toxic chemicals" to report annually to epa on the amounts of each chemical released to each environmental medium ( air , land , or water ) or transferred off - site . epa makes tri data available in "raw" and summarized forms to the general public . the law authorized epa to expand reporting requirements to additional industries . epa promulgated a rule may 1 , 1997 , requiring reports on toxic releases from seven additional industrial categories , including some metal mining , coal mining , commercial electric utilities , petroleum bulk terminals , chemical wholesalers , and solvent recovery facilities ( 62 federal register 23834 ) . the original statute specified 313 "toxic chemicals" or categories of chemicals for which reporting was required , but epcra gave epa authority to add or delete chemicals from the list either on its own initiative , or in response to citizen petitions . epa has removed more than 15 and added a few hundred so that the current list includes 666 individual chemicals . the public may obtain specific information ( eg , about a particular manufacturing facility ) by submitting a request in writing to epa . epa distributes written and electronic , nationwide and state - by - state summaries of annual data . raw data and summaries also are available over the internet . epcra , section 313 , generally requires a report to epa and the state from each manufacturer with 10 or more employees and who either uses 10,000 pounds or manufactures or processes 25,000 pounds of any "toxic chemical" during the reporting year . however , epa may adjust ( and has adjusted in the past ) these thresholds for classes of chemicals or categories of facilities . these forms must provide estimates of the maximum amount of the chemicals present at the facility at any time during the preceding year ; estimates of the average daily amount of chemicals present ; and the general location of the chemicals in the facility . information must be provided to the public in response to a written request .