cir. environmental advocates continue to argue that the entire rule is deficient , while the pork producers group objects to the fact that the rule only partially exempted releases from epcra . other industry groups such as the national chicken council intervened in the litigation in support of the final rule . parties to the litigation entered into talks to mediate the issues , but in june 2010 , the federal government asked to remand the final rule for epa to reconsider and possibly modify the rule . the court approved the government's request for a remand in october 2010 . epa anticipated proposing a new or revised rule in 2012 , but it has not done so yet . in the meantime , the 2008 exemption rule remains in effect . congressional attention to the issues discussed in this report has been limited , with the result that developments have proceeded largely by administrative and some judicial actions , not through legislative policymaking . prior to release of the air compliance agreement in january 2005 , some individual members wrote letters to epa objecting to the pending plan . some members also were critical of epa's proposal to exempt routine animal waste air releases from cercla and epcra's reporting requirements , questioning the potential for harmful environmental and enforcement impacts of the proposal . at a 2008 hearing where gao's report was discussed , several house energy and commerce subcommittee members said that they were skeptical of the epa's authority for a blanket exemption . others suggested that an exemption for small farms , whose emissions are unlikely to cause environmental harm , would make sense . epa and usda witnesses supported the proposal , saying that the air release waiver would only affect reporting meant for emergency response situations , but would not affect requirements to report emissions of hazardous substances from other farm sources , or releases of hazardous substances from manure into soil , ground water , or surface water . no legislation regarding the air compliance agreement has been introduced . however , in several congresses since 2005 , legislation has been introduced that would exclude "manure" from the definition of hazardous substances under cercla and remove reporting liability under cercla and epcra for releases of manure . proponents have argued that congress did not intend that either of these laws apply to agriculture and that enforcement and regulatory mechanisms under other laws are adequate to address environmental releases from animal agriculture . opponents responded that enacting a statutory exemption would severely hamper the ability of government and citizens to know about and respond to releases of hazardous substances caused by an animal agriculture operation . in the 112 th congress , bills on this topic were h.r . both were intended to clarify that manure is not a "hazardous substance" or "pollutant or contaminant" under cercla and to remove emissions reporting liability under cercla and epcra . supporters of these bills have sought to block epa from revising the 2008 exemption rule so as to require reporting of releases . a house energy and commerce subcommittee held a hearing on h.r . 2997 on june 27 , 2012 .