he will have a seat in the legislature . in third place with 26.2% was the constitutional liberal party ( plc ) candidate josé rizo , an ally of alemán and critic of president bolaños . edmundo jarquin registered a distant fourth place at 6.4% . jarquin , an economist who worked at the inter - american development bank , left the fsln in opposition to ortega and in favor of political reform . he became the presidential candidate of the sandinista renewal movement ( mrs ) when nominee herty lewites died suddenly in july 2006 . eden pastora , a disaffected one - time sandinista leader , won less than half a percent of the vote . the 90-member national assembly was also elected ; no party won an outright majority . the fsln will have 38 seats , the plc 25 , the aln 22 , and the mrs 5. international and domestic observation groups pressed the government to address problems during the pre - election process such as a high rate of errors on voter registry lists , and difficulty getting voter identification cards needed to vote , and considered the elections to be fair . u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) elections support for nicaragua was expected to reach at least $12 million for election support activities by november 5 , 2006 . critics accused both u.s. officials and venezuelan president hugo chávez of trying to influence the election's outcome: the u.s. embassy for making critical remarks , such as alluding to ortega and rizo as "two corrupt bosses ; " chávez for supporting ortega by providing fertilizer and oil under favorable terms through sandinista - dominated groups . ambassador paul trivelli , asserting his right to express his opinion , rejected calls to stop commenting on the elections . the elections followed more than a year of political tensions among current president enrique bolaños , the leftist sandinista party , and allies of rightist former president arnoldo alemán ( 1997-2002 ) . during the height of tensions , president bolaños invoked the oas inter - american democratic charter , and the oas sent several high - level delegations to help negotiate a solution . bolaños had been isolated by his anti - corruption efforts against alemán , who was sentenced to 20 years in prison in 2003 for fraud and money - laundering . aleman still controls the plc , and has obtained a conditional release . ortega announced he was breaking the power - sharing pact between his party and the plc that had defined national politics since it was negotiated in 1998 and hampered bolaños' ability to govern . the fsln and plc still controlled many state institutions , however , including the electoral authority . after ortega's announcement , the legislature passed reforms such as the passage of the 2006 budget , the first - ever tax code , local government transfers , and financial administration . ortega and bolaños then agreed to postpone the implementation of constitutional amendments at the root of the tensions . these amendments will transfer significant executive powers to the legislature in february 2007 , unless ortega's newly elected government seeks to change them .