the current array includes . aggravated identity theft is punishable by imprisonment for two years , and by imprisonment for five years if the offense involves a federal crime of terrorism . aggravated identity theft only occurs when the identity theft happens "during and in relation" to one of several other federal crimes . it has the effect of establishing a mandatory minimum for each of those predicate offenses that would not otherwise exist . more than half of the judges who responded to a united states sentencing commission survey felt that the two - year mandatory minimum was a generally appropriate sentence . the sentencing commission's report on mandatory minimum penalties makes little if any mention of the five - year terrorism penalty and instead directs its attention to the two - year identity theft mandatory minimum . the commission further confines itself to comparatively complimentary observations rather than recommendations , due to the provision's relatively recent emergence and its somewhat unique characteristics . section 1028a , parsed to its elements , declares: - whoever - during and in relation to - any felony enumerated in — subsection ( c ) [predicate offense] , [or] — section 2332b ( g ) ( 5 ) ( b ) [predicate terrorist offense] - knowingly - transfers , possesses , or uses - without lawful authority - a means of identification - of another person shall , in addition to the punishment provided for such [predicate offense or predicate terrorist offense] , be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 2 years [or a term of imprisonment of 5 years in the case of terrorist predicate offense] . a defendant convicted of a federal "serious violent felony" must be sentenced to life imprisonment under the so - called three strikes law , 18 u.s.c . 3559 ( c ) , if he has two prior state or federal violent felony convictions or one such conviction and a serious drug offense conviction . over 60% of the federal district court judges responding to the sentencing commission survey indicated they considered federal mandatory minimum sentences too high . although the survey asked specifically about sentences under other mandatory minimum statutes , it provided no opportunity for a response focused on section 3559 ( c ) . ( * mandatory minimum term of imprisonment or a fine ) ( + safety valve offenses ) .