under the iran sanctions act ( p.l . 104-172 , originally known as the iran - libya sanctions act ) , non - u.s. companies that invest over $20 million annually in iran or libya are subject to sanctions . transparent pricing allows oil to be traded efficiently and visibly . in general , the region's refining sector has moved toward deregulation , but many barriers remain to outside competition . similar obstacles to open market competition exist in the power sectors in japan and south korea . the united states could seek to reduce these barriers by encouraging its allies to create independent regulatory bodies . some specialists suggest that u.s. officials could also work with the japanese and south korean governments in restoring public confidence in nuclear energy by sharing technology and expertise , as available , to assure safer operation of nuclear reactors . some say that collaboration on energy research might also be beneficial in fostering a cooperative , market - based approach to energy security , in addition to offering the promise of technological breakthroughs that eventually reduce global dependency on oil . the department of energy has taken modest steps to enhance energy efficiency cooperation with asian nations , including efforts to develop fuel cell technology research and development with the japanese government ; to cooperate with chinese officials in pursuing cleaner air , with a particular focus on the 2008 olympic games to be held in beijing ; and to promote the use of cleaner - burning fuels and reform in the energy sector in the philippines . energy competition and security are among the many issues included in the debate over how the united states should deal with a rising china . some policymakers and experts resist the idea of aiding china's increasing prosperity , viewing chinese growth as a serious security risk for the united states . others see the potential for mutually - beneficial sino - american cooperation because of the shared interest in stability in oil - producing regions . today china is labeled by many as a "free - rider," in that it reaps the rewards of the security that american power brings to the middle east and asia . allowing china to continue to be a "free rider" could lessen the risk of conflict . assertions of military strength or regional tension over access to oil supplies could cause price spikes in the global market , which would be harmful to u.s. interests as well . positive bilateral relationships and overall regional stability might enhance the perception of oil as a global commodity . in addition , some analysts suggest the united states or its allies could consider providing technical assistance to china in expanding its strategic stockpile of oil . according to this view , the "cushion" of a strategic reserve would allow china to cope better with a short - term disruption to global oil supply without causing shocks to the market . the campaign to pressure beijing to become a "responsible stakeholder" in the world encompasses energy cooperation with the united states and the international energy community .