appendix a . the transition from internet protocol version 4 ( ipv4 ) to ipv6 the internet protocol version 4 ( ipv4 ) is the name of the digital signal transport protocol that has been used for global communications through the internet since the 1970s . the u.s. military now uses several transport protocols for digital communications in addition to ipv4 . however , dod planners see a need for more network capabilities to support future nco operations . by 2008 , dod is planning to convert digital military communications to use the newer internet protocol version 6 ( ipv6 ) as the standard for all transmission through the global information grid ( gig ) , and for all systems that are part of the defense information system network ( disn ) that will interoperate with the gig . ipv6 technology is considered the next - generation internet transport protocol , and all commercial network communications equipment ( also heavily used by the military ) will eventually transition to its use , and gradually reduce support for ipv4 . this is because ipv6 offers advantages in speed , capacity , and flexibility over ipv4 . for example , ipv6 will enable network users to more easily set up a secure virtual private network ( also known as secure tunneling through a network ) than with ipv4 . using ipv6 , hardware devices can be attached to a network and configured more easily , which will also provide mobile users with easier and faster access to network services . however , because use of ipv4 is so firmly embedded in the commercial systems now used in the united states , the transition for the civilian communications infrastructure in other countries may go more smoothly and quickly . this is because new communications infrastructures now being built in other countries will use the newest equipment with ipv6 capability already built in . this may also mean that much of the talent for managing the new ipv6 technology may eventually belong to technicians and programmers who reside in countries outside the united states . research has shown that regional agglomeration of technical expertise increases active sharing of tacit knowledge among groups of innovators . some of that tacit knowledge may also include sharing of information about newly - discovered vulnerabilities for the ipv6 technology . what follows is a brief explanation of some technical differences between ipv4 and ipv6 , and a discussion of possible economic and security issues related to the coming transition to the new internet protocol . technical differences between ipv4 and ipv6 information is sent through the internet using packets ( approximately 4000 digital bits per packet ) , and which include the address of the sender and the intended destination . internet protocol version 4 ( ipv4 ) has been used globally since before 1983 . however , ipv4 information packets are designed to carry an address in a 32-bit field , which means that ipv4 can only support approximately 4,000,000,000 internet devices ( computers , routers , websites , etc. )