states . elections are administered by state and local governments , with the federal government playing a circumscribed role . although that rolewas substantially enhanced with the enactment of hava , the law stipulates that methods ofimplementation of its requirements are to be left to the discretion of the states ( sec . is the same true for dres ? somecomputer experts think not , arguing that the software could be modified in ways that could alter theresults of an election and that would be very difficult to detect . this concern appears to stem largelyfrom three factors: malicious computer code , or malware , can often be written in such a way that it is very difficult to detect . ( 11 ) dre software is moderately complex , and it is generally accepted that the morecomplex a piece of software is , the more difficult it can be to detect unauthorized modifications . ( 12 ) most manufacturers of dres treat their software code as proprietaryinformation and therefore not available for public scrutiny . consequently , it is not possible forexperts not associated with the companies to determine how vulnerable the code is to tampering . ( 13 ) voting system standards and certification . concerns such as those described above have been voiced by some experts at least since the 1980s . ( 14 ) thedevelopment of the voluntary voting systems standards ( vss ) by the federal election commission ( fec ) in 1990 , and the subsequent adoption of those standards by many states , helped to reducethose concerns . the vss were developed specifically for computer - assisted punchcard , optical scan,and dre voting systems . they include a chapter on security , which was substantially expanded inthe updated version , released in 2002 . ( 15 ) alongwith the standards , a voluntary testing andcertification program was developed and administered through the national association of stateelection directors ( nased ) . in this program , an independent test authority ( ita ) chosen bynased tests voting systems and certifies those that comply with the vss . ( 16 ) testing is done of bothhardware and software , and the tested software and related documentation is kept in escrow by theita . ( 17 ) if questions arise about whether thesoftware used in an election has been tampered with , thatcode can be compared to the escrowed version . systems that receive nased certification may alsoneed to go through state and local certification processes before being used by an electionjurisdiction . hava creates a new mechanism for the development of voluntary voting system standards . it creates the election assistance commission ( eac ) to replace the fec's office of electionadministration and establishes three bodies under the eac: a 110-member standards boardconsisting of state and local election officials , a 37-member board of advisors representing relevantgovernment agencies and associations and fields of science and technology , and a 15-membertechnical guidelines development committee chaired by the director of national institute ofstandards and technology ( nist ) . this last committee is charged with making recommendationsfor voluntary standards ( called guidelines in the act ) , to be reviewed by the two boards and theeac .