instead , a hybrid of both has developed and been maintained . this country has long debated how best to meet the needs of the poor . some argue that income supplements that allow families to participate in the consumer market are the most effective and efficient means for the government to ensure that the basic needs of the poor are met . others argue that poor people cannot effectively participate in the free market for a variety of reasons beyond income , and , as a result , society has a responsibility to provide them with the goods and services they need to survive . the social welfare programs run by the federal government have shifted from time to time in their relative emphasis on providing cash welfare versus subsidizing the costs of goods and services . looking at the changes in welfare and housing programs over time helps to illustrate this tension . during and after the great depression , the government created a number of programs that provided both cash welfare and subsidized goods and services to the poor . the social security act of 1935 offered grants to states to help fund cash aid for three groups of needy persons: children ( aid to dependent children ) , aged persons ( old - age assistance ) , and blind persons ( aid to the blind ) . the housing act of 1937 created a federal construction program both to create jobs and to stimulate the economy , as well as to build low - cost housing for the poor . by the late 1930s and early 1940s , the federal government was providing surplus food to the poor in select cities . in 1964 , the food stamp program was enacted both to eliminate surplus food as well as supplement the food needs of the poor . in 1965 , the medicaid program , which provided access to health care for the poor was created . by the late 1960s , the children's cash welfare program ( renamed aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) ) had become the target of widespread criticism . some argued that cash welfare programs for single mothers promoted out - of - wedlock childbirth and dependency while discouraging work . at the same time , critics attacked federal housing programs , citing rising crime in publicly constructed housing developments and chronic fraud and abuse in their management . in 1969 , president nixon proposed a radical change to the federal social welfare system , a guaranteed minimum income in the form of a negative income tax . nixon's plan was not adopted , but some reforms were made to the cash welfare program . by 1973 , nixon declared a moratorium on all federal housing construction programs . in their place , a number of programs were developed , the largest being a system of rental subsidies which families could use in the private market . since the 1970s , federal social welfare policies have not resolved the debate between cash and services . the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) was created in the late 1970s and provides income supplements to working families .