table 3 . calculation of monthly payment rates for selectedcounties , 2004 source : congressional research service ( crs ) analysis of cms data . starting in 2006 , the ma program will allow plans to operate regionally . maplans may serve a single region or multiple regions ( including all 26 regions ) as partof a new regional program . the regional program is designed to encourage plans toserve areas they had not previously served , particularly rural areas . regional planswill operate like preferred provider organizations - - a popular option in the privatehealth insurance market so that a plan participating in the new regional program will ( 1 ) have a network of providers who agree to a contractually specified reimbursementfor covered benefits , and ( 2 ) provide for reimbursement for all covered benefits,regardless of whether the benefits are provided within the network . in addition , bothmedical savings account ( msa ) plans and private fee - for - service ( pffs ) plansmay serve one or more regions . ( 14 ) the secretary established 26 regions taking into account such factors as ( 1 ) an adequate number of eligible beneficiaries , ( 2 ) presence of existing commercial andfederal employees health benefits plans that may consider serving an ma region , ( 3 ) limiting the variation of payment rates within regions , and ( 4 ) preservation ofexisting patient flow in areas where beneficiaries have a tendency to seek careoutside of their state of residence . the weight for the statutory component is based on the percent of eligible individualsin the area , as opposed to enrollees . ( 15 ) the plan - bid component is the weighted averageof all the ma regional bids submitted in a region . this weight is based onenrollment by plan . similar to local plans , each regional plan will submit a bid toprovide coverage of all required benefits , but unlike the benchmark for local plans,the regional benchmark depends on all plan bids . by incorporating the plan bid intothe calculation of the benchmark , the payments amount to any one plan thatparticipates in a region will depend on the bids submitted by other plans in theregion . this introduces a new type of competition , not previously used indetermining medicare payments . beginning in 2010 , the secretary will establish a program for the applicationof comparative cost adjustment ( cca ) in cca areas . the six - year program willbegin january 1 , 2010 and end december 31 , 2015 . the program is designed to testdirect competition among local ma plans , as well as competition between local maplans and fee - for - service medicare . this program will only occur in a limited number of statutorily qualifyingareas in the country .