map of the southwest pacifi . ( 28 ) figure 1 . australia's renewed activism in the pacific is not universally accepted . some in australiaand the region are concerned that it could mark a return to neo - colonial activity by australia in thearea . china has become increasingly active - - diplomatically and economically - - in the southwestpacific . some analysts suggest that its current involvement could result in strategic benefits forchina in the long term . while the united states does not maintain an embassy in several pacificisland countries , the people's republic of china ( prc ) has opened embassies in all countries withwhich it has diplomatic relations and has provided bilateral assistance and high - profile visits - - withlittle criticism of their internal policies . ( 15 ) the opposition laborparty views these measures as unnecessary . ( 27 ) although china does notpossess a "blue water" navy capable of challenging the u.s. in the region , some experts assert thatit plans to develop one . china reportedly has provided "modest" military support - - training andnon - combat defense supplies rather than weapons - - to pacific island countries that possess militaryforces - - fiji , papua new guinea , vanuatu , and tonga . since 1997 , china has operated a satellitespace - tracking station on tarawa atoll in the republic of kiribati . some analysts argue that the basecould be used for monitoring u.s. missile defense tests at kwajalein atoll in the marshall islands . while not opposing the u.s. and australian presence in the region , many pacific islandscountries have been attracted to china as an "anti - colonial" power , welcomed the aid and attentionfrom china and taiwan , and appreciated china's relative support on some issues such as the globalwarming treaty ( kyoto protocol ) to reduce greenhouse emissions . some regional analysts , membersof congress , and leaders of australia have advocated stronger roles for the united states , australia,and japan in the southwest pacific as counterweights to growing chinese influence . first , chinahas attempted to thwart taiwanese diplomatic efforts in the region . taiwan has actively courted theregion , establishing diplomatic relations with four pacific island states at china's expense - - palau,the solomon islands , tuvalu , and the marshall islands . taiwan has offered these and other pacificisland countries economic and development assistance - - helping to build or provide hospitals,airports , copra processing equipment , ships , grants and loans . so eager are some states for assistancethat they often switch allegiances without warning or threaten to change sides . after the referendum , local militias , whichfavored continued association with indonesia , attacked pro - independence east timorese . by leadingan international peacekeeping coalition to east timor , australia lessened pressure on the unitedstates to become more extensively involved . australia's subsequent involvement in east timor has helped east timor develop into an independent , viable state , though negotiations continue for a fullagreement on how to divide the oil and gas resources that lie beneath the timor sea .