this report is an overview of u.s. foreign assistance to the middle east . it includes a brief historical review of foreign aid levels , a description of specific country programs , and an analysis of current foreign aid issues . congress both authorizes and appropriates foreign assistance and conducts oversight on executive agencies' management of aid programs . as the largest regional recipient of u.s. economic and military aid , the middle east is perennially a major focus of interest as congress exercises these responsibilities . in the middle east , the united states has a number of strategic interests , ranging from support for the state of israel and israel's peaceful relations with its arab neighbors , to the protection of vital petroleum supplies and the fight against international terrorism . u.s. assistance continues to support the 1979 peace treaty between israel and egypt and the continued stability of the kingdom of jordan , which signed its own peace treaty with israel in 1994 . u.s. funding also has focused on strengthening palestinian governance and civil society , and aid officials have worked to ensure that u.s. aid to the west bank is not diverted to terrorist groups , such as hamas , which controls the gaza strip . since the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , the united states has established region - wide aid programs that increase the focus on democracy promotion and encourage socio - economic reform in an attempt to undercut the forces of radicalism in some arab countries . the following section provides funding details on the largest regular aid recipients in the middle east: israel , egypt , jordan , the palestinians , and lebanon . each country section features a table with a more elaborate breakdown of aid by account over the last five fiscal years . for information on u.s. assistance for iraqi reconstruction , see crs report rl31833 , iraq: reconstruction assistance , by [author name scrubbed] and crs report rl31339 , iraq: post - saddam governance and security , by [author name scrubbed] . even when adjusted for inflation , annual u.s. assistance to the middle east in the decades following world war ii was only a small fraction of current aid flows to the region . under vastly different geopolitical circumstances , u.s. policy was geared toward supporting the development of oil - producing countries , maintaining a neutral stance in the arab - israeli conflict while supporting israel's security , and preventing soviet influence from gaining a foothold in iran and turkey . u.s. policymakers used foreign aid in the 1950s and 1960s to support these objectives . u.s. aid to israel was far less in the 1950s and 1960s than in later years . egypt , which had already seen its annual aid reduced , lost food aid entirely after it severed relations with the united states during the 1967 war . jordan and other arab states also saw their aid reduced . by 1970 , annual appropriations to iran were close to being phased out , as many policymakers considered iran to be a middle - income state that was economically self - sufficient . the decade of the 1970s witnessed a dramatic increase in u.s. foreign assistance to the middle east .