furthermore , while the actions of both the clinton and george w. bush administrations in implementing the provisions of e.o . 12,866 appear to indicate a conception of presidential authority consonant with that conveyed by the reagan order , their more nuanced approach to exercising this authority has largely diminished charges against its constitutionality . in turn , presidential review of agency rulemaking has become a widely used and increasingly accepted mechanism by which a president can exert significant , and sometimes determinative , authority over the agency rulemaking process . the evolution of presidential review of agency rulemaking efforts since the reagan era in particular constitutes a significant assertion and accumulation of presidential power in the regulatory context . while initial presidential forays into centralized regulatory review were limited in scope , presidential review of rules has emerged as one of the most widely - used and controversial mechanisms by which a president can ensure the realization of his regulatory agenda . steadily increasing presidential involvement in agency rulemaking efforts has often been cited as one of the most significant developments in administrative law and domestic policymaking since the introduction of the first formal review programs in the 1970s . the first formal regulatory review program was instituted by president nixon in 1971 through the establishment of a "quality of life review" program designed to improve "the interagency coordination of proposed agency regulations , standards , guidelines and similar materials pertaining to environmental quality , consumer protection , and occupational and public health and safety. under this program agencies were required to submit "significant" proposed and final regulations to the office of management and budget ( omb ) , which then disseminated them to affected agencies for comment . president ford extended regulatory review through executive order 11,821 , requiring agencies to prepare "inflation impact statements" for any "major" regulatory action . president carter expanded presidential review through the issuance of executive order 12,044 , which required agencies to prepare a "regulatory analysis" of all proposed "major rules," examining the potential economic impact of the proposal and an evaluation of alternative regulatory options . president carter took the additional step of forming the regulatory council , which was tasked with coordinating agency rulemaking activities in an effort to avoid duplicative or conflicting regulatory regimes . while the programs established in the nixon , ford , and carter administrations illustrate a successive increase in the centralization of regulatory review with the executive office of the president , these programs are generally characterized as having been "designed primarily to facilitate interagency dialogue. however , these programs laid the foundation for the implementation of a much more extensive and vigorous review process under the reagan administration . as has been illustrated by the consideration of the review regimes discussed above , there has been a steady evolution of presidential review of agency rulemaking from the nixon administration to the current administration of george w. bush . while the initial programs established in the 1970s were generally viewed as benign , president reagan's issuance of e.o . 12,291 ushered in a new era of presidential assertions of authority over agency rulemaking efforts , raising attendant concerns with regard to the proper allocation of authority between the president and congress in this context .