the price of oil is key . the scale of investment is large . for example , the exxonmobil project in qatar reportedly will cost $7 billion for a gtl plant of approximately 150,000-180,000 bpd , producing diesel fuel , naphtha , and lubricant basestocks . the royal dutch / shell group and qatar petroleum agreed in 2003 to invest $5 billion in a gtl plant of approximately 140,000 bpd capacity . connocophillips signed a letter of intent in 2003 to build a gtl plant with a capacity of 180,000 bpd . other projects with u.s. as well as foreign oil companies are either under construction , or planned with agreements in place . the investment costs for the exxonmobil project were reportedly to be met solely by the company , which is also to provide its proprietary technology and management skills to the project , while partner qatar petroleum provides the natural gas for the project . only a few energy companies , mainly the largest oil companies that have announced investment projects , have capital budgets large enough to operate in the gtl or the lng industries . as the market develops over time , a more appropriate balance between demand and supply evolves . because the gtl industry both competes for inputs with the lng industry , and competes for customers with the petroleum refining industry , key factors in economic feasibility also span various energy markets . the combination of a receptive business environment from the producing countries , especially qatar , and the investment commitments of the major oil companies suggest that rapid growth is likely to be made by the gtl industry over the next decade . the implications of the growth of the gtl industry for the consuming nations is mixed . while the availability of ultra clean diesel fuel is a benefit , promising to relieve supply worries and moderate price increases due to the increased supply , the beneficial effects on the natural gas side of the market are less clear . in 2001 , the refiners' acquisition cost for crude oil was approximately $24 per barrel . uncertainty regarding the $4 per barrel premium of actual crude oil prices above the minimum price for gtl feasibility , or the narrowness of the margin itself might have been an impediment to investment . in august 2007 , with crude oil trading at over $70 per barrel , the $20 per barrel minimum requirement for gtl feasibility seems likely to pose less of an impediment . comparative returns to lng development also influence the economics of gtl . lng returns still appear to be adequate , even if they are not at levels they attained 10 or 15 years ago . lng has become a mature industry . even with the large increases in demand projected in the aeo 2007 , there has been little new project development . the year 2007 has seen little new lng projects begun in producing nations . this might seem to indicate that gtl is a viable alternative , or that producers are waiting to see the outcome of the elevated price levels for natural gas as well as oil before making binding decisions . natural gas prices are also important in determining gtl feasibility .