the challenge has four components . first is the direct action by radical muslim groups against businesses and institutions which they accuse of representing western cultural and moral values . the most widely publicized group is the islamic defenders front ( fpi ) . the fpi targets such businesses for direct , violent action . squads of fpi cadre have forcibly shut down gambling dens , discos , nightclubs and bars that serve alcoholic beverages , and brothels . the fpi also has targeted christian churches . attacks by the fpi and like - minded muslim groups have forced the closure of upwards of 100 christian churches since september 2004 , including more than 30 in west java alone . the fpi is estimated to have supporters in the tens of thousands at most . it and similar groups receive financial backing from saudi arabia . its influence is felt widely partly because police and law enforcement authorities have adopted a permissive attitude toward its activities . arrests of fpi members are few and infrequent despite the government's revisions of public assembly laws to make it easier to disband violence - prone groups . despite some ongoing activity it appears that this type of militant action is less intense than in years past . it has extensive natural resources . a large percentage of world trade transits the strategically important straits of malacca that link the indian ocean littoral to the south china sea and the larger pacific ocean basin . indonesia is also perceived by many as the geopolitical center of the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) , which is a key actor in the geopolitical dynamics of the larger asia - pacific region . indonesia continues to emerge from a period of authoritarian rule and is consolidating its status as one of the world's largest democracies . some 86% of indonesians are muslim , and the overwhelming majority subscribe to a moderate form of the religion , giving indonesia the potential to act as a counterbalance to more extreme expressions of islam . despite this , radical islamists and terrorist cells have operated in the country . internal strife and social dislocation stemming from inter - communal discord , autonomous and secessionist movements , political machinations among elites , islamist extremism , government corruption , and economic uncertainty have all undermined stability in indonesia in the past . more recently , indonesia has been conducting elections widely considered free and fair and building a more robust civil society . while indonesia's economy suffered major setbacks during the asian financial crisis of 1997 / 98 , it has weathered the recent global economic downturn relatively well . the key challenge for the united states and indonesia is now how to build on recent progress in the relationship and deliver demonstrable results in developing the comprehensive partnership between the two countries that can further shared interests . specific areas of congressional interest include democracy promotion , security and counterterrorism cooperation , human rights , fostering liberal trade and investment policies , securing indonesian cooperation on regional issues and global ones such as climate change . the military - to - military relationship has been a key test of enhanced bilateral cooperation .