trade policy proceeds . developing countries have emerged as significant players in u.s. trade and world trade asa result of globalization . this trend presents the united states with challenges . the issues of workers rights and environmental protection , become significant points ofdebate in congressional consideration of many trade matters . more precisely , the question is to whatextent should workers rights , environmental protection , and other concerns be part of tradeagreements or other trade policy initiatives . the congress included workers rights andenvironmental policy as principal negotiating objectives in the legislation granting trade promotionauthority . some members of congress have argued that trade agreements should ensure that tradepartners' treatment of workers rights meet internationally accepted core labor standards or otherwiseface trade sanctions . others contend that trade agreements should only ensure that countriesadequately enforce their own trade laws . a similar division of thought exists regarding tradeagreements and environmental protection . this underlying debate will likely emerge in congressional consideration of dr - cafta andother trade agreements involving developing country trading partners . it may also arise if and whencongress considers renewal of the president's trade promotion authority and reviews u.s.participation in the wto . the outcome of these debates might determine in which direction u.s.trade policy is moving on these issues . the trade issues that the 109th congress faces and how the congress deals with them couldhave an impact on the international trading system . the international system is becoming larger andmore complex . lying at the foundation of the system is the wto . over the years , the rules thewto ( and its predecessor the gatt ) administers have expanded from tariffs to such nontariffbarriers as government procurement practices , sanitary and phytosanitary measures , and iprprotection . an objective of the doha development agenda is to broaden the rules coverage evenmore . the 107th congress helped set the agenda for the dda round and u.s. negotiating positionsduring the round when it granted the president trade promotion authority and established negotiatingobjectives . the 109th congress through oversight and the administration's mandatory consultationscan continue to influence the agenda . the wto is also expanding its membership . as of february 2006 , the wto has 149members with 29 more countries at various stages of attaining membership or accession . congressdoes not vote on whether a country can join the wto . through oversight it can influence the u.s.position on negotiating a country's entry . the congress could have a more direct impact when itconsiders pntr for those countries , such as russia , ukraine , and vietnam , whose ntr status is stillconditioned under the jackson - vanik amendment . along with the wto , the international trading system is populated by a web of regional andbilateral free trade areas based on ftas . in some cases , these areas are interlinked , while in others,they are distinct . ftas have become a significant and expanding part of the international tradingsystem . international trade observers and policymakers are divided on whether the two tracks of theinternational trading system - - the multilateral ( the wto ) and bilateral / regional ( ftas ) - - aremutually reinforcing or in conflict . the bush administration firmly bases its trade policy strategyon the two prongs being reinforcing .