the btcc and the bkc jointly make these assessments . the total construction cost for the nbacc facility has been determined by dhs to be $141 million , a $13 million increase from the initially requested $128 million . original funds for the construction were appropriated in fy2003–fy2005 . community response to the nbacc facility construction has been mixed . the construction of the nbacc facility , along with new laboratory space for other federal agencies , at the fort detrick site has been identified as beneficially spurring investment and development in the surrounding area . activities funded include both intramural and extramural efforts . the programs within nbacc , as well as the construction of the nbacc facility , have been reported as part of the science and technology directorate's biological countermeasures portfolio . the nbacc program currently conducts research through partnerships and agreements with federal and private institutes . to provide a unique home for research overseen by the nbacc program , dhs is constructing an nbacc laboratory at fort detrick , md as part of the national interagency biodefense campus . the degree to which the research programs of the nbacc program and component centers are transparent and actively overseen may become an area of congressional interest . two factors have contributed to an increased focus by biosecurity advocates on nbacc research activities: the degree to which classified research may be performed by the nbacc program and the extent and quality of review for compliance with the biological and toxin weapons convention ( bwc ) . because of the potential for classified research to be performed at the nbacc facility , some biodefense experts have identified the lack of transparency as problematic for international relations and treaty compliance . other experts assert that such issues of transparency can be dealt with so long as a process for review and compliance with applicable treaties is developed and maintained . these issues and the department's efforts to address these factors are described below . some research activities performed by the btcc and the nbfac , either in interim facilities or at the to - be - constructed nbacc facility , may be classified in nature . the nbacc facility is being constructed in such a manner that the entire building can be certified as a sensitive compartmented information facility ( scif ) . the ffrdc contractor operating the nbacc facility must be capable of providing employees cleared at the top secret / sensitive compartmented information ( ts / sci ) level . the balance of classified and unclassified activities will change depending on agency need and future planning . thus , the extent to which the capability to perform classified research will be utilized is undetermined . initially , only a portion of the nbacc facility may operate under classified circumstances , with this amount increasing or decreasing depending on evolving research priorities . the nbacc ffrdc rfp provides some expectations for the ffrdc contractor's future capabilities though , stating: the government has estimated final operations work force at 120 people , with virtually all of them ( > 95% ) requiring ts / sci clearance . the offerors are expected to propose a strategy and commensurate workforce for initial operations and transition .