this constancy is not absolute , however . there has been short - run variability caused by the business cycle , but on balance these short - run effects do not deflect the underlying long - term trend . the automobile has transformed how we move about and where we live . higher education has become an endeavor of the many rather than the few . hours of work have decreased while hours of leisure have increased . the pace of long - term economic growth is likely to be a central focus of attention in the decades just ahead , as the u.s. economy must confront the need to undertake unprecedentedly large generational transfers of income to pay for the retirement of the huge baby - boom generation . faster economic growth leads to a larger economic pie from which to make such transfers and makes this redistribution less onerous for future workers . another element of concern about the future burden on workers grows out of the united states' large accumulation of foreign debt stemming from a long succession of large trade deficits . with a net foreign debt that now approaching $3 trillion and could plausibly approach $10 trillion in the decade ahead , the united states could expect to have to make annual debt service payments to foreign creditors of $80 to $100 billion . this means that a significant share of future output growth will be transferred to foreigners and will not be available to improve the future living standard of domestic consumers . again , the eroding effect of these transfers on future living standards of workers will be less if the annual rate of long - term growth is greater . although the trend growth rates of mature industrial economies have historically not shown great variability , even relatively small differences in that growth rate steadily cumulate to have sizeable effects on the scale of improvement in future living standards . an economy in which output per capita grows at an average annual pace of 2.0% will double in size in 34 years , while growth at 3.0% leads to a doubling in size in only 24 years . put another way , beginning at the 2004 level of real gdp per capita of about $37,000 , at the end of 24 years a 3% annual growth rate generates a level of per capita real gdp of about $75,000 , as compared to a level of only about $59,000 generated by a 2% annual growth rate for the same time interval . that extra $16,000 confers a substantial broadening of economic choices and the ability to achieve any given spectrum of economic and social goals with less sacrifice . despite its importance for future living standards , long - term growth is seldom the explicit interest of economic policy . nevertheless , many policies directed at more immediate goals are likely to have implications for the speed of economic growth . tax policy , labor market policy , science and technology policy , education policy , budget policy , as well as legal and regulatory policy can all have effects on the rate of economic growth and the level of future income .