investment costs have been high for lng projects . at that time , contracts signed during the market expansion of the 1970s and 1980s began to expire . as recently as mid - 1990s , the capital investment cost of a liquefaction plant was over $400 per ton of annual capacity , implying a cost of over $2.5 billion for a plant with an annual capacity of 6.6 million tons . additional costs , of approximately equal magnitude , are also required for natural gas field development and a possible pipeline from the field to the liquefaction plant . the spa is designed to manage and reapportion the risk . most long - term contracts have included a "take - or - pay" provision . this provision requires that the buyer guarantee purchase of agreed upon gas volumes , or pay for non - delivery . by requiring the buyer to take contracted volumes of gas or pay for non - delivery , the spa vests the purchaser with the quantity risk of the contract , virtually assuring the producer of full production levels of output . full production is important to the producer because less than full capacity production usually translates into poor economic performance for the investment . price risk is managed through a price escalation clause in the spa . in most existing spas , the price escalator is tied to the price of oil , which traditionally has been the prime competing fuel for natural gas . as a result of this pricing mechanism , lng investment decisions are made on the basis of the actual and forecast prices in target markets and what the net back to the project might yield . historically , there is little evidence to suggest that lng prices have adjusted to competition in the market . more common is the result that if prices for domestic natural gas are weak , lng tends to exit the market , returning when prices recover . for example , four lng receiving facilities were built in the united states in the 1970s . with the decline of natural gas prices in the 1980s , and the low prices prevalent for most of the 1990s , these facilities either were closed , or remained open at very low utilization rates in the latter decade . the higher natural gas prices of the last five years , supported by demand growth for natural gas , coupled with the declining costs of lng , have provided economic incentive for these facilities to re - open and expand . additionally , an off - shore facility , gulf gateway located in the gulf of mexico , opened in 2005 . growing demand , stagnating domestic production , and the reduced availability of traditional sources of imported natural gas suggest the possibility of imbalance in the natural gas market over the aeo forecast period to 2025 . imbalance could show up as physical shortages , if new sources of production cannot be identified , as well as volatile , high price levels . lng has been suggested as a possible solution to this problem .