within each agency . these chief officers now include , in chronological order of establishment by statute: inspectors general ( established 1978 ) ; chief financial officers ( established 1990 ) ; chief information officers ( cios ; established 1996 ) ; chief human capital officers ( chcos ; established 2002 ) ; and chief acquisition officers ( caos ; established 2003 ) . on the next page , table 1 summarizes key categories of information about each of these officers , including ( 1 ) the function ( s ) with which the officer position is typically associated , ( 2 ) the law that established the officer position , ( 3 ) a united states code citation for key statutory provisions , ( 4 ) a summary of the statutory rules governing appointments for the position , and ( 5 ) the person to whom the chief officer reports . or should there be a mix of these two approaches ? this tension between standardization and customization arises frequently for congress with respect to management of the executive branch — where varying degrees of standardization and customization can exist in general management laws , authorizing statutes , or appropriations . many experts believe standardization can help improve executive branch transparency and accountability . for example , the administrative procedure act , enacted in 1946 , was intended to establish basic requirements across the executive branch for agency rulemaking . with regard to another functional area , financial management , congress introduced standardization in stages . the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 ( 104 stat . 2838 ) , as amended by the government management reform act of 1994 ( gmra ; 108 stat . 3410 ) , required 24 major executive departments and agencies to prepare audited financial statements covering all their accounts . this requirement contributed to many agencies receiving unqualified ( "clean" ) opinions in fy2002 . in 2002 , congress further amended the cfo act to extend similar requirements to most other executive agencies with passage of the accountability of tax dollars act ( 116 stat . standardization can also promote accountability by putting the burden of proof on agencies to demonstrate when ( or if ) exceptions are necessary . by contrast , customization can also be beneficial for effective management . customization can help align an agency's management with both the agency's internal environment ( eg , culture , size , decision - making processes ) and its external environment ( eg , economic conditions , events , stakeholder and client needs ) . congress regularly uses authorizing statutes , appropriations , and accompanying reports to require or direct specific actions ( or prohibitions ) for agencies , but congress also builds customization into general management laws . for example , until recently , small agencies were not generally required to prepare audited financial statements . similarly , when the department of homeland security ( dhs ) was established by the homeland security act of 2002 ( 116 stat . 2135 , at 2145 ) , the new agency's cfo position was not subject to cfo act requirements . another example comes from the hrm area .