109-699 ) sec . the secretary of homeland security shall submit a report to the committees on appropriations of the senate and the house of representatives , not later than february 8 , 2007 , that — ( 1 ) identifies activities being carried out by the department of homeland security to improve — ( a ) the targeting of agricultural inspections ; ( b ) the ability of united states customs and border protection to adjust to new agricultural threats ; and ( c ) the in - service training for interception of prohibited plant and animal products and agricultural pests under the agriculture quarantine inspection monitoring program of the animal and plant health inspection service ; and ( 2 ) describes the manner in which the secretary of homeland security will coordinate with the secretary of agriculture and state and local governments in carrying out the activities described in paragraph ( 1 ) . 5441 , 109 th congress ) the coordination issue was previously raised fy2005 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l . was the activity initiated with homeland security supplemental funds ? did aphis receive enhanced homeland security funds for the activity ? is the activity needed in order to comply with one or more homeland security presidential directives or the bioterrorism act of 2002 ? of the hundreds of animal and plant pathogens and pests available to an agroterrorist , perhaps fewer than a couple of dozen represent significant economic threats . determinants of this level of threat are the agent's contagiousness and potential for rapid spread , and its international status as a "reportable" pest or disease ( i.e. , subject to international quarantine ) under rules of the world organization for animal health ( also commonly known as the oie , the office international des epizooties ) . a widely accepted view among scientists is that livestock are more susceptible to agroterrorism than cultivated plants . much of this has to do with the success of efforts to systematically eliminate animals diseases from u.s. herds , which leaves current herds either unvaccinated or relatively unmonitored for such diseases by farmers and some local veterinarians . once infected , livestock can often act as the vector for continuing to transmit the disease , facilitating an outbreak's spread , especially when live animals are transported . has the bulk of the program activity changed as a result of 9 / 11 ? does the activity address international pest or disease outbreaks or other acts of agro - bioterrorism ? certain animal diseases may be more attractive to terrorists because they can be zoonotic , or transmissible to humans . in contrast , a number of plant pathogens continue to exist in small areas of the u.s. and continue to infect limited areas of plants each year , making outbreaks and control efforts more routine . moreover , plant pathogens generally are more difficult to manipulate from a technical perspective . some plant pathogens require particular environmental conditions of humidity , temperature , or wind to take hold or spread . other plant diseases may take a longer time than an animal disease to become established or achieve a level of destruction that a terrorist may desire .