coordinating these activities continues to be a challenge . various organizational structures have been attempted over the past two decades in the effort toimprove coordination and efficiency . an early effort , dating back to the late 1970s , was embodied in the national climate program act of 1978 ( h.r . 6669 , public law 95-367 ) , involving twelve federal agencies vestedwith responsibilities in climate research and services . ( 10 ) designed to centralize planning and toimprove interagency and intergovernmental coordination , the national climate program emphasizeddevelopment and delivery of useful climatic information and services to a wide range of users , basedon current knowledge of climate and better use of existing climatic data . simultaneously , theprogram sought an expanded federal effort in scientific research to foster better understanding of theclimate system and the societal consequences of climate change as a basis for national decisionmaking that depended on improved predictions of future climate conditions and better climate impactassessments . some ten years after its enactment , however , the national climate program was faced with criticisms that involved charges of paucity of funding and concerns expressed among agencyprincipals that any program combining individual agency capabilities and resources into acoordinated effort could compromise or impede existing agency responsibilities . possible climate change linked to "greenhouse gas" emissions has been addressed by variousu.s . government policies since the mid - 1980s , with an emphasis on energy r&d and on climateresearch and services . u.s. efforts in the former bush and clinton administrations toward r&din energy efficiency and renewable energy , and research into climate and global change were givendirection by the energy policy act of 1992 , which implemented united states responsibilities underthe unfccc , and by the global change research act of 1990 . the 1993 climate change actionplan linked or made partnerships among various federal agencies , business , state and localgovernments , and other entities with the goal of reducing u.s. greenhouse gas emissions . theclinton administration's ccti built upon these earlier efforts . the current bush administrationhas introduced its u.s . climate change research initiative , the national climate changetechnology initiative , and the climate change science program strategic plan . the plan , asreleased on july 24 , 2003 , describes five major research goals ( improve knowledge of past andpresent climates , improve understanding of climate change forces , reduce uncertainty in climatechange projections , understand sensitivity and adaptability of ecosystems to climate change , andexplore uses and limits of knowledge to manage risks and opportunities ) . as funding and otherdetails become available , similarities to and differences from earlier climate - change programs maybecome apparent . the evolving organizational structure , however , makes it difficult to determineprecisely some of the interrelationships among science and technology programs . some critics of current climate change policy call for sharper goals , better defined priorities , and more detailed , clearly stated objectives for climate change r&d , and its associated fundingprofile .