regulations . [section 804 ( b ) ] the secretary,after consultation with the united states trade representative and the commissioner of customs,must promulgate regulations permitting pharmacists and wholesalers to import prescription drugsfrom canada into the united states . limitation . [section 804 ( c ) ] the regulationsmust ensure that all imported prescription drugs meet the same safety and efficacy standards as drugsapproved in the united states and that the importer comply with all information and reportingrequirements . the secretary is permitted to adopt such rules as necessary to safeguard public healthor as a means to facilitate the importation of prescription drugs . information and records . [section 804 ( d ) ] drugimporters must provide information that includes the name and amount of the active ingredient ofthe drug , the dosage form of the drug , the date the drug is shipped , the quantity shipped , andinformation about its origin and destination . the importer must also supply the price paid by theimporter ; the importer's name , address , and license number ; the original source of the drug and theamount of each lot received from that source ; and the manufacturer's lot or control number . also,the importer or manufacturer must certify that the drug is fda - approved , properly labeled , notadulterated , and not misbranded ; and provide laboratory records of authenticity testing , includingdata , and evidence that testing was conducted in an approved u.s. laboratory . the importer isrequired to provide any other information that the secretary determines is necessary to ensure thepublic health . records regarding imported prescription drugs must be provided to the secretary , andthen kept for such time as the secretary determines to be appropriate . for a prescription drug imported directly from the first foreign recipient from themanufacturer , there must be documentation indicating that the drug came directly from themanufacturer , that the amount being imported is not greater than the quantity that was originallyreceived , that the drug was subsequently shipped by that recipient to the u.s. importer , andverification that each batch of the drug has been statistically sampled and tested for authenticity anddegradation prior to importation . samples of subsequent shipments of these drugs must also betested for authenticity and degradation . for a prescription drug not imported directly from the firstrecipient in the foreign country , there must be documentation demonstrating that each batch of thedrug has been statistically sampled and tested for authenticity and degradation prior to importation . testing . ( 8 ) waiver authority for importation by individuals . [section 804 ( j ) ] congress declares that the secretary should use discretion when enforcing thecurrent legal prohibition against persons importing drugs or devices . the secretary should focusenforcement on cases where the importing may pose a significant threat to public health . when theimportation is clearly for personal use and the prescription drug or device does not appear to presentan unreasonable risk to the individual , the secretary should exercise discretion to permit theimportation by the individual . the new law specifies two waiver procedures to allow individuals - - other than pharmacists and wholesalers - - to bring prescription drugs into the united states fortheir personal use . the first deals with drugs from canada .