further , p.l . 105-392 provided support for the analysis of the nation's health workforce in anticipation of pending and future needs to address supply and demand issues throughout the united states . what is the societal value of a well - placed provider who would not otherwise be there ? adding to the challenge of evaluating effectiveness , even if one concludes that title vii programs led to improved provider distributions , what does that mean for access to care , or to actual health outcomes for the population ? gao has noted that: geographic measures of physician supply can be a very rough measure of the actual accessibility of physician services in a given area.... many people lack access even in an area with a large number of physicians . this lack of access is often due to economic facts ; lack of insurance , medicaid coverage or low income in general may prevent many residents from receiving care from many of the physicians in the area . in addition , there may be language and cultural barriers that keep the residents from seeking or receiving appropriate care . many seek an end to the annual debate in which the administration , congress and stakeholders propose eliminating or restoring budgets for title vii programs , while evaluation methods continue to satisfy no one . the society of primary care policy fellows has called for a new evaluation model , saying: over the 25-year history of these programs , extensive data have been collected but have not been effectively used to scientifically assess their impact . for a decade , the office of management and budget and the general accounting office have repeatedly criticized ( hrsa ) for failing to perform regular , objective , comprehensive evaluations . evaluation of the programs has also been hampered due to a lack of legislated outcome measures and their reliance on the prevailing administration's priorities . when it has been possible to collect data relevant to administration priorities , for example , to assess [title vii's] ... impact on access to care in either health centers or through the national health service corps , these data have not been collected . for title vii , this evaluation failure has meant a decade of administration budget recommendations for no funding . the society recommends that an evaluator directly accountable to the congress be designated , that the evaluator establish outcomes - based benchmarks , and that there be routine data analysis to measure workforce production and distribution , and population health . the society also recommends that data be gathered to evaluate the impact of title vii programs on the distribution and deployment of the health workforce in federally qualified health centers and other underserved communities . the gao has noted limitations in the part assessment process , saying in particular: some agency officials claimed that having multiple statutory goals disadvantaged their programs . without further guidance , subjective terminology can influence program ratings by permitting omb staff's views about a program's purpose to affect assessments of the program's design and purpose .