recruiting has been called the life blood of the military . there are both "quantity" and "quality" goals for the enlisted force . the term retention refers to the rate at which military personnel voluntarily choose to stay in the military after their original obligated term of service has ended . imbalances in the retention rate can cause problems within the military personnel system . a common retention concern is that too few people will stay in , thereby creating a shortage of experienced leaders , decreasing military efficiency , and lowering job satisfaction . this was a particular concern during the middle part of the last decade , as the stress of combat deployments raised concerns about the willingness of military personnel to continue serving . the opposite concern — more salient today in light of reductions in force structure — is that too many people will stay in , thereby decreasing promotion opportunities and possibly requiring involuntarily separations in order to prevent the organization from becoming "top heavy" with middle and upper level leaders or to comply with end - strength limitations . each of these outcomes can have a negative impact on recruiting by making the military a less attractive career option . the nation's most recent experience with force structure cuts illustrates some of the potential impacts that such cuts can have on recruiting and retention . in the aftermath of the cold war , all of the services embarked on major force reduction efforts . needing fewer people , the services significantly reduced their recruiting and retention goals , which in turn made it easier for them to meet these goals . as a result , the services all reported excellent recruiting and retention results in the early 1990s . however , by the late 1990s , the army , navy , and air force began to experience some difficulties . in fy1998 , the army and the navy failed to meet their quantity goals for enlisted recruits , as did the army and the air force in fy1999 . retention shortfalls also surfaced in the army , navy , and air force . there was a wide array of perceived causes for these recruiting and retention shortfalls , including competition with a robust civilian economy and a perceived "pay gap" between civilian and military compensation , competition with institutions of higher education , and demographic and attitudinal changes among younger americans . other cited causes included limited recruiting resources and dissatisfaction with military life , due to the nature of military service and pace of operations ( eg , bosnia and kosovo ) and a lack of critical supplies and equipment . in comparison to the cold war drawdown mentioned above , this current drawdown is smaller in scope for the army , about the same magnitude of reduction for the marine corps , and is focused mainly on these two services rather than all four services ; but a similar dynamic could occur . in such a scenario , recruiting and retention would likely remain strong in the near term due to force reductions and sluggish competition from the civilian economy , but challenges would arise once these factors faded .