there was no focus onterrorism. in the aftermath of september 11 , 2001 , congress moved quickly to pass the aviation andtransportation security act ( atsa , p.l . 107-71 ; 115 stat . designed to correct weaknessesin aviation security exploited by the 9 / 11 hijackers as well as other potential vulnerabilities intransportation systems , atsa established the transportation security administration ( tsa ) as anew organization within the department of transportation responsible for security matters in allmodes of transportation . highlights of atsa included establishing a federal security screener workforce under tsa atairports ; requiring explosive detection screening of all checkedbags ; deploying air marshals on all high risk flights ; and hardening cockpit doors . atsa also gave the tsa broad authority to assess threats to security in all transportationmodes , primarily focusing on aviation , and implement appropriate security measures . in this regard,atsa was seen as a comprehensive legislative vehicle for addressing transportation security witha specific emphasis on aviation security . the following year , the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l . 107-296 ; 116 stat . 2135 ) established the department of homeland security ( dhs ) and placed the tsa within this newdepartment . the act also authorized the arming of airline pilots as an additional measure to protectaircraft against terrorist hijackers . additional aviation security measures were included in the mostrecent faa reauthorization act , vision 100 - century of aviation reauthorization act ( p.l.108-176 ; 117 stat . most notably , vision 100 established an aviation security capital fund tohelp pay for placing explosive detection systems ( eds ) "in - line" with baggage conveyers and sortingfacilities in an effort to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of checked baggage screening andexpanded the program to arm pilots to include pilots of all - cargo aircraft . despite these actions , congressional and administration oversight of aviation security hasidentified several areas of vulnerability that persist . these include air cargo operations ; generalaviation ; access controls for airport employees ; screener performance ; and possible terrorist attacksusing shoulder - fired missiles . the 9 / 11 commission also recognized many of these vulnerabilities . the 9 / 11 commissionconcluded that "[m]ajor vulnerabilities still exist in cargo and general aviation security . these,together with inadequate screening and access controls , continue to present aviation securitychallenges. ( 3 ) based onthese findings , the 9 / 11 commission made specific recommendations regarding improvements toairport passenger and baggage screening , and air cargo security . while the commission identifiedpotential threats posed by inadequate access controls to secured areas of airports and general aviationoperations , it did not issue any recommendations pertaining to these risks . also , while the 9 / 11commission acknowledged concerns raised by previous and current administrations over possibleshoulder - fired missiles attacks against commercial airliners , it did not make any specificrecommendations regarding this threat . the 9 / 11 commission delineated its recommendations regarding aviation security in a sectiontitled "a layered security system. as suggested by this title , the 9 / 11 commission concluded thatthe tsa must implement a multi - layered security system that takes into consideration the full arrayof possible terrorist tactics .