section 1108 of h.r . 2410 calls for a report ( within 180 days of enactment ) that would provide information related to monitoring progress on these recommendations . in the report accompanying h.r . 111-136 ) , the house foreign affairs committee ( hfac ) states that the addition of helicopter refurbishment to gpoi's functions is intended to respond to current critical shortfalls in air assets in ongoing peacekeeping operations in darfur , the democratic republic of congo , and chad , as well as to potential new operations "which would likely face similar shortfalls ... " ( p. 167 ) the bill finds that a shortfall of over 50 helicopters critically hampers those three peacekeeping operations . 2410 , as reported by the committee and passed by the house , does not authorize a specific funding amount for gpoi programs and activities , including helicopter refurbishment . instead , section 1108 would authorize the appropriation of the funds necessary in fy2010 and fy2011 to carry out that section . 111-136 , hfac encourages appropriators "to allot such funds as may be necessary above the president's request" of $96.8 million in order to refurbish helicopters . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that the cost of refurbishing one medium - lift utility helicopter is about $2 million , and that the total cost of implementing gpoi programs and activities over the fy2010-fy2014 period , including the refurbishment of three helicopters by the end of 2011 , would be about $195 billion . over the past few years , the state department responded to concerns of the 109 th and the 110 th congresses to strengthen gpoi . its steps included producing a strategic plan ( the executive summary of which is publically available ) , facilitating procedures to speed planning and implementation , and implementing an evaluation program . as of 2008 , congress requested that the government accountability office ( gao ) investigate a number of remaining issues: the gao expressed several concerns about gpoi performance and management in a june 2008 report . among the points the congress requested the gao to address were ( 1 ) the extent to which contributing and participating countries maintain records and databases ; ( 2 ) the quality and sustainability of the training of individuals and units ; ( 3 ) the extent to which those trained are equipped and remain equipped to deploy in peace operations ; ( 4 ) participating countries capacity to mobilize those trained ; ( 5 ) the extent to which trained individuals are deployed ; and ( 6 ) the extent to which contractors are used and the quality of their results . the committee also requested an assessment of whether gpoi is achieving its goals and recommendations as to whether a country's participation in gpoi "should require reciprocal participation. in its june 2008 report , the gao doubted , based on information available to it in its investigation , that gpoi would be able to reach its goal of training 75,000 peacekeepers by 2010 . the gao stated , however , that it could not evaluate information that the state department subsequently provided to demonstrate that gpoi would reach its goal .