( pp . 133-134 ) the committee recommended eliminating the $7.7 million requested for the modern pit facility ( see appendix ) . it recommended that "nnsa focus its efforts on how best to lengthen the life of the stockpile and minimize the need for an enormously expensive infrastructure facility until the long - term strategy for the physical infrastructure of the weapons complex has incorporated the reliable replacement warhead strategy.... " ( p. 134 ) the committee recommended eliminating the $55.0 million requested for construction of the chemistry and metallurgy research facility replacement ( cmrr ) at los alamos . "construction at the cmrr facility should be delayed until the department [of energy] determines the long - term plan for developing the responsive infrastructure required to maintain the nation's existing nuclear stockpile and support replacement production anticipated for the rrw initiative. ( p. 136 ) the house armed services committee reported the fy2006 national defense authorization bill , h.r . 1815 , on may 20 ( h.rept . the bill passed the house , 390-39 , on may 25 with no amendments concerning rrw . the committee recommended providing the amount requested for rrw . the report stated: "the committee firmly believes that the nation must ensure that the nuclear stockpile remains reliable , safe , and secure and that national security requires transforming the cold war - era nuclear complex . thus , the committee supports the reliable replacement warhead program . office of management and budget . 4986 , into law ( p.l . 110-181 ) on january 28 , 2008 . on december 16 , the house rules committee posted the fy2008 consolidated appropriations bill ( the house amendments to senate amendment to h.r . 2764 , state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2008 ) . the house and senate agreed to this bill through an exchange of amendments , december 17-19 , and the president signed the consolidated appropriations act , fy2008 , into law ( p.l . 110-161 ) december 26 . 110-161 eliminated nnsa rrw funds . according to the explanatory statement , the amended bill provides no funds for the reliable replacement warhead ( rrw ) , as proposed by the house . as stated in both the house and senate reports , congress believes a new strategic nuclear deterrent mission assessment for the 21 st century is required to define the associated stockpile requirements and determine the scope of the weapons complex modernization plans . the nnsa is directed to develop a long - term scientific capability roadmap for the national laboratories to be submitted to the committees on appropriations .