that should not change . the senate's role in the review of executive personnelis but one example of that political relationship . the senate's role in the confirmation process wasdesigned not to eliminate politics but to make possible the use of politics as a safeguard . from theoutset the political motivations of the two branches were to be a protection against tyranny. ( 44 ) "the one enduring characteristic of the process is that it is as deeply and intensely politicalnow as it has always been," ( 45 ) agreed mackenzie . "is there any indication that the senate might smooth the way for futurenominees ? given the profound changes in the chamber over the past twenty - five years - - the greaterlatitude allowed individual members and the intense partisanship that dominates muchdecision - making - - it seems unlikely that reformers would profit much from attempting to reshapesenate procedures. ( 42 ) instead , he argued , "striving to "govern together" by bridging the separate institutions may bevaluable than seeking to change an institution that has proved highly resistant to structuralreforms. ( 43 ) if the history of the confirmation process is more about practices than rules , perhaps it wouldbe useful to consider informal changes in the dynamics that undergird the process . instead of settingup timetables for action , this approach would build upon a view that the problem is not procedural,but political . political scientist christopher j. deering wrote that politics has always been a part of theprocess . "the relationship between the executive and legislative branches has been and remainsessentially political . the process is political , he asserted , becauseits results can have a major impact on policy - making , and therefore , politics . conflict occurs in the appointment process for a verysimple reason . appointments matter . were that not the case , presidential administrations would nothave several dozen white house aides devoting full time to appointment decisions ; senatecommittees would not hold hundreds of hours of confirmation hearings ; interest groups , agencies,political parties and members of the house would not spend their time and resources trying to shapeappointments decisions . yet they do all these things , and they do them because they think it makesa difference who gets appointed to serve in particular federal offices . ( 46 ) as a result , when the process has worked , it frequently was because the two branches ofgovernment found a way to make it work . "the appointment power operates in a framework ofstudied ambiguity , its limits established for the most part not by court decisions but by imaginativeaccommodations between the executive and legislative branches," wrote separation - of - powersscholar fisher . the 9 / 11 commission's proposal provides an occasion for the senate to evaluate the largerquestion of its confirmation process and its role in the presidential appointment process . adoptionof the recommendation , for example , could open the door to consideration of ever more nominationsthrough expedited procedures . what would a new process mean for other presidential nominations,particularly those to the judiciary ? for several years , the senate has been debating the proper role of the president and senatorsin the nomination and confirmation of the nation's federal judges .