for example , under p.l . 107-16 , signed into law in 2001 , the estate tax will not be eliminated until 2010 . this can occur in a number of ways . how is the economy affected by government intervention ? many of the arguments surrounding the proper size of government are economic in nature , and these are discussed in this report . what role does the state play in economic activity ? government activity affects the economy in four ways: the government produces goods and services , including roads and national defense . less than half of federal spending is devoted to the production of goods and services . the government transfers income through both the tax system and outlays . popular perception typically focuses on transfers across income classes through the progressive income tax system and means - tested benefits , referred to as vertical redistribution . but vertical redistribution is dwarfed by horizontal redistribution , transfers unrelated to income class . the largest beneficiaries of transfers are the elderly , through programs such as social security . the government collects taxes , and that alters economic behavior . for instance , taxes on labor change the incentives to work , while taxes on specific goods ( eg , gasoline ) change the incentive to consume and produce those goods . the government regulates economic activity for a number of reasons , including environmental protection , workplace safety , and consumer protection . the economic impact of regulation is probably the hardest and most contentious to measure of the four types of government economic activity . before assessing how the government affects economic activity , it is necessary to agree upon how to measure the size of the government . for a number of reasons , this exercise is less straightforward than it may seem . the size of government can be expressed in a number of different units of measurement . should the size of government be measured in dollars , on a per capita basis , by total employees , or as a percentage of gdp ? each measurement has its advantages , but some measurements have more shortcomings than others . if measured in dollars , then those dollars should be adjusted for inflation . the purpose of measurement is to gauge the resources at the government's disposal , and a dollar of tax revenue in 1946 would buy $11 of goods and services in 2009 because of inflation . measuring the size of government by the number of employees is imprecise because the government can substitute capital for labor over time to accomplish the same tasks with fewer employees . for example , the government's purchase of computers has rendered many clerical jobs obsolete . the federal government can also pay workers in the private labor force through contracts and grants or allow state and local government workers to deliver federal programs in place of federal public servants . one estimate puts the number of private and state and local government workers working for the federal government at more than seven times the size of the federal workforce .