deadline . the provisions require federal agencies to determine whether florida is meeting the deadline , and if not , the provisions state that congress may disapprove fy2004 funding for some everglades restoration projects . this florida state law , chapter 2003-12 , as amended ( hereafter referred to as the amended efa ) changes the everglades forever act of 1994 ( efa ; florida statutes â§373.4592 ) by authorizing a new plan to mitigate phosphorus pollution in the everglades , known as the "everglades protection area tributary basins conceptual plan for achieving long - term water quality goals final report" or long - term plan . this report provides for a planning process to ensure that discharges of water into the everglades will comply with state water quality standards and that phosphorus levels in these waters will not alter the native everglades ecosystem . in contrast to the efa , the new law contains provisions that appear to create flexibility in this goal . for example , the long - term plan is to be implemented from 2003 to 2016 and is expected to "provide the best available phosphorus reduction technology" ( â§3 ( b ) ) . further , the new law allows the long - term plan to be changed through adaptive management , which may lead to changes in the implementation of phosphorus reduction activities and an extension of any compliance deadlines . the amended efa does contain provisions that suggest the december 2006 deadline for meeting the phosphorus criterion is expected to be met . for example , the bill states that "by december 31 , 2006 , the department and the district shall take such action as may be necessary to implement the pre - 2006 projects and strategies of the long - term plan so that water delivered to the everglades protection area achieves in all parts of the everglades protection area state water quality standards , including the phosphorus criterion and moderating provisions" ( â§3 ( b ) ) . note that this provision requires the implementation of projects and strategies by december 2006 to achieve the phosphorus criterion , but does not require the phosphorus criterion be met by 2006 . the new law does not specify a particular date by which the phosphorus criterion must be met . the long - term plan also specifies that a second 10-year phase ( 2017-2026 ) to reduce phosphorus may be necessary to achieve the plan objective . the objective in the plan is to obtain , to the maximum extent practicable , a long - term geometric average phosphorus concentration in waters discharged to the everglades that is within the upper annual concentration limit of the criterion as calculated in the 2003 everglades consolidated report . this mean has been defined by the florida department of environmental protection as 10 ppb over a 5-year period , with no single year going beyond 15 ppb . phosphorus is one of the primary water pollutants in the everglades and is generally thought to be caused by natural leaching , urban runoff , and agricultural runoff from sugar plantations , vegetable farms , and livestock operations ( eg , from animal waste ) .