the u.s. lng industry is growing quickly . while rising lng imports may offer economic benefits , they also pose risks . lng infrastructure is inherently hazardous and it is potentially attractive to terrorists . furthermore , because their security has been subject to intense public scrutiny , new lng terminal and tanker operations may be safer than they might have been without such scrutiny and their siting may be less likely to be challenged at a later time when construction is already underway . the construction and subsequent closure of the shoreham nuclear power plant in the 1980's due to new public opposition offers an example of the need to resolve safety and security concerns before capital is invested . from a purely economic perspective , therefore , the added costs of building more heavily protected lng terminals potentially farther from their primary markets may represent the u.s. public's willingness to pay for lng security . whether this implicit price of lng security is reasonable is an open question , but the continued interest of private companies to invest billions of dollars in u.s. lng terminals suggests that it will not prevent needed lng development . as congress continues its oversight of lng infrastructure development , it may decide to examine the public costs and resource requirements of lng security , especially in light of dramatically increasing lng imports . in particular , congress may consider whether future lng security requirements will be appropriately funded , whether these requirements will be balanced against evolving risks , and whether the lng industry is carrying its fair share of the security burden . congress may also act to improve its understanding of lng security risks . costly "blanket" investments in lng security might be avoided if more refined terror threat information were available to focus security spending on a narrower set of infrastructure vulnerabilities . finally , congress may initiate action to better understand the security and trade implications of efforts to promote u.s. - flagged lng tankers . in addition to these specific issues , congress might consider how the various elements of u.s. lng security activity fit together in the nation's overall strategy to protect critical infrastructure . maintaining high levels of security around lng tankers , for example , may be of limited benefit if other hazardous marine cargoes are less well - protected . u.s. lng security also requires coordination among many groups: international treaty organizations , federal agencies , state and local agencies , trade associations and lng infrastructure operators . reviewing how these groups work together to achieve common security goals could be an oversight challenge for congress . this overview focuses on the three major elements of this infrastructure: tanker ships , marine terminals , and storage facilities . but lng is a hazardous liquid transported and stored in large quantities . consequently , lng infrastructure may directly impact the security of communities where this infrastructure is located . technology improvements and standards since the 1940s have made lng facilities much safer , but serious hazards remain since lng is inherently volatile and is shipped and stored in large quantities . a january 2004 accident at algeria's skikda lng terminal which killed or injured over 100 workers added to the ongoing controversy over lng facility safety .