table 1 . nominees for chief justice of the united states , 1789 to the present: dates of nomination , finalaction bythe senate or president , judicial oath and termination of service , and ages at times of appointment and termination of service sources : william d. bader and roy m. mersky , the first one hundred justices , ( buffalo: william s. hein & co. , inc. , 2004 ) ; artemus ward , deciding to leave , ( albany: state university of new york press , 2003 ) ; journal of the executive proceedings of the senate of the united states ofamerica ( various volumes ) ; the supreme court of the united states ( an undated pamphlet published by the united states supreme court ) ; and maevamarcus and james r. perry , editors , the documentary history of the supreme court of the united states , 1789-1800 ( new york: columbia universitypress , 1985 ) . legend: name in bold - - was serving as associate justice at time of nomination to be chief justice . name in italics - - had earlier served as associate justice , prior to , but not at , time of nomination to be chief justice . name in bold italics - - had earlier served as chief justice . the mechanics of a switch would not be hard . bushwould withdraw roberts's nomination as associate justice and then simultaneously nominate himas chief justice . bush could then take his time choosing someone else to replace o'connor becauseshe has agreed to remain on the court until her successor's confirmation . ( 149 ) indeed , the very morning on which the above news report appeared , president bush wouldannounce his selection of judge roberts to be chief justice . in doing so , the president alsoemphasized that , from his perspective , the senate was "well along in the process of consideringjudge roberts' qualifications. ( 150 ) the next day , september 6 , 2005 , the chairman of thejudiciary committee , the committee's ranking democratic member , and senate leaders announceda new schedule for judge roberts' confirmation hearings , this time as nominee to be chief justice . hearings on the nomination of judge roberts for chief justice were held by the judiciarycommittee on september 12 , 13 , 14 and 15 , ( 151 ) and on september 22 , the judiciary committee approved theroberts nomination by a vote of 13-5 , with three democrats on the committee joining all 10republicans in favor of judge roberts . ( 152 ) the committee action sent the nomination to the full senate,where a vote on confirmation is expected on september 29 . in the full senate , members will evaluate judge roberts' fitness to be chief justiceaccording to their own criteria and concerns . in large part , their concerns will mirror the traditionalconcerns of presidents with professional excellence , character , and leadership qualities in a chiefjustice nominee . some senators , however , also will be concerned with the nominee's judicialphilosophy or views on constitutional issues and how , in their view , the appointment might affectthe court's future direction on major legal and constitutional questions .