table 1 . china's acquisitions under reported contracts formilitary - related systems from europe ( excluding russia ) , israel , and others since the1990s table 2 . itar waivers . on june 22 , 2004 , the senateapproved an amendment ( s.amdt . 3429 ) to the national defense authorization act forfy2005 ( s. 2400 ) that would have waived section 38 ( j ) of the arms export controlact for the u.k. ( and australia ) . what are the implicationsfor u.s. political and security interests concerning europe and china ? if u.s. interests are adverselyaffected , what are some options for congress to discourage the eu from lifting its arms embargo onchina and , if it is lifted , to protect u.s. national security interests ? the purpose of this crs reportis to discuss u.s. concerns and implications for u.s. interests , as the eu considers the future of thearms embargo , as well as options for u.s. policy . given strenuous u.s. objections , there are concerns that a decision made by the eu to expandengagement with china by lifting the arms embargo would negatively impact the trans - atlanticalliance ( if there is a division in u.s. and european approaches toward china ) and defensecooperation ( if the united states responds by restricting technology transfers to europe or defenseprocurement from europe ) . at the same time , the current disagreement presents an opportunity forcloser coordination of u.s. - european policies , including controls over military - related exports andstrategy towards china . the united states has important interests in maintaining strong allianceswith common approaches toward a rising china . like europe , washington increasingly has engaged beijing on the economic , political , andmilitary fronts . a fundamental issue , then , has been how engagement is pursued and whether itcontributes to a more responsible china in domestic and international affairs or aggravatesdevelopments in china with adverse implications . for decades , u.s. - prc relations have expandedwith trade and cooperation on international issues . there remain western concerns , however , aboutrestrictions on human rights and democracy in china , and about the impact of china's weaponsproliferation practices and military buildup on peace and stability in asia and other regions aroundthe world . because some european companies have transferred defense - related systems to china underthe arms embargo that is not legally binding , the united states has called for the eu to maintain theembargo and strengthen export controls . there are fears that any acceleration of china's militarymodernization with european defense technology would result in instability in the taiwan strait,which could involve u.s. military intervention . this concern stems from one dilemma for u.s.policy: adherence to the "one china" policy since the nixon administration started secret talks withthe prc in 1971 while maintaining diplomatic relations with the republic of china ( commonlycalled taiwan ) until 1979 and unofficial relations since then . taiwan remains the major u.s. - prc issue that could bring the countries into conflict . the1979 taiwan relations act ( tra ) , p.l . 96-8 , governs u.s. policy toward taiwan , including offeringarms to assist its self - defense .