the wars in the former yugoslavia were ended . all of the countries of the region are undertaking political and economic reforms and orienting their foreign policies toward euro - atlantic institutions . u.s. officials have stated that ensuring the stability of the balkans is an important part of a u.s. vital interest in securing a europe whole , free , and at peace . for more than thirteen years , the united states has provided significant aid and troop deployments to the balkans in support of this goal . both aid amounts and the u.s. troop commitments have declined as the region has stabilized and more pressing u.s. foreign policy priorities have emerged . at the same time , the european union has increased its role , with the ultimate goal of extending eu membership to the countries of the region . however , analysts believe the united states still may have an important role to play in the balkans . observers note that the united states has political credibility in the region , particularly among bosniaks and albanians , which the europeans may lack . in particularly , some analysts say that greater u.s. diplomatic engagement is needed to re - energize constitutional reforms in bosnia , which have languished since 2006 . the region may have a higher strategic profile given u.s. use of military bases in romania and bulgaria , which could be useful for u.s. operations in the middle east . continued u.s. attention may also be needed to uproot possible terrorist networks in the region . congress has played an important role in shaping u.s. balkans policy . members of congress spoke out strongly against atrocities by serbian forces in croatia and bosnia in the early 1990s . some members pushed for lifting the arms embargo against the bosniaks , so that they could better defend themselves . congressional pressure may have encouraged the clinton administration to play a bigger role in stopping the fighting in bosnia , ultimately culminating in the dayton peace accords in 1995 . congress also played an important role in supporting the international criminal tribunal for the former yugoslavia and pressing for the arrest and transfer of indictees . despite the activism of some members on these issues , many in congress remained cautious about u.s. military involvement in the balkans . the deployment of u.s. peacekeepers in bosnia in 1995 and the air war in kosovo in 1999 provoked heated debate in congress , in part due to policy disagreements , in part due to partisan conflict between the clinton administration and a republican - led congress . however , despite sometimes harsh criticism , both military missions received full congressional funding . nevertheless , concerns about the costs of open - ended missions led congress to try several strategies to limit these uncertainties . these included pressing the administration to set benchmarks for the deployments and to report on them . congress also sought to limit u.s. engagement by pushing for greater burdensharing . as a result of legislation and congressional pressure , the u.s. aid and troop contributions in bosnia and kosovo were capped at no more than 15% of the total contributions of all countries .