several of these issues are discussed below . however , it is important to place the bayh - dole act in context . the law is one significant factor in expanded industry , university , small business collaboration , but not the only one . therefore , it may be difficult to assess what concerns are the direct result of the bayh - dole act and which arise from the overall research environment . the rising costs associated with the performance of research and development , the availability of venture capital , increased r&d outsourcing by large firms , and expanded federal funding for biomedical research all contribute to increased interaction among the parties . additional legislative initiatives including the research and experimentation tax credit , the national cooperative research act , the small business technology transfer program , the advanced technology program , and cooperative r&d agreements established by the stevenson - wydler technology innovation act all facilitate joint r&d activities leading to the commercialization of new technologies for the marketplace . the discussion surrounding changes to the patent laws in the 1980s , and the debate over technology transfer since the late 1970s , acknowledged many of the issues currently being explored . as a result of expressed concerns , certain safeguards were built into the activities authorized by the bayh - dole act . as discussed previously , march - in rights , the government's retention of an irrevocable license to patents generated under federally funded r&d , publication requirements , and commercialization schedules , among other things , all are incorporated into the process to protect the public interest . while there is a potential for creating an "unfair" advantage for one company over another , this is balanced against the need for new technologies and techniques and their contribution to the well - being of the nation . despite arguments that title should remain in the public sector where it is accessible to all interested parties , the earlier lack of exclusivity appeared to interfere with the further development and commercialization of federally funded r&d . during the 1980s , congress determined that the dispensation of patent rights to universities , small businesses , and nonprofit institutions and cooperative efforts took precedence , projecting the greater good generated by new products and processes that improve the country's health and welfare . lawmakers anticipated the economic benefits through increased revenues from profits , wages , and salaries . the government receives a significant payback through taxes on profits and society benefits from new jobs created and expanded productivity . the importance of patent ownership has been reinforced by the positive effects studies have demonstrated p.l . 96 - 517 is reported to have had on the emergence of new technologies and new techniques generated by american companies . there remain areas of concern , as discussed above , that congress may decide to pursue . some argue , particularly with respect to pharmaceuticals and biotechnology , that under the bayh - dole act companies are receiving too many benefits at the expense of the public . others , particularly in the defense arena , assert that the existing rights retained by the government under the act are too restrictive and are an impediment to meeting federal needs .