, among several other provisions . 884 would provide a stable workforce for growers and more job stability for workers , give workers better wages and working conditions , and let responsible guest workers earn the right to stay in the united states , among other things . opponents of the bills largely frame their arguments in terms of immigration policy , arguing that the measures would give amnesty to illegal immigrants , and make it easier for criminals and terrorists to get into the country . § 499a et seq .

 ) more specifically , it requires paca - regulated retailers ( those selling at least $230,000 a year in fruits and vegetables ) to inform consumers of the origin of these products "by means of a label , stamp , mark , placard , or other clear and visible sign on the covered commodity or on the package , display , holding unit , or bin containing the commodity at the final point of sale to consumers. the 2002 law required the labeling to be implemented by september 30 , 2004 . house - senate conferees on the fy2004 consolidated appropriation act ( h.r . 108-199 ) , which incorporated usda funding , agreed to language to delay the september 30 , 2004 , mandatory labeling date for fruits and vegetables ( and other commodities ) until september 30 , 2006 . the usda appropriations act for fy2006 postponed the date two more years — until september 30 , 2008 ( p.l . the united fresh produce association generally is not in favor of mandatory cool . beginning with consideration of the 2002 farm bill cool provision , ufpa officials have maintained that the program should be voluntary , and that cool laws should apply to all food items and cover all channels of distribution , including food service sales . the industry is concerned that a mandatory program will lead retailers to try to shift the burden of labeling back up the chain to packer / shippers and producers . opponents of mandatory cool point out that the industry has voluntarily labeled u.s. - grown produce and tree nuts for years , and that the trend in supermarkets and other retail outlets also has been toward increased cool in response to consumer preferences . proponents of a mandatory cool program ( which include the american farm bureau , the national farmers union , some domestic fruit and vegetable producers , and some consumer organizations ) argue that consumers have a right to choose which foods they buy based on knowledge of their source , particularly since imports are increasing at a fast pace , and thus the risk is higher that foods with health and safety problems could enter the u.s. marketplace . although imported fruits and vegetables have been the source of some foodborne illness outbreaks ( eg , the hepatitis a outbreak in november 2003 , linked to green onions from mexico ) , illness caused by pathogenic organisms in u.s. - grown produce also occurs , as it did with an outbreak of illness from e. coli o157:h7 contamination of fresh spinach from california in october 2006 .