france was at the center of these disputes . a key point of contention was the amount of flexibility that nato forces would be granted to protect civilians and civilian areas . reports indicate that french officials insisted on maintaining the ability to strike ground forces that threatened civilian areas , while their turkish counterparts vocally opposed any targeting of ground forces . although the allies ultimately agreed on the terms of their military engagement , some of the aforementioned tensions have reemerged over the course of the mission . in particular , french and british officials have urged more allies to join the mission and have called on those participating to increase their contributions . they have also criticized many of those countries taking part in operation unified protector for placing operational restrictions on their forces that forbid them to attack qadhafi's ground forces . many observers speculate that domestic political considerations were a key factor behind president sarkozy's decision to lead international diplomatic and military efforts in libya . sarkozy , who is struggling to boost his public approval ratings ahead of the 2012 presidential election , appears to enjoy the support of a wide majority of the french public for his handling of the situation in libya . that said , a drawn - out military mission with no foreseeable resolution could also damage the president's political prospects . most core interests remain similar . both countries' governments have embraced the opportunity to build stability in europe through an expanded eu and nato . each has accepted the need to ensure that russia remain constructively engaged in european affairs . each has also recognized that terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction are the most important threats today . post - cold war developments have brought new challenges , which have affected the u.s. - french bilateral relationship . german unification and the entry of central european states into the eu and nato may have shifted the continent's balance of political and economic power away from the french - german "engine" and towards central and eastern europe . while french - german initiatives remain of great importance in europe , german perspectives are increasingly eastward ; and , in some eyes , central european states feel closer strategically and politically to the united states than they do to france . nonetheless , france remains a key player in european affairs and few initiatives can succeed without its support and participation . the united states , a global superpower since the second world war , has remained deeply involved in european affairs . in the view of some europeans , however , by the mid - 1990s , washington appeared to be slowly disengaging from europe , while wanting at the same time to maintain leadership on the continent . french and german efforts to form an eu security policy potentially independent of nato and the united states emerged and evolved in this period . the europeans based this policy in part on the belief that the united states had growing priorities beyond europe , and in part because americans and europeans were choosing different means to protect their interests .