cuts in the russia program . each year since fy2001 , aid to russia has been decreased . under the fy2008 request , fsa assistance would again be cut to $50 million from a level of $80 million in fy2006 . these cuts are meant to lead to a total "phase - out" of the russia fsa account aid program in the next several years . there are no current plans to eliminate the dod or doe non - proliferation programs to russia . although the fsa program was not established with any firm deadline in mind , most observers assumed that the program was "transitional" and would not run as long as programs in developing countries . the majority of specific restrictions have been aimed at russia . these include directions that aid be cut or withheld if russia implemented a law discriminating against religious minorities , if its troops remained in the baltics , if it did not provide ngo access to chechnya , or if it did not cooperate with war crime investigations in chechnya . to become eligible for the program , countries must meet certain standards of behavior related to governance , social development , and economic freedom . while armenia , for example , appears to have met those standards sufficient to warrant a compact agreement , it also has been warned that it must maintain them or risk losing aid . even as its $236 million award was announced in december 2005 , a letter from the mcc to armenia's president kocharian suggested that steps be taken to correct problems , particularly with regard to charges of electoral fraud and media restrictions in the november 2005 constitutional referendum . currently , the most difficult conditionality issue arises with respect to human rights in central asia . the authoritarian governments of the so - called "stans" were not seen as fertile territory for u.s. assistance in the 1990s . consequently , most received minimal aid . in the fy2006 foreign operations appropriations , for example , aid to the central government of uzbekistan was conditioned on its making "substantial and continuing" progress in human rights and democratization . aid to the government of kazakhstan similarly depended on its improvements in protection of human rights , although the condition could be waived on national security grounds ; secretary of state rice most recently employed the waiver in may 2006 . although the house version of the fy2007 foreign operations bill , h.r . 5522 , did not contain the uzbekistan or kazakhstan language , foreign assistance appropriators reportedly expect the administration to respect fy2006 terms and conditions under the fy2007 continuing resolution . in 2004 , the secretary of state was unable to make a determination allowing uzbek government aid to go forward , and $18 million planned for the central government was withheld . at the same time , dod waived a human rights requirement under the nunn - lugar cooperative threat reduction legislation to allow non - proliferation aid to uzbekistan . following a violent uzbek government response to unarmed demonstrators in mid - may 2005 and critical comments by the united states , relations between the united states and uzbekistan have been strained .