international investment not only has an impact on the u.s. economy , but it is affected by the economy . investment funds that are flowing into direct investment and into corporate stocks and bonds presumably are being used to bolster investments in plant and equipment and other investments that aid in improving productivity over the long run . as such , those investments may well provide a boost to u.s. economic growth well into the future . foreign investment in u.s. treasury securities directly aids in financing the federal government's budget deficits and indirectly eases the federal government's demands on domestic credit markets , which assists u.s. firms and consumer consumption by freeing up capital in the economy and by relieving some of the pressure on domestic interest rates . one growing concern among some policymakers is the rising amount of investment by foreign governments in u.s. businesses , real estate , and portfolio assets ( corporate stocks and bonds , and u.s. government securities ) . such investments by foreign governments are bolstered by the growing holdings of u.s. currency by foreign governments , known as sovereign wealth funds , which are estimated to amount to more than $2.5 trillion . u.s. policy toward foreign investment generally has been one of acceptance and openness . investments by foreign governments , however , are viewed by some as a new and different kind of investment that bears greater scrutiny . such investments by foreign governments are viewed by some as contrary to long - standing u.s. policies which have encouraged foreign governments to shift away from owning businesses enterprises and to support private ownership . for some observers , investments by foreign governments also raise the potential for official interference into a broad range of market activities . there is no evidence to date that ownership of various u.s. assets by foreign governments , by itself , has affected the management of those assets or the markets in which they exist in ways that differ from ownership by private foreign entities . nevertheless , such concerns likely helped motivate congress to pass , and president bush to sign on july 26 , 2007 , p.l . 110-49 , the foreign investment and national security act of 2007 , which increased congressional oversight over acquisitions of u.s. businesses by foreign governments . some observers contend that a sharp decline in capital inflows or a sudden withdrawal of foreign capital from the economy could spark a financial crisis . congress likely would find itself embroiled in any such financial crisis through its direct role in conducting fiscal policy and in its indirect role in the conduct of monetary policy through its supervisory responsibility over the federal reserve . such a coordinated withdrawal seems highly unlikely , particularly since the vast majority of the investors are private entities that presumably would find it difficult to coordinate a withdrawal . short of a financial crisis , events that cause foreign investors to curtail or limit their purchases of u.s. securities likely would complicate efforts to finance budget deficits in the current environment without such foreign actions having an impact on u.s. interest rates , domestic investment , and long - term rate of growth .