additionally , p.l . 112-239 raised award caps ( up to $9 million ) and lowered matching requirements for fire departments serving higher population areas . the conference report ( h.rept . 111-16 ) cited dhs estimates that this spending would create 2,000 jobs . the arra also included a provision ( ยง603 ) that waived the matching requirement for safer grants funded by appropriations in fy2009 and fy2010 . the application period for arra assistance to firefighters fire station construction grants ( scg ) opened on june 11 and closed on july 10 , 2009 . there is no cost share requirement for scg grants . eligible applicants are nonfederal fire departments that provide fire protection services to local communities . ineligible applicants include federal fire departments , ems or rescue organizations , airport fire departments , for - profit fire departments , fire training centers , emergency communications centers , auxiliaries and fire service organizations or associations , and search and rescue teams or similar organizations without fire suppression responsibilities . dhs / fema received 6,025 scg applications for $9.9 billion in federal funds . as of october 1 , 2010 , 119 scg grants were awarded , totaling $207.461 million to fire departments within the united states . a complete list of scg awards is available at http: / / www.fema.gov / rules - tools / assistance - firefighters - station - construction - grants . in response to concerns over the adequacy of firefighter staffing , the 108 th congress enacted the staffing for adequate fire and emergency response ( safer ) act as section 1057 of the fy2004 national defense authorization act ( p.l . 108-136 ; signed into law november 24 , 2003 ) . the safer grant program is codified as section 34 of the federal fire prevention and control act of 1974 ( 15 u.s.c . the safer act authorizes grants to career , volunteer , and combination fire departments for the purpose of increasing the number of firefighters to help communities meet industry minimum standards and attain 24-hour staffing to provide adequate protection from fire and fire - related hazards . also authorized are grants to volunteer fire departments for activities related to the recruitment and retention of volunteers . firefighting activities are traditionally the responsibility of states and local communities . on may 13 , 2003 , the u.s. fire administration ( usfa ) released the first independent evaluation of the assistance to firefighters program . conducted by the u.s. department of agriculture's leadership development academy executive potential program , the survey study presented a number of recommendations and concluded overall that the program was "highly effective in improving the readiness and capabilities of firefighters across the nation. as such , funding for firefighters is provided mostly by state and local governments . during the 1990s , shortfalls in state and local budgets , coupled with increased responsibilities of local fire departments , led many in the fire community to call for additional financial support from the federal government .