, 2 maps . what factors should determine whether to open the area ? if it is opened , how can damages be avoided , minimized , or mitigated ? to what extent should congress legislate special management of the area ( if it is developed ) , and to what extent should federal agencies be allowed to manage the area under existing law ? if congress takes no action , the refuge remains closed to energy development , as provided in section 1003 of p.l . basic information on the refuge can be found at the fws website , http: / / arctic.fws.gov / . a presentation of some arguments in favor of development can be found at http: / / www.anwr.org , sponsored by arctic power , a nonprofit coalition of most groups supporting anwr energy development . some opponents' arguments can be found at http: / / www.alaskawild.org / places - we - protect / arctic - refuge / , supported by the alaska wilderness league , or at http: / / www.protectthearctic.com / , supported by the national audubon society . maps of the coastal plain showing existing oil development areas on state and federal land can be found at http: / / dog.dnr.alaska.gov / gis / maps.htm . on - site research on any oil resources in the 1002 area has not been carried out since the mid - 1980s , in light of the fact that development and activities leading to development continue to be prohibited by section 1003 of anilca . however , some additional modeling of older data , aided by results from exploration on nearby onshore or offshore tracts , has produced a few new interpretations from time to time . in consequence , many older publications remain useful , and are included below . crs report 98-814 , budget reconciliation legislation: development and consideration , by bill heniff jr. crs report rl30862 , the budget reconciliation process: the senate's "byrd rule" , by bill heniff jr. crs report 98-815 , budget resolution enforcement , by bill heniff jr. crs report rl31033 , energy efficiency and renewable energy fuel equivalents to potential oil production from the arctic national wildlife refuge ( anwr ) , by fred sissine . crs report rl31115 , legal issues related to proposed drilling for oil and gas in the arctic national wildlife refuge ( anwr ) , by pamela baldwin . crs report rs22326 , legislative maps of anwr , by m. lynne corn . crs report rl32108 , north slope infrastructure and the anwr debate , by m. lynne corn . crs report rs22143 , oil and gas leasing in the arctic national wildlife refuge ( anwr ) : the 2,000-acre limit , by m. lynne corn and pamela baldwin . crs report rs20368 , overview of the congressional budget process , by bill heniff jr. crs report rs20602 , presidential authority to create a national monument on the coastal plain of the arctic national wildlife refuge , and possible effects of designation , by pamela baldwin . crs report rl31447 , wilderness: overview , management , and statistics , by katie hoover . ( see above comment on older reports. )