no action on h.r . 4458 has been scheduled by the house committee on the judiciary , and no comparable legislation has been introduced in the senate . similar legislation was introduced in the 109 th congress ( h.r . 682 and s. 1388 ) , but was not acted upon . 4458 would make a number of changes to the rfa — all of which are supported by the sba office of advocacy and small business representatives . for example , section 3 of the bill would amend section 601 of the rfa and define "economic impact" to include direct economic effects of a rule on small entities as well as any indirect effect "which is reasonably foreseeable and results from such rule. section 4 of the bill would make several changes to the rfa's requirements — adding new analytical or reporting requirements , and adding to the level of detail in existing requirements . for example , whereas the rfa currently requires an initial regulatory flexibility analysis to contain a "description" of the reasons why the agency action is being considered and a "succinct statement" of the objectives of and legal basis for the proposed rule , h.r . 4458 would require a "detailed statement" describing those elements . section 5 of h.r . 4458 would amend section 610 of the rfa and establish new requirements for the periodic review of rules . specifically , within 180 days after enactment , the bill would require agencies to publish in the federal register and on their websites a plan for reviewing all existing rules that the agency heads determine have a "significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities" — regardless of whether the agency published a final regulatory flexibility analysis under section 604 of the rfa at the time the rule was promulgated . the plan would have to provide for the review of all existing rules within 10 years after the enactment of the legislation ( although the agency head could extend that deadline by two years if completion of the review was not feasible ) , and for the review of rules issued after enactment within 10 years of their publication in the federal register . also , each agency would have to publish a list of the rules to be reviewed pursuant to the plan , including why the agency determined each rule has a significant impact , and would have to request comments from the public , the sba chief counsel for advocacy , and the regulatory enforcement ombudsman on the "enforcement" of the rule . finally , the bill would require agencies to submit a report annually to congress and , for agencies other than independent regulatory agencies , to the oira administrator . the annual report is to include ( 1 ) the identification of any rule for which the agency head had "made a determination" regarding whether the rule overlaps or conflicts with other rules , and the length of time since the rule had previously been evaluated ; and ( 2 ) a "detailed explanation of the reasons for such determination. 4458 would clarify how agencies' reviews under section 610 of the rfa should be conducted .