however , there is no guarantee that this pattern will continue in the future . in fact , it is unreasonable to extrapolate historical excess cost growth indefinitely , because that would result in health care eventually consuming 100% of gdp . unfortunately , although there is great uncertainty about what future rate of excess cost growth above growth in gdp per capita is reasonable , federal health spending projections are highly sensitive to this assumption . to illustrate the sensitivity , figure 3 compares cbo's projection of federal health spending to two other scenarios: that the historical growth rates of 2% persisted and that excess cost growth is eliminated . under the extended baseline scenario , where the tax cuts and amt patch were assumed to expire ( as scheduled under current law ) , physician payments are cut as scheduled under law , and non - entitlement spending were reduced to all - time lows relative to gdp , deficits would rise more slowly , but still exceed 4% of gdp after 2035 . another way to measure the imbalance in future government finances is through the fiscal gap concept , which refers to the immediate reduction in spending or increase in taxes that would be required in order to prevent the federal debt from rising relative to gdp over the projection window . cbo estimates a fiscal gap of 4.8% of gdp over the next 25 years and 8.3% of gdp over the next 75 years under current policy . to close this fiscal gap for the next 25 years , would require reducing primary spending by 20% , raising total revenues by 25% , or some combination of the two . although the magnitude of these changes would be unprecedented , delay would require even larger cuts in the future . although these options are undesirable , they cannot be postponed indefinitely ( if the projections prove to be accurate ) for reasons discussed in the next section . policymakers do have a wide array of choices concerning the form the tax increases or spending cuts could take , however . reform may encompass several goals — altering the redistributive characteristics of the system , giving people more choices about the form their benefits take , and so on . this section considers reform options in light of only one goal — altering current policy to achieve future fiscal solvency — because changes to the status quo are unavoidable under current projections . likewise , discretionary spending is set annually through the appropriations process , so many valid assumptions could be made about its future size . the "alternative fiscal scenario" assumption that nondefense discretionary spending will stay close to its pre - recession share of gdp is consistent with historical trends and seems reasonable for a long - term projection . figure 4 illustrates spending as a share of gdp through 2035 under this scenario . under the alternative fiscal scenario assumptions about current policy and future excess cost growth , the increase in entitlement spending would not be matched by increases in general revenues or decreases in other spending , and would need to be entirely deficit financed . by 2047 , social security and federal health spending alone are projected to exceed total revenues .