this method has been used before . for example , collectors of internal revenue , collectors of customs , and postmasters were all converted from pas positions to competitive service positions during reorganizations of the agencies within which they resided . two of these three reorganizations were accomplished through presidential reorganization authority , which is currently dormant . the constitution uses categories — "ambassadors , other public ministers and consuls , judges of the supreme court" — to specify which positions must be filled through appointment by the president with the advice and consent of the senate . what are some alternative ways for approaching this task ? although the president's role has evolved into that of chief manager of the federal bureaucracy , congress has a clear and longstanding role as co - manager of the national administration . the role of the senate in the appointment process is just one of the ways congress is involved in shaping the organization and activities of federal governmental entities and programs . congress establishes departments and agencies , and , to whatever degree it chooses , the internal organization of agencies . congress , through law , also determines the missions of agencies , defines the parameters of personnel systems , provides funding through the appropriations process , and ultimately determines , through the authorization process , whether agencies and programs shall continue in existence . congress also co - manages the federal bureaucracy through its oversight role . senators sometimes use confirmation hearings as one venue for conducting oversight . what institutional and political considerations are relevant in the decision making process ? in such a case , congress , particularly the senate , may have reduced influence over the selection of the individual , and it gives up the opportunity to consider the individual's merits . in addition , congressional committees may have greater difficulty obtaining testimony from an appointee who has not been confirmed by the senate . as previously mentioned , the senate usually gains , during the confirmation process , a commitment from the nominee to respond to requests to come before committees of the senate . this commitment may not be necessary , under most circumstances , to obtain testimony . an argument could be made that congress has the authority to call most officers with operational duties , regardless of appointment status , before its committees . as a practical matter , however , the commitment obtained at the time of confirmation may make this process easier for congress . congress could strengthen its oversight ability by stipulating , in law , that all officers with operational responsibilities are obligated to respond to congressional committees of jurisdiction . several participants in the political process , including congress , the president , agency heads , and interest groups , have a political stake in the arrangements by which the number and distribution of pas positions are determined . although certain high - level policymaking positions , such as secretary and administrator , are routinely subject to the advice and consent of the senate , many subordinate pas positions require confirmation because congress asserted its constitutional prerogative .