that's unambiguousas far as i am concerned. ( 6 ) on november 15 , 2002 , the fbi stated , "sources suggest al qaeda may favor spectacularattacks that meet several criteria: high symbolic value , mass casualties , severe damage to the u.s.economy and maximum psychological trauma. ( 7 ) despite the tone of the warning , white house spokesman scottmcclellan said the national alert status would remain unchanged . although the previous two examples did not represent official public announcements , theeffect was the same in that both of these events were widely publicized . both statements may havebeen analytically correct , however a potentially troublesome precedent was being set by seniorofficials offering diverging interpretations of the nation's threat environment in a public forum . the attorney general announced that based on "credibleintelligence from multiple sources , al qaeda intends to attack the united states in the next fewmonths . this disturbing intelligence indicates al qaeda's specific intention to hit the united stateshard. ashcroft said the intelligence - - along with recent public statements attributed to al qaeda - - "suggest that it is almost ready to attack the united states. he further stated that after the march11 train bombings in madrid , spain , an al qaeda spokesman said the network had completed "90percent of preparations" to attack the united states . ( 23 ) during this press conference a reporter asked if there was credible intelligence suggestingthe united states is going to be attacked between now and the election , why the threat level had notbeen raised . attorney general ashcroft responded that "the homeland security council , led bysecretary ridge , would make such a decision , and for me to try to speak for them at this time wouldbe inappropriate. ( 24 ) after mr. ashcroft's announcement , mr. ridge seemed surprised by the attorney general's warning.asked why the national color - code alert had not been raised , mr. ridge replied "there is nothingspecific enough ( to raise the alert level ) . this seemingly uncoordinated effort was followed by a response from representativechristopher cox , chairman of the house select committee on homeland security . "disseminationby our government of sensitive terrorism warnings must be closely coordinated across ourintelligence and law enforcement communities," cox said . "in the homeland security act , dhs wasassigned the central coordinating role in this process . the absence of secretary ridge fromyesterday's news conference held by the attorney general and the fbi director , and the conflictingpublic messages their separate public appearances delivered to the nation , suggests that the broadand close interagency consultation we expect , and which the law requires , did not take place in thiscase. ( 25 ) these last two examples are cited by many observers as suggesting a general lack ofcoordination and unity in message of warnings to the nation of threats , and also reflecting a lack ofoverall collaboration between dhs and other federal intelligence community and law enforcementorganizations . homeland security employees have complained that their cia and fbi colleaguesshow them little respect . intelligence agents reportedly counter saying that dhs has been known togo public with terror alerts based on information that other agencies found to be sketchy .