private screening operations . table 1 . airports in the security screening pilotprogram the tsa recently contracted with bearing point and abt associates to develop a comparative assessment technique and conduct a formal evaluation comparing airports in the privatescreening pilot program to airports with federal screeners . however , the implementation of theprivate screening program has not been without criticism . this criticism points to perceived flawsin the pilot program that may limit the conclusions that can be drawn from this ongoing evaluation . first , the limited scope of the pilot program raises concern that inferences drawn fromcomparing these five airports to other airports under the federal screening system may not trulyrepresent differences between private screening contracts and federal screening operations , but maysimply reflect airport specific characteristics unique to the sites chosen for the pilot program . fiveairports represent only about one percent of the total number of u.s. airports ( currently 445 ) withscheduled passenger service where airport passenger screening is required , and the number oforiginating passengers at these five airports represent less than 4 percent of the nationwidetotal . ( 47 ) furthermore,only one airport from each of the 5 airport security risk categories is represented in the pilot program . so , in essence , the sample size for evaluating the effectiveness of private screening is only one datapoint per risk category . moreover , the selection of airports was not done randomly . rather,selections were made from airport who voluntarily elected to apply for private screening under thepilot program . therefore , there was no process to select a representative sample of airports forparticipation in the pilot program . because of the limited scope of the pilot program , observations and statistical conclusionsregarding the program are open to criticism regardless of what they indicate . as advocates forexpanding the pilot program have pointed out , findings from the current pilot program may beskewed by confounding local factors for a given airport or a given security contractor and may notbe representative of private screening operations in general . for this reason , an expanded pilotprogram , consisting of 5-10 percent of commercial passenger airports , was originally advocated asa means for providing a more meaningful basis for evaluating private screening programs . ( 48 ) however , as mandated,the pilot program consists of only 5 airports . this is not to say that assessments of the pilot program airports cannot reveal valuableinsights and data to assist airports in identifying many of the pros and cons of private screeningoperations , and perhaps identify certain elements of private screening operations that may be usefulin developing proposals for participation in the opt - out program . the pilot program airports mayserve as insightful case studies for assessing private screening operations and comparing them tofederal screening operations . also , to assuage some of the concerns over the potential for uniquelocal factors confounding conclusions about specific private screening operations at the pilotprogram airports , the tsa - sponsored comparison study has matched the 5 airports to those airportsusing federal screeners considered to be most similar in security related characteristics . ( 49 ) the evaluation compared each of the five pilot program locations to 5 or 6 comparableairports where federal screeners are currently deployed .