subsequently , h.r . 109-13 ) , a supplemental appropriationsbill for fy2005 , extended aml authorization to the end of fy2005 . bills have been introduced inthe 109th congress to extend the authorization for fee collections and make changes to the programthat would address concerns about the mechanics of the program , the fee structure , and theunappropriated balances . legislation reauthorizing aml was introduced in the 108th congress , but did not pass . inaddition , congress did not adopt in its fy2005 aml appropriation an administration proposal thatwould have refunded , through a significant increase in appropriations , unobligated state balancesover a 10-year period . ( 2 ) andcoal will be part of that conversation . out of the four major fuel sources - - oil , gas , uranium , andcoal - - coal has the largest domestic reserve base , the largest share of u.s. energy production inbtus , and the smallest percent met by imports . the energy information administration ( eia ) projects that coal imports will continue to be negligible through 2025 , while there will be a growingreliance on foreign sources for other major fuels . in addition , coal is forecast to be the largest sourceof domestic fuel production in the foreseeable future . coal supplies 22% of u.s. energy demand but over 50% of the energy used by the electricpower sector ( both utility and non - utility consumers ) . the electric power sector consumes 90% ofall coal in the united states . the remaining 10% is used in the industrial and commercial sectorsor used in coke plants . coal use in the electric power sector has maintained a share greater than 50%for the past two decades . the eia forecasts electricity consumption to grow by 1.9% per year through 2025 - - from3,481 billion kilowatt hours ( kwh ) to 5,220 billion kwh . ( 3 ) the increase in demand is largely to be met by new coal - fired ornatural gas - fired power plants . the price of each fuel , the capital costs associated with power plantconstruction , and plant efficiencies will determine the competitiveness of each fuel source . butbecause of limited domestic supply , natural gas supply is unlikely to keep pace with demand . thiswill lead to increased imports , according to eia forecasts . per - well reserve additions are expectedto continue to decline over the eia forecast period ( 2004-2025 ) . eia further forecasts that naturalgas will not displace coal as the dominant fuel supply for power generation despite projectedincreases in liquefied natural gas ( lng ) imports , additional domestic supply from the lower 48states , and alaskan natural gas from a newly constructed pipeline . by mandating significant reductions in three pollutants emitted by coal - fired electricgenerating units , proposed clear skies legislation could have significant impact on coal productionand distribution , if enacted . electric utilities are the largest users of coal , and legislation restrictingtheir emissions could affect coal markets in several ways , depending on the specifics of any finallegislation . the surface mining control and reclamation act ( smcra , p.l . 95-87 ) , enacted in 1977,established reclamation standards for all coal surface mining operations and for the surface effectsof underground mining .