there are commonalities , however . first , all seven cases raise statutory rather thanconstitutional issues ( or mostly so in the two preemption cases: engine manufacturers ass'n and bates ) . no unifying substantive theme is apparent . further , why some of thecases were of interest to the court is perplexing: many of them involve issues of narrow focus , withno accompanying split in the circuit court decisions . this is a principal reason why there is no unifying theme among the cases ; statutory issuestend to be specific to the statute under which they arise . in this regard , norton may be the mostimportant of the cases , since the statute construed there , the administrative procedure act , is thebasic charter for accessing judicial review of federal agency action , and the issue in the case , whenagency inaction is reviewable , is a ubiquitous one in administrative law . second , in six of the seven cases ( all except bates ) the decision of the court below adoptedthe more "environmental" side of the argument . given that the supreme court typically does nottake cases in order to affirm , this initially caused some concern in the environmentalist camp thatthe court's conservative bloc was set to reign in environmental programs . the results , in the fivecases decided so far , have indeed largely tilted against the environmental positions advanced , but notexclusively so . nor were the conservative justices alone in their votes . in three of the five decisions,the "non - environmental" position was endorsed by the court unanimously ( dep't of transportation and norton ) or by 8-1 ( engine manufacturers ass'n ) . and in the nepa rulings ( dep't oftransportation and norton ) , the decisions merely continue an unbroken string of defeats for the"environmental" position over three decades of supreme court nepa litigation . third , in all four cases in which the united states is not a party ( engine manufacturers ass'n , miccosukee tribe , cooper industries and bates ) - - and thus is under no litigation constraint to adopta particular position - - it has filed amicus briefs urging the "non - environmental" position . finally , three of the seven cases inquire into the nature of the federal - state relationship ( alaska dec , engine manufacturers ass'n , and bates ) , presumably reflecting the court's continuinginterest in federalism issues , and environmental federalism in particular . ( 40 ) of the two decided so far ( alaska dec and engine manufacturers ass'n ) , the court ruled for the federal side in each , thoughonly by 5-4 in alaska dec . in the two that are preemption cases ( engine manufacturers ass'n and bates ) - - again , instances where the united states is not a party - - the department of justice also tookthe position that the federal law prevailed . thus , in the cases reviewed here , there has been aconsistent endorsement of the federal side of the federalism argument by both court andadministration .