organization . in the 2006 general election , democrats won a majority of the house and organized it and its committees in the 110 th congress . the ratio of democrats to republicans on the homeland security committee was 20-to - 15 . the members elected to the committee were: the committee on homeland security organized and adopted its oversight plan on january 23 , 2007 . the six subcommittees created had been previously announced: border , maritime , and global counterterrorism chair: loretta sanchez ; ranking member: mark e. souder emergency communications , preparedness , and response chair: henry cuellar ; ranking member: charlie dent emerging threats , cybersecurity , and science and technology chair: james r langevin ; ranking member: michael t. mccaul intelligence , information sharing , and terrorism risk assessment chair: jane harman ; ranking member: david g. reichert management , investigations , and oversight chair: christopher p. carney ; ranking member: mike rogers transportation security and infrastructure protection chair: sheila jackson - lee ; ranking member: daniel e. lungren jurisdictional memorandum . with the convening of the 110 th congress , rules committee chair louise mcintosh slaughter inserted in the congressional record a memorandum of understanding arrived at by the chairs of the homeland security committee and transportation and infrastructure committee , messrs. bennie g. thompson and james l. oberstar , respectively . the memorandum of understanding began by acknowledging that the legislative history that had been inserted in the congressional record in the 109 th congress was the authoritative source of legislative history , and then stated that the memorandum's purpose was to provide "two clarifications. first , with regard to the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , the homeland security committee had jurisdiction over the homeland security department's "responsibilities with regard to emergency preparedness and collective response only as they relate to terrorism. referring then to the enactment of the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2007 ( p.l . 109-295 ) and its title vi , the post - katrina emergency management reform act of 2006 , the memorandum of understanding next stated that a bill to amend fema's "all - hazards emergency preparedness programs that necessarily addresses fema's terrorism preparedness programs" would be referred to the transportation and infrastructure committee and that , in addition , the homeland security committee would have a "jurisdictional interest" in the bill . this part of the memorandum of understanding also stated that the memorandum did not affect the transportation and infrastructure committee's jurisdiction over the stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act or the federal fire prevention and control act . would a new committee help make congress a stronger institutional player in setting homeland security policy ? the memorandum next stated that a bill that addressed the "activities , programs , assets , and personnel of the coast guard as they relate to port security and non - port security missions" would be referred to the transportation and infrastructure committee and that , in addition , the homeland security committee would have a "jurisdictional interest" in the bill . the memorandum of understanding concluded with a disclaimer that the memorandum clarified jurisdiction only with respect to these two specific issues and did not address other issues or the jurisdiction of other committees .