some have questioned the effectiveness of such asystem . with a limited number of monitors within a metropolitan area , these critics questionwhether potentially more likely smaller - scale events are detected . others question whether such asystem will provide dependable results upon which sound decisions are made . since much information on biowatch has not been released to the public , it is difficult toevaluate criticisms of the system . many of the technical issues raised may have been or are beingaddressed by the department of homeland security . agreements on coordination between state andfederal authorities may be developed but not released . congress , in overseeing the use of limitedhomeland security resources , may wish to further assess and oversee the impacts of biowatch andits further development . airborne particles passing through the system arecaptured on a filter . the filter mechanism is designed to roughly determine when an attack occurredby using sequential filters automatically rotated on an hourly basis . filters are removed and testedusing pcr for the presence of select pathogens . ( 15 ) there arecurrently 118 member labs in the lrn . biowatch equipment is heavily based on the biological aerosol sentry and informationsystem ( basis ) , a system developed within the chemical and biological national security programof the national nuclear security administration ( now part of the department of homeland security ) by scientists at lawrence livermore and los alamos national laboratories . ( 16 ) basis is comprised ofan air collector coupled to a series of filters . basis was deployed for both indoor and outdoor monitoring at the salt lake city olympicsin 2002 , and was also tested and characterized in urban settings . ( 17 ) some conclusions aboutinstrument performance based on these tests were released . basis was characterized as having highspecificity , with fewer than 0.005% false positives per filter measurement , ( 18 ) and high sensitivity . ( 19 ) however , basis wasnoted to be labor intensive , requiring people to collect filters and perform pcr testing and analysis . ( 21 ) the director of thehouston department of health and human services stated , "we are investigating to determine if thebacteria was always present or newly present and if it represents a health threat to the community. these findings may likely reflect natural "background" levels of the organism in the environment,and authorities have chosen to enhance surveillance rather than distributing antibiotics in the affectedcommunity . the biowatch program has received a mixed reaction from experts . while acknowledgingthe program may address a noted homeland security vulnerability , commentators and analysts haveraised concerns in a number of areas . this section presents some of these concerns , including overallstrategy , sensor siting , detector performance , and public health response . several aspects of the biowatch program are undergoing further development . local jurisdictions are responsiblefor the public health response to positive findings . the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) isdesignated as the lead agency for the law enforcement response if a bioterrorism event is detected.the installation of the sensor network is ongoing , with over 30 cities chosen as locations for thesesensors .