the corporate income tax does not apply . competitiveness can be defined in a variety of ways ( indeed , some would argue that it has no concrete meaning at all , at least at the national level ) . but regardless of how competitiveness is defined , standard economic analysis suggests that most tax measures can do little to enhance it . 111-312 ) extended the reduced rates through 2012 . because assets gradually depreciate until they are worthless , the tax code permits firms gradually to deduct the full acquisition cost of an asset over a number of years . the tax code contains a set of rules that govern the rate at which depreciation deductions can be claimed . in contrast , corporations that qualify as "s corporations" are not subject to the corporate income tax . instead , their net profits are passed on a pro rata basis through to the individual shareholders who are taxed on the profits under the individual income tax . to be classified as an s corporation , the organization may have no more than 100 shareholders . taxes aside , partnerships are like corporations in that they have multiple owners . in contrast to corporations , some partnerships convey a liability for debts that is not limited to partners' contributions to the enterprise . partnerships are also less likely than corporations to be publicly traded , although some forms of partnerships ( "master limited partnerships" ) are . like s corporations , partnerships are not subject to the corporate income tax ; partners are subject to their share of partnership earnings under the individual income tax . limited liability companies ( llcs ) have some of the characteristics of both partnerships and corporations . under irs "check the box" regulations , llcs can elect to be taxed either as corporations or as partnerships . other specially defined business entities include real estate investment trusts ( reits ) , which are required to engage primarily in passive investment in real estate and securities . qualifying reits are permitted to deduct dividends they pay to shareholders , which effectively exempts reits from the corporate income tax . regulated investment companies ( rics ) , who invest primarily in securities and distribute most income , are also permitted to deduct dividends . as a result , exports are predicted to fall and imports increase until any initial improvement in the balance of trade that may have occurred disappears . further , to the extent that part of the export tax benefit is passed on to foreign consumers as lower prices , analysis indicates that the measure transfers economic welfare from u.s. taxpayers to foreign persons . many economists would argue that taxes can alter the balance of trade in the short and medium term , but not in the way that is perhaps commonly thought . if a country runs a trade deficit , it is using more than it produces ; and to do so , it must , in effect , borrow from abroad , importing the foreign investment that finances the deficit .