3221 in the senate , but objection was heard . 3237 — the smart grid facilitation act of 2007 , proposes to modernize the nation's electricity transmission and distribution system to incorporate digital information and controls technology . develop a plan for the continuation of critical information operations in the event of a cyber attack . define what qualifies as a cyber incident of national significance for purposes of the national response plan . it is clear that terrorist groups are using computers and the internet to further goals associated with spreading terrorism . this can be seen in the way that extremists are creating and using numerous internet websites for recruitment and fund raising activities , and for jihad training purposes . several criminals who have recently been convicted of cybercrimes used their technical skills to acquire stolen credit card information in order to finance other conventional terrorist activities . it is possible that as criminals and terrorist groups explore more ways to work together , a new type of threat may emerge where extremists gain access to the powerful network tools now used by cybercriminals to steal personal information , or to disrupt computer systems that support services through the internet . policy issues for cybercrime and cyberterrorism include a need for the following: increase awareness about changing threats due to the growing technical skills of extremists and terrorist groups ; develop more accurate methods for measuring the effects of cybercrime ; help to determine appropriate responses by dod to a cyberattack ; examine the incentives for achieving the goals of the national strategy to secure cyberspace ; search for ways to improve the security of commercial software products ; explore ways to increase security education and awareness for businesses and home pc users ; and find ways for private industry and government to coordinate to protect against cyberattack . congress may also wish to consider ways to harmonize existing federal and state laws that require notice to persons when their personal information has been affected by a computer security breach , and that impose obligations on businesses and owners of that restricted information . 1525 — the internet spyware ( i - spy ) prevention act of 2007 , proposes penalties for unauthorized access to computers , or the use of computers to commit crimes . on may 23 , 2007 , this bill was received in the senate and referred to the committee on the judiciary . 1684 — the department of homeland security authorization act for fiscal year 2008 establishes within the department of homeland security an office of cybersecurity and communications , headed by the assistant secretary for cybersecurity and communications , with responsibility for overseeing preparation , response , and reconstitution for cybersecurity and to protect communications from terrorist attacks , major disasters , and other emergencies , including large - scale disruptions . the bill directs the assistant secretary to do the following: establish and maintain a capability within the department for ongoing activities to identify threats to critical information infrastructure to aid in detection of vulnerabilities and warning of potential acts of terrorism and other attacks . conduct risk assessments on critical information infrastructure with respect to acts of terrorism .