this is verysignificant from a budgeting standpoint . contract authority is tantamount to , butdoes not actually involve , entering into a contract to pay for a project at some futuredate . under this arrangement , specified in title 23 u.s.c. , authorized funds areautomatically made available at the beginning of each fiscal year and may beobligated without appropriations legislation ; although appropriations are required tomake outlays at some future date to cover these obligations . where most federal programs require new budget authority as part of theannual appropriations process , transportation appropriators are faced with theopposite situation . that is , the authority to spend for the largest programs under theircontrol already exists , and the mechanism to obligate funds for these programs alsois in place . transportation budgeting uses a confusing lexicon ( for those unfamiliar withthe process ) of budget authority and contract authority - - the latter , a form ofbudget authority . contract authority provides obligational authority for the fundingof trust fund - financed programs , such as the federal - aid highway program . prior totea - 21 , changes in spending in the annual transportation budget component hadbeen achieved in the appropriations process by combining changes in budget / contractauthority and placing limitations on obligations . the principal function of thelimitation on obligations is to control outlays in a manner that corresponds tocongressional budget agreements . contract authority is tantamount to , but does not actually involve , enteringinto a contract to pay for a project at some future date . under this arrangement,specified in title 23 u.s.c. , which tea - 21 amended , authorized funds areautomatically made available to the states at the beginning of each fiscal year andmay be obligated without appropriations legislation . appropriations are required tomake outlays at some future date to cover these obligations . tea - 21 greatly limitedthe role of the appropriations process in core highway and transit programs becausethe act enumerated the limitation on obligations level for the period fy1999 throughfy2003 in the statute ( 112 stat . highway and transit grant programs work on a reimbursable basis : statespay for projects up front and federal payments are made to them only when work iscompleted and vouchers are presented , months or even years after the project hasbegun . work in progress is represented in the trust fund as obligated funds andalthough they are considered "used" and remain as commitments against the trustfund balances , they are not subtracted from balances . trust fund balances,therefore , appear high in part because funds sufficient to cover actual and expectedfuture commitments must remain available . both the highway and transit accounts have substantial short - and long - termcommitments . these include payments that will be made in the current fiscal yearas projects are completed and , to a much greater extent , outstanding obligations tobe made at some unspecified future date . additionally , there are unobligatedamounts that are still dedicated to highway and transit projects , but have not beencommitted to specific projects . two terms are associated with the distribution of contract authority funds tothe states and to particular programs . the first of these , apportionments , refers tofunds distributed to the states for formula driven programs .