those proceedings were incorporated into the biennial review . on june 2 , 2003 , the commission adopted a report and order modifying its ownership rules . in the order , the commission concluded that "neither an absolute prohibition on common ownership of daily newspapers and broadcast outlets in the same market ( the 'newspaper / broadcast cross - ownership rule' ) nor a cross - service restriction on common ownership of radio and television outlets in the same market ( the 'radio - television cross - ownership rule' ) [remained] necessary in the public interest. the commission found that "the ends sought can be achieved with more precision and with greater deference to first amendment interests through [its] modified cross media limits ( 'cml' ) . the commission also revised the market definition and the way it counted stations for purposes of the local radio rule , revised the local television multiple ownership rule to permit the common ownership of up to three stations in large markets , modified the national television ownership cap to raise the national audience reach limit to 45% , and retained the dual network rule . following the publication of the commission's order , several organizations filed petitions for review of the new rules . the petitions for review were consolidated and heard by the united states court of appeals for the third circuit . after an initial hearing on september 3 , 2003 , the court entered a stay for the effective date of the proposed rules , preventing their enforcement , and ordered that the prior ownership rules remain in effect pending resolution of the proceedings . on february 14 , 2004 , the court heard oral arguments and issued its opinion on june 24 , 2004 . as noted above , on june 2 , 2003 , the commission approved a report and order modifying its media ownership rules to provide a "new , comprehensive framework for broadcast ownership regulation. the commission determined that new technologies necessitated new rules and that the prior rules "inadequately [accounted] for the competitive presence of cable , [ignored] the diversity - enhancing value of the internet , and [lacked] any sound basis for a national audience reach cap. according to the commission , the newly adopted rules were "not blind to the world around them , but reflective of it," and "necessary in the public interest. several organizations filed petitions for review of the new rules upon their publication . the numerous petitions for review were consolidated and the case was heard by the united states court of appeals for the third circuit in philadelphia . as noted above , after an initial hearing , the court entered a stay for the effective date of the proposed rules . on february 14 , 2004 , the court heard oral arguments and issued its opinion on june 24 , 2004 . with respect to the national ownership rules , the court did not address the commission's decision to raise the national audience reach cap from 35% to 45% citing congress's modification of the rule in the 2004 consolidated appropriations act . section 629 of the act directed the commission to modify the rule by setting a 39% cap on national audience reach .