rate . taxable social security benefits , and the associated taxes , are based on the amount of non - social security income earned by a recipient during the tax year . the social security administration , without knowledge about the amount of other income received by a beneficiary , is unable to properly determine the amount of taxes that should be withheld from social security benefits . like other taxpayers , social security recipients can make quarterly estimated income tax payments . the uruguay round agreements act ( p.l . 103-465 ) amended the internal revenue code ( irc ) to allow individuals to request that monies be withheld from certain federal payments to satisfy their income tax liability ; this is commonly referred to as voluntary tax withholding . an amendment to section 207 of the social security act allowed this voluntary tax withholding from social security benefits . voluntary tax withholding became effective with payments issued in february 1999 . workers' compensation is generally not taxable . any reduction in social security benefits due to the receipt of workers' compensation is still considered to be a social security benefit , however , so income taxes are computed based on the full ( unreduced ) benefit amount . treatment of nonresident aliens citizenship is not required for receipt of social security benefits . nonresident aliens , under irs definitions , may receive benefits provided they have engaged in covered employment and otherwise meet eligibility requirements . the irs defines a nonresident alien as a noncitizen who ( 1 ) is not a lawful permanent resident ( this is known as the green card test ) and ( 2 ) has been physically present in the united states for fewer than 31 days in the previous calendar year and 183 days in the previous three - year period , counting all the days in the calendar year and a portion of the days in the two previous calendar years ( this is known as the substantial presence test ) . in general , 85% of the social security benefits for nonresident aliens is taxable ( i.e. , none of the thresholds apply ) at a 30% rate . however , there are a number of exceptions to this general rule on the basis of tax treaties such that nonresident aliens or u.s. citizens living abroad may not have u.s. social security benefits subject to u.s. income taxes . those two perspectives are illustrated in the two figures below . ( the figures are for single retirees only , but they would be similar for married couples. ) figure 1 shows taxable social security benefits for single retirees with four different amounts of annual social security benefits ( $10,000 , $15,000 , $20,000 , and $25,000 ) as non - social security income increases from zero to $45,000 . ( provisional income , which equals non - social security income plus half of social security benefits , is not shown directly in the figure. ) once provisional income exceeds the first tier threshold of $25,000 , each additional dollar of non - social security income results in 50 cents of additional taxable income .