for all other claims ( i.e. , non - personal injury and personal non - physical injury claims ) , general tax principles include the award in the recipient's income unless an exclusion exists for the item of income that the payment is meant to replace . when a taxpayer makes a payment pursuant to a judgment or settlement , the payment may be deductible as a business expense under irc ยง 162 or as an income - production expense under irc ยง 212 . this is generally true regardless of whether the payment represents compensatory or punitive damages . however , a deduction is not allowed to the extent that the taxpayer has been reimbursed for the expenses through insurance or other means . this report examines the tax consequences of these payments and expenses . 1985 ( federal whistleblower protection tax act of 2005 ) would exclude damages and the amounts awarded for attorneys' fees and costs from the recipient's income in claims brought under federal whistleblower protection laws . it ends with a summary of the legislation proposed in the 109 th congress that would affect these consequences . for tax purposes , it does not matter whether the payment is made pursuant to a judgment or a binding settlement agreement . 4297 ( tax relief act of 2005 ) , and the senate - passed version of h.r . 3 ( safe , accountable , flexible , and efficient transportation equity act of 2005 ) . in any case , the internal revenue service ( irs ) or a judicial authority may reallocate the payment to properly reflect the actual substance of the award . in order to determine the appropriate allocation , the irs and reviewing authorities will look at such things as the complaint , other pleadings , evidence presented at trial , and a settlement agreement . for awards received pursuant to a judgment or settlement for claims involving personal physical injury or sickness , the recipient's tax consequences are determined under section 104 of the internal revenue code ( irc ) . additionally , fines and penalties paid to a government and payments in antitrust suits are subject to special rules . punitive damages and damages on account of lost income would not be excluded from income . the bill would allow income - averaging on awards of lost income , so that the whistleblower would not be taxed on the entire award in the year it was received . 2755 ( victims tax fairness act of 2005 ) would explicitly state that the recipient's gross income includes awards representing attorneys' fees and costs in non - physical personal injury cases , and then would allow the recipient to deduct the full amount as an above - the - line deduction . 3076 ( freedom from unnecessary litigation act of 2005 ) would exclude all medical malpractice damages that were awarded in binding arbitration from the recipient's income . 4707 ( simplified usa tax act of 2006 ) would return the law to how it was before sbjpa . awards , other than punitive damages , for non - physical personal injury or sickness and punitive damages for physical personal injury or sickness would be eligible for the irc ยง 104 exclusion .