should it be mandatory ? what would it cost , and who pays ? the livestock and meat industries have discussed these questions for some time , and an industry - government working group was developing a national animal identification ( id ) plan for livestock disease tracking purposes . the group stated that the health of u.s. herds was "the most urgent issue" and "the most significant focus" of its proposed plan . national interest intensified in the wake of such developments as the discovery in 2003 of bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse or "mad cow disease" ) in north america , and ongoing concerns about bioterrorism . debate over a law requiring retail country - of - origin labeling ( cool ) for meats and other products also has fueled interest in increased animal id capabilities ( but was not a focus of the industry - government working group ) . in 2007 , the need for , and design of , an animal id program will be a topic during debate on a new omnibus farm bill . this report covers animal id and , to a lesser extent , meat traceability . however , traceability , and the somewhat different but related concepts of "identity preservation" and "product segregation," also pertain to other agricultural products ( eg , grains ) and issues ( eg , genetically modified , or gm , crops ; the labeling of gm foods ; and the production and labeling of organic foods ) . several sources cited below , including the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) economic research service ( ers ) and choices articles ( see footnote 1 ) and a 2002 sparks study ( see footnote 5 ) , cover traceability in more breadth . animal id refers to the marking of individual farm animals , or a group or lot of animals , so that they can be tracked from place of birth to slaughter . many producers already know , and keep records on , the identities of each animal . in addition , many animals have been identified as part of official disease eradication or control programs . however , no nationwide u.s. marking system , backed by universal numbering and a central data registry , is in place yet . animal id is one component of meat traceability . traceability is the more comprehensive concept of tracking the movement of identifiable products through the marketing chain . an extensive form of meat traceability is the ability to follow products forward from their source animal ( i.e. , birth or ancestry ) , through growth and feeding , slaughter , processing , and distribution , to the point of sale or consumption ( or backward from the consumer to the source animal ) . traceability can be used to convey information about a product , such as what it contains , how it was produced , and every place it has been . animal id and meat traceability are not themselves food safety , animal disease prevention , quality assurance , or country - of - origin labeling programs . however , they may be important components of such programs .