possibleapproaches include . section 2235 ( "extension of pakistan waivers" ) of s. 600 , "the foreignaffairs authorization act , fiscal years 2006 and 2007," reported to the senate may 26 , 2005 ( s.rept . figure 1 . country map of pakista . the 9 / 11 commission report emphasizes the need for "hard choices"and "difficult long - termcommitments" to pakistan . ( 9 ) the report explicitly notes that the need for a pragmatic approachinevitably involves compromises with other important u.s. interests such as democracy and nuclearnon - proliferation . the report does not address the issue of where the balance should be struckbetween supporting the musharraf government as a necessary means of fighting terrorism . perhaps because of its relatively narrow mandate , the 9 / 11 commission focused more on the urgency of maintaining a stable and cooperative government in islamabad that would remain apartner in the war against terrorism and less on pakistan's role as a source of nuclear proliferation.in the view of the 9 / 11 commission , maintaining close cooperation with pakistan in the fight againstal qaeda and keeping pakistan's nuclear capabilities out of the hands of terrorists depends criticallyon supporting president pervez musharraf's vision of a moderate , modernizing islamic state . the 9 / 11 commission addressed only in an oblique manner the issue of pakistan's pastnuclear proliferation activities and the risk of further proliferation emanating from pakistan . thereport's section on pakistan acknowledges , but does not dwell on , pakistan's continuing potentialto be a source of technology and know - how for other states or terrorist groups intent on acquiringnuclear weapons . it noted president musharraf's repeated assurances that "pakistan does not barterwith its nuclear technology," but also observed that "proliferation concerns have been long - standing. a section of the 9 / 11 commission report dealing more generally with the threat of nuclearproliferation takes note of khan's role in establishing illegal covert networks for global transfer ofnuclear technology and materials , but its recommendations are not pakistan - specific . rather , thereport emphasizes multilateral solutions based on "an international legal regime with universaljurisdiction to enable the capture , interdiction , and prosecution of smugglers" by any state that findsthem operating covertly in its territory . the report specifically calls for expanding the 2003proliferation security initiative ( psi ) and the 1991 "nunn - lugar" cooperative threat reduction ( ctr ) program . the psi emphasizes international cooperation to interdict wmd and ballisticmissile shipments , while the ctr concentrates on securing nuclear weapons and other dangerousmaterials scattered throughout the territories of the former soviet union , which could fall into thehands of terrorists . ( 10 ) instead of hard choices , some observers judge that the bush administration and congresshave little choice but to provide substantial assistance to pakistan to bolster musharraf and to gainthe closest possible antiterrorist cooperation from islamabad , without regard to issues such asdemocracy and nuclear proliferation . from this perspective , the issue may be less one of choicesthan following the logic of unpleasant realities .