it discusses the sources ( i.e. , natural versus industrial , historic versus modern ) and chemical forms of mercury in the environment ; how mercury moves through the environment and concentrates in fish ( i.e. , the fate of mercury ) ; and the risks to human health and wildlife of mercury exposure through fish consumption . each of these major sections of the report aims to summarize scientific evidence relevant to specific arguments and questions that have emerged in the policy context . for example , the section on mercury in the environment addresses the question "are utility emissions deposited locally or regionally , or do they rise to merge with the global atmospheric mercury pool ? for information about specific regulatory proposals to reduce environmental mercury , see crs report rl32868 , mercury emissions from electric power plants: an analysis of epa ' s cap - and - trade regulations ; crs issue brief ib10137 , clean air act issues in the 109 th congress , both by [author name scrubbed] ; or crs report rl31908 , mercury in products and waste: legislative and regulatory activities to control mercury , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) . mercury is a natural element , a silver - colored , shiny , liquid metal that is found in a variety of chemical forms in rocks , soil , water , air , plants , and animals . sometimes mercury occurs in its elemental , relatively pure form , as a liquid or vapor , but more commonly mercury is found combined with other elements in various compounds , which may be inorganic ( eg , the mineral cinnabar , a combination of mercury and sulfur ) or organic ( eg , methylmercury ) . natural forces move mercury through the environment , from air to soil to water , and back again . volcanoes and deep sea vents release tons of mercury to the atmosphere and oceans . mercury in the air falls to earth with dust , rain , and snow . mercury evaporates from the oceans , leaves of plants , and other surfaces back into the air . in sensitive experimental lakes and wetlands , when local and regional mercury emissions decreased , deposition decreased proportionately , and levels of methylmercury in freshwater fish dropped quickly . this indicates that controls on mercury emissions from electric power plants ( particularly those plants with emissions that tend to be deposited locally ) could lead to substantial reductions in deposition at some nearby hot spots . it remains to be determined whether there is a link between mercury emissions and mercury in ocean fish . however , scientists have shown that significant quantities of emitted mercury are deposited in the oceans ; methylmercury is found in marine fish and predatory seabirds , sometimes at very high concentrations ; and sulfate - reducing bacteria are active in coastal sediments . as yet unquantifiable but potentially significant risks from emissions exist , to people and wildlife locally , but also in areas distant from emission sources .