2192 ( b ) ) . ( 4 ) committee consideration . if the committee of either house to which the resolution has been referred has not reportedit within 45 days ( 9 ) afterits introduction , the committee is automatically discharged from further consideration of theresolution , and the resolution is placed on the appropriate calendar for floor consideration ( sec.125 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( c ) ; 19 u.s.c . 3535 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( c ) ) . ( also placed on the appropriate calendar under regular legislative procedure are measuresthat have been reported , whether favorably or adversely. ) ( 5 ) restriction on consideration in either house . it is not in order in either house to consider a joint resolution of withdrawal ( other than aresolution received from the other house ) if that house has previously adopted a joint resolution ofwithdrawal ( sec . ( 20 ) on june 9 , 2005 , thehouse disapproved withdrawal resolution h.j.res . 27 by a vote of 338-86 . since then , it has been greatly expanded in the formof the wto agreement , likewise with the united states' participation and under its leadership , intoa world - wide , comprehensive code of rules covering most aspects of international trade . this codehas radically reduced tariff and nontariff obstacles to free flows of world commerce in goods andservices and provided a forum for settling international trade disputes . u.s. withdrawal from thewto also would likely erode the u.s. leadership position in international trade relations andthereby possibly put a strain on the cohesiveness of the organization . on a more specific , functional level , the withdrawal would relieve the united states from theobligations stemming specifically from the wto agreement , but also preclude it from benefittingfrom its rights under the agreement , particularly , from access to wto dispute settlement mechanism.except for that access , however , this exclusion from the wto regime would in practice be likelyto result in very limited selective changes in the united states' position in international trade , at leastin the short run . on the u.s. side , most obligations under the wto agreement have been enacted by theuraa as general u.s. domestic law and would not be automatically repealed by the withdrawalresolution . to that extent , they would continue to apply not only to wto members but to u.s.trading partners in general . some provisions of the wto agreement have been substantively ineffect on the basis of earlier , also generally applicable legislation ; others have been amended ornewly enacted by the uraa , again as generally applicable domestic legislation . such applicabilitywould not cease due to the u.s. withdrawal from the wto . similarly , those u.s. present rights under the wto ( i.e. , obligations of other wto memberstoward the united states ) which are reflected in those countries' generally applicable statutes orregulations would not cease to apply to the united states . on march 30 , 2000 , the committee held a hearingon the subject , ( 17 ) andon june 12 , 2000 - - being in general agreement with the president's evaluation - - unanimously ( 35-0 ) adversely reported ( 18 ) the withdrawal resolution .