technology development . the homeland securityact of 2002 ( p.l . 107-296 , sec . 302 ) makes the dhs under secretary for science and technologyresponsible for "coordinating the federal government's civilian efforts to identify and developcountermeasures to" terrorist wmd threats . dhs is charged with coordinating efforts by manyagencies , including doe's national nuclear security administration and the department ofcommerce's national institute of standards and technology , to develop technology for homelandsecurity . dhs has proposed various technology programs and organizations forfy2005-fy2006 . ( 51 ) u.s. national laboratories ( including the three nuclear weapons labs , los alamos , livermore , andsandia ) , u.s. and foreign corporations , universities , and others have been conducting r&d for newtechnologies to detect smuggling of nuclear materials and weapons . detection of heu and wgpuis difficult because , as noted , they are not highly radioactive . ( 52 ) various technologies arein use , ( 53 ) such asradiation portal monitors , which passively detect radiation emitted by a source , ( 54 ) and active imagingsystems , like the vehicle and cargo inspection system ( vacis ) , which operate like x - raymachines . ( 55 ) moreadvanced systems are being developed . for example , livermore is developing aneutron - interrogation system to screen containers . it bombards a container with neutrons , producingnuclear fissions in such material as heu and wgpu . ( 56 ) the fissions produce gamma rays with specific energy levelsunique to each substance , permitting identification . detecting illegal movement across u.s. borders,in contrast , does not require detecting fissile material ; relevant technologies include surveillancesensors and data analysis software . ( 57 ) the fy2006 dhs budget includes the establishment of a new domestic nuclear detectionoffice ( dndo ) within dhs: the dndo will develop , acquire and support thedeployment and improvement of a domestic system to detect and report attempts to import,assemble , or transport a nuclear explosive device , fissile material or radiological material intendedfor illicit use . ( 58 ) intelligence . the possibility that terrorists couldevade any of the layers described above necessitates an enhanced intelligence capability tocomplement other means of detecting movement of nuclear materials and warheads . such acapability could also focus the efforts of particular defenses , whether alerting a russian facility thata smuggling plan was in the works or indicating that a particular cargo container might hold anuclear weapon . improving and organizing intelligence for homeland security have been sharplydebated . ( 59 ) nuclear forensics . the ability to glean informationfrom nuclear weapon debris and other radioactive material lies at the intersection of technology andintelligence . during the cold war , the united states obtained much information by analyzing falloutfrom soviet nuclear weapon tests . for example , analysis confirmed that the soviet union hadconducted its first atomic bomb test , and analysis of fallout from the first soviet hydrogen bomb testrevealed many details about that weapon's design . ( 60 ) even minute samples are of value . ( 61 ) with the currentmoratorium on nuclear testing , forensic studies are applied to verifying the safety of u.s. nuclearwarheads , detecting signs of nuclear proliferation , and thwarting illicit trafficking of nuclearmaterials .