most information dhs provides to state and local government officials is unclassified . nevertheless , these officials might need some access to classified information , for example , "real time" intelligence information concerning terrorism threats , to adequately plan , coordinate , and execute homeland security activities . presently , dhs has not provided standards for any other type of first responder equipment . priority would be given to grant applications enhancing counter - terrorism capabilities . grants would be available only for training , vehicle acquisition , firefighting equipment , and personal protective equipment . under the budget proposal , activities such as wellness / fitness and fire station modification would not be funded . activities such as prevention , public fire safety education and awareness , and fire code enforcement would be funded under a separate fire prevention and firefighter safety grant program . for fy2006 , the administration is requesting no funding of the staffing for adequate fire and emergency response ( safer ) grants , which provide assistance to fire departments for hiring personnel . the house appropriations committee recommends $600 million for firefighter assistance , including $550 million for fire grants and $50 million for safer act grants . the committee does not agree with the administration's proposal to shift the program's priority to terrorism or to limit the list of eligible activities . the following table compares funding for fy2003 through fy2005 with the fy2006 budget request and dhs appropriations bill ( h.r . another state and local homeland security issue concerns equipment standards . on december 17 , 2003 , the president issued homeland security presidential directive - 8 ( hspd - 8 ) . among other things , hspd - 8 directs the dhs secretary , in coordination with state and local officials , to establish and implement procedures for developing and adopting first responder equipment standards that support a national preparedness capability . dhs , however , has so far issued standards only for two first responder equipment categories: personal protective gear , and radiation and nuclear detection equipment . a report prepared for the oklahoma city national memorial institute for the prevention of terrorism and the department of justice recommends that the federal government establish first responder equipment standards to assist in the nation's preparedness for terrorist attacks . in february 2003 , the national task force on interoperability , a task force composed of representatives from professional emergency responder and government personnel associations , recommended the establishment of standards for interoperable communications . in a report on interoperable communications , the task force stated that the use of standards for equipment and software might alleviate many of the interoperability problems faced by emergency responders , and state and local governments . in the fy2006 hsgp guidance , dhs provides an ael that categorizes which equipment states and localities are authorized to purchase . the list , however , does not identify standards for equipment selection . 1544 and s. 21 either require a determination of the need for equipment standards or require dhs to provide information to states and localities on voluntary standards . the lack of equipment standards may result in states and localities purchasing equipment which does not meet their homeland security needs .