this report addresses each of these issues in turn . the term "intellectual property" identifies a number of legal instruments , including copyrights , patents and trade secrets , that provide innovators with proprietary interests in their intangible creations . copyright provides authors with exclusive rights in their writings , visual works and other works of authorship ; patents relate to products , processes and other useful inventions ; while trade secret law concerns secret information that is of commercial value . discussion concerning the intersection of homeland security issues and the intellectual property law has principally concerned patents . as a result , this report will focus upon the patent law , although its broader discussion of the relationship between homeland security and intellectual property is applicable to trade secrets , copyrights and other similar proprietary interests . episodes such as the cipro incident have raised the possibility that intellectual property rights may clash with homeland security needs . if a firm owns a patent that covers an anti - terrorism technology , the exclusive patent right may be perceived as impeding the rapid and widespread deployment of that technology for purposes of homeland security . current laws provide several possibilities for addressing this conflict , however . one option is a u.s. government taking of the intellectual property , subject to reasonable compensation owed to the patent owner . another is that the federal government purchase any applicable patents from their owners . ciprofloxacin is sold under the trademark cipro by the german firm bayer ag . alongside the various laws pertaining to u.s. government use of subject matter protected by an intellectual property right , other legislation relates to the issues at the intersection of homeland security and intellectual property . this report next considers the more significant of these statutes . bayer agreed to reduce the prices it charged the u.s. government and to increase production . although widely prescribed for several medical indications , cipro was at that time the only antibiotic approved by the u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) for inhalation anthrax . as the incident proceeded , attention focused on the availability of large quantities of ciprofloxacin hydrochloride for public use . some observers noted that bayer owned the pertinent u.s. patents on ciprofloxacin hydrochloride and therefore possessed the ability to exclude other pharmaceutical companies from selling generic versions of the drug in the united states . additional commentators encouraged the u.s. government to purchase ciprofloxacin hydrochloride from generic manufacturers , who had been producing and selling the drug in foreign countries where bayer did not possess patent rights . perhaps not fully appreciated during the cipro incident was the fact that existing laws provide mechanisms for addressing potential conflicts between intellectual property rights and homeland security needs . these mechanisms include a government taking of the intellectual property , subject to reasonable compensation owed to the patent owner , as well as government purchase of patents . legislation introduced in the 107 th congress would have called for the award of a compulsory patent license in the event of a public health emergency .