this was not always the case . the process of natural gas pricederegulation began in 1978 when the natural gas policy act ( p.l . 95-621 ) became law . under thenatural gas policy act , nearly all price controls were phased out by the end of 1984 . ( 2 ) the spot price of natural gas is recorded at a transportation hub , the largest in the united statesbeing henry hub in louisiana , and is generally somewhat higher than the wellhead price becauseit includes some processing and transportation costs . natural gas futures contract trading on thenymex establishes forward prices for natural gas , and allows market participants to hedge shortand medium term price risk . the nymex future price is determined by the interaction of traderswho have business interests in the real , physical natural gas market , and financial traders whospeculate on the market . natural gas is also traded by numerous brokers and other entities forphysical delivery at a number of local markets . interstate pipeline rates are not directly regulated and their pricing structure largely reflects open access for shippers and market pricing . the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) monitors pipeline tariffs to assure "just and reasonable" pricing , and has intervened in a number oftariff situations . the city gate price includes the addition of these pipeline transportation charges . residential and small commercial consumers buy gas from a local distribution company , which delivers gas from a long - haul pipeline to the customer's premises . local distribution companies areregulated by state public service commissions , who set distribution charges . the price data in table1 indicates that residential prices have recently been almost double city gate prices in 2004 . theprice premium paid by residential and commercial consumers reflects the high fixed cost associatedwith distribution of their supply , as well as the added cost of small volume purchases . the eia defines effective productive capacity as the maximum production available fromnatural gas wells , allowing for limitations in the production , gathering , and transportation systems . ( 3 ) the effective capacity utilization rate ( ecur ) is the ratio of actual production to effective productivecapacity . surplus capacity is the difference between effective productive capacity and actualproduction . figure 1 shows , for monthly data over the period 1987 to 2001 , that the average wellheadpricehas stayed below $3.00 per mcf whenever the ecur was below 90% . the data also show howupwardly volatile natural gas prices can be as the ecur rises above 90% . the correlation betweenhigh values of the ecur and high prices suggests that when the ecur is above 90% , conditionsare in place that are consistent with high , volatile natural gas prices . figure 2 shows the history of the ecur , capacity and production since 1985 . several trendsare noticeable in the data . productive capacity has declined since the late 1980s , but appears to haveremained stable since 1993 . actual production has trended up from 1985 to 1995 and has beenrelatively stable since then . these two trends , taken together , drove the ecur to 90% or higherlevels for almost all of the past eight years .