in a january 2006 message , he proposed a temporary truce with the united states in exchange for a series of u.s. concessions . it is unlikely , however , that bin laden could ensure a wholesale cessation of hostilities or that al qaeda supporters would abandon the strategic priorities reflected in their statements that have sanctioned , encouraged , and provided guidance for terrorist operations . osama bin laden's longstanding threats to strike the united states came to fruition on september 11 , 2001 , and bin laden and others subsequently issued several statements confirming al qaeda's responsibility for the attacks on new york and washington . following an established pattern , bin laden acknowledged his support for the hijackers and repeated his claim that strikes on american targets should be viewed by muslims and americans as a defensively motivated response to perceived american aggression in the islamic world . statements attributed to bin laden and al zawahiri since 2001 have promised further attacks and sought to justify al qaeda's targeting of american and british civilians by arguing that western societies are morally corrupt , recent democratic reform and human rights initiatives are insincere or bankrupt , and american and british civilians should be held accountable for the policies of their democratically elected governments in the middle east that al qaeda finds objectionable or unjust . statements from osama bin laden , ayman al zawahiri , the late abu musab al zarqawi , sayf al adl , and al qaeda affiliates in iraq display the uncompromising commitment of al qaeda's leaders and operational affiliates to a consistent ideological agenda focused on two sequential goals: the expulsion of foreign forces and influences from islamic societies and , ultimately , the creation of an islamic state ruled by sharia law . the political prescriptions outlined in the statements are rooted in the islamic principle known as tawhid , or the principle of the absolute unity of god , and an identification of islam as an all - encompassing religious , political , and social system . according to this perspective , islamic faith , adherence to islamic law , and implementation of conservative islamic social and political principles are synonymous . throughout their statements , al qaeda founders and affiliates characterize as "infidels" those who do not share these beliefs , those who oppose the creation of an islamic state on the terms they describe , and those supporting existing governments and coalition activities in the islamic world . al qaeda's diverse statements contain calculated variations in tone and content that address or appeal to various target audiences . some officials and analysts believe that al qaeda's messages contain signals that inform and instruct operatives to prepare for and carry out new attacks . bin laden has referred to his public statements as important primary sources for parties seeking to understand al qaeda's ideology and political demands . through his public statements over the last ten years , bin laden has portrayed himself both as the leader of a consistent ideological movement and a strategic commander willing to tailor his violent messages and acts to respond to specific political circumstances and to influence specific audiences and events .