representatives . in december 2004,musharraf made a brief stopover in washington , where president bush praised the pakistani leaderfor working to combat terrorism , saying that the pakistani army "has been incredibly active and verybrave in southern waziristan. four months later , president bush said that the united states is moresecure "because pakistani forces captured more than 100 extremists across the country [in 2004],including operatives who were plotting attacks against the united states. top u.s. government andmilitary officials regularly meet with musharraf in islamabad to discuss counterterrorism and forconsultations on regional security . as a vast mosaic of ethnicities , languages , cultures , and religions , india can be difficult togovern . internal instability resulting from diversity is further complicated by colonial legacies suchas international borders that separate members of the same ethnic groups , creating flashpoints forregional dissidence and separatism . separatist movements in the northwestern jammu and kashmirstate , and in remote and underdeveloped northeast regions , confound new delhi and createinternational tensions by operating out of neighboring pakistan , bangladesh , burma , bhutan , andnepal . moreover , indigenous maoist rebels continue to operate in eastern states , possibly incollusion with nepali maoists at war with the kathmandu government . the indian home ministryreported to parliament that a total of 7,458 people were killed in 10,788 incidents of separatist andmaoist "naxalite" violence in india during the year ending october 31 , 2004 . more than half ofthese deaths and incidents occurred in kashmir . bangladesh's political and economic development continues to be hampered by the forces ofcorruption , radicalism , and partisan fighting . rivalry between the leaders of the nation's two largestpolitical parties has led to an ongoing series of demonstrations , strikes , and increasingly to politicallymotivated violence . the frustration caused by the combination of poverty , corruption , and the lackof good governance due to a stalemated political process is thought by some to contribute toincreasing radicalization of society and thereby to the recruitment of islamist radicals to the causeof terrorism . bangladesh's form of moderate islam is increasingly under threat by radical elements . in early2005 there was increased concern over the rise of islamic extremism in bangladesh . khaleda zia'sbangladesh national party ( bnp ) has coalition partners in government that are thought to have tiesto radical islamist elements that give cause for concern . some view the government's coalition withhardline islamist coalition members as promoting the spread of violence . ( 188 ) the radicalharkat - ul - jihad - al - islami ( huji ) is thought to have ties to both al qaeda and the islamic oikya jote,which is a coalition partner in the government . huji is on the united states state department list ofother terrorist organizations and is thought to have been behind an assassination attempt on thenprime minister sheikh hasina in july 2000 . ( 189 ) huji also signed the 1998 fatwa by usama bin laden whichdeclared american civilians to be legitimate targets . ( 190 ) fundamentalist leader bangla bhai , who promotes islamic revolution in bangladesh , hasbeen accused of having ties to the jamaat - e - islami ( ji ) which is another coalition partner with thebnp government .