embassy attacks . on june 25 , 2003 greystone , a u.s. embassy storage compound occupied by thousands of civilians fleeing fighting and mortarfire , was hit by two explosions during a second major assault by lurd on monrovia . three personswere killed , including two local embassy workers , and 16 were injured . the state department issueda sharp condemnation of the attack , after earlier labeling the lurd assault a "serious violation ofthe cease - fire" and stated that the attack might remove "any international credibility or recognition"retained by lurd ( 56 ) . on june 26 , liberian crowdspiled eleven bodies , including children , in frontof the u.s. embassy , in a demonstration calling for immediate u.s. intervention to halt the fighting . on july 20 , a team of 21 u.s. marines , part of a 41 member fleet anti - terrorism security team ( fast ) trained to guard u.s. diplomatic installations , was deployed to monrovia . upon its arrival,the fast faced a hail of mortar fire falling in the vicinity of the embassy . its deployment wasbacked by u.s. air transport teams based in senegal and sierra leone ; the latter carried out severalevacuations from monrovia . in late july 2003 , all of these u.s. military elements became part ofa larger u.s. military effort , dubbed joint task force liberia . conflict resolution efforts . the united states , a key member of the icgl , actively participated in the peace negotiations in ghana . these effortssought to improve the security environment in monrovia ; enable then - suspended or otherwiseinterrupted emergency relief operations to resume ; and to further resolve the conflict and a transitionof state power . after a cease - fire agreement was signed on june 17 , the united states repeatedly andstrongly urged the liberian belligerents to adhere to it , and to prevent civilian casualties . in late july,deputy assistant secretary of state pamela bridgewater traveled to guinea , where she reportedlymet with lurd chairman sekou conneh and guinean government officials to emphasize the needfor an end to the conflict and for guinean support of lurd . her visit was quickly followed by avisit to guinea by walter kansteiner , assistant secretary of state for africa , who reiteratedbridgewater's message to guinean officials . in july and august 2003 , the united states assisted the deployment of ecomil to liberia ( see "overview and recent developments," above ) - - a course of action that was preceded by extensivepublic debate about the potential and relative merit of a direct u.s. military intervention . onceecomil had deployed , u.s. policy makers pushed for the creation of a u.n. peacekeeping missionin liberia . the united states also acted to protect the interests of some liberians living in theunited states by granting to those who qualified for temporary protected status ( tps ) . after increasing briefly following liberia's 1989-1997 war , u.s. assistance forliberia steadily declined , reflecting the clinton and bush administrations' generallycritical views of the taylor administration . in fy2002 , aid began to be channeled"only through non - governmental organizations" and was "focused narrowly on healthand food security needs in rural communities , along with a modest effort to assistcivil society.