this report was prepared using exclusively open sources . the bush administration recently has promoted cooperative measures with allies to pressure north korea,such as the 11-country proliferation security initiative ( psi ) charged with interdicting vesselssuspected of carrying illicit cargo . members of congress may benefit from classified briefings from the intelligence community on the extent of chosen soren's ties withthe north korean government . the test launch of the taepodong missile over japan in august 1998 by north korea and theadmission by kim jong il in september 2002 that north korea had abducted several japanesenationals has significantly altered the japanese government's stance towards chosen soren . in thepast year , domestic outrage over the abductions and intense media coverage of the return of fiveabductees has spurred the government to crack down more severely and monitor more closelychosen soren's interaction with north korea . japanese politicians , responding to public opinion,have become more outspoken in their criticism of pyongyang and have curtailed existing ties withchosen soren . the japanese government has taken a number of legal steps , either in enforcingpreviously lax laws or proposing new legislation to stem possible illicit transfers to north korea . because of the anti - north korean climate in japan following the abduction admission andnorth korean missile tests , japan's actions over the past several months suggest an increasedwillingness to confront chosen soren , which would be in line with previous u.s. proposals for japanto choke off funds to north korea . japanese measures to promote this goal might include continuedclose surveillance of the restructured banks serving chosen soren members , a re - invigoration ofefforts to regulate the flow of pachinko profits , and more robust enforcement of export controls onvessels bound to or originating from north korea . some observers have suggested that the unitedstates press japan to cut off all official trade ( about $400 million in 2001 ) with north korea , muchof which is facilitated by chosen soren . ( 32 ) japanhas already relaxed its sanctions criteria by citingthe foreign exchange and foreign trade control law , which permits the government to imposesanctions in order to preserve peace , instead of requiring a united nations security councilresolution . ( 33 ) overall reform and increasedtransparency of japan's financial institutions could alsoprove helpful in following the money trail to pyongyang . congress and the administration may pursue multilateral efforts as well . such efforts to crack down on international drug and weaponstrafficking may reveal more illicit ties between chosen soren members and north korea , whichcould trigger additional punitive actions . options involving third parties include asking thailandto eliminate technology transfers to north korea that are reported to have transited through itsterritory or asking austria and macau to curtail bank transfers that often pass through their financialinstitutions . japaneseofficials have recently indicated more willingness to crack down on chosen soren's illegal activities . u.s. officials may be prepared to cooperate with japan in dealing with the organization as part ofa broader strategy of influencing north korean actions .