two are discussed below . the firstis the 9 / 11 commission's other recommendation: a joint committee on intelligence . the second is a proposal to establish an intelligence appropriations subcommitteein each of the senate and house appropriations committees . consolidating responsibility for intelligenceappropriation and authorization in senate select committee onintelligence . on october 7 , 2004 , the senate rejected , by a vote of23-74 , a proposal by senator john mccain , to transfer appropriations,rescissions , ( 40 ) and spending authority ( 41 ) related tofunding intelligence matters from the senate appropriations committee to the senateselect committee on intelligence . the proposal was in the form of an amendment ( s.amdt . 3999 ) to the amendment in the nature of a substitute ( s.amdt . 445 , the intelligence committee reorganization resolution . separate senate intelligence appropriationssubcommittee . on october 9 , 2004 , the senate adopted , by a voteof 79-6 , s.res . 445 , an intelligence committee reorganization resolution , whichestablishes a separate subcommittee on intelligence in the senate appropriationscommittee ( see â§402 ) . 445 clarifies that the appropriations committee willidentify the intelligence activities to be transferred to the new subcommittee . it also provides that as soon as possible after the 109th congress convenes , thesenate appropriations committee is responsible for reorganizing the appropriationssubcommittees to ensure that the existing number of subcommittees ( 13 ) remains ( see â§402 ) . the original amendment in the nature of a substitute ( s.amdt . 3981 ) tothe resolution would have preserved the 13 subcommittees by merging the militaryconstruction and defense subcommittees . this language was replaced with the finallanguage by an amendment ( s.amdt . 4015 ) proposed by the chair of the militaryconstruction subcommittee , senator kay bailey hutchison . the amendment wasadopted by a vote of 44-41 on october 9 . since the senate and house appropriationssubcommittees have customarily retained parallel jurisdictions , the house is expectedto respond to the senate's action . requiring congressional action on 9 / 11commission's congressional oversight proposals in 108th congress . on october 7 , 2004 , the house rejected , by a vote of 203-213 , a proposal that , amongother provisions , would have required the senate and house to establish in the 108thcongress either of the 9 / 11 commission's recommendations to establish ( 1 ) a jointcommittee on intelligence ; or ( 2 ) a single committee in each chamber withjurisdiction over both intelligence authorizing and appropriating authorities . theproposal was in the form of an amendment in the nature of a substitute to h.r . 10,the 9 / 11 recommendations implementation act , and was proposed by representativerobert menendez . the report contained the commission's findings as wellas its recommendations for corrective measures that can be taken to improve the protection of theunited states against future terrorist attacks . in its report , the commission stated that existingcongressional oversight of intelligence was "dysfunctional," due to the limitations of the existingcongressional intelligence authorizing committees .