they can be extinguished at will and created at will . itdoes not even require concurrence of the other body when we take such an action . deprivingmembers of the right to vote in a committee is fully within the power of the house , by abolishingthe committee . giving them additional rights to vote is within the power of the house by creatinga new committee… . nothing that the resident commissioner could do in a committee vote couldbecome a final decision unless a majority of the elected members of congress supported his position . however , in the standing committee itself i think that the member from puerto rico should havea vote . ( 22 ) an immediate question arose: should the delegate serve in the house or in the senate ? thenorthwest ordinance , which had been enacted by the unicameral congress under the articles ofconfederation , had only specified a "seat in congress. some members of congress argued that theproper place for delegate white was the senate since his method of election , by the territoriallegislature , was similar to that of senators . others suggested that perhaps mr. white should sit inboth chambers . proposals for seeking senate concurrence in the matter of admitting delegate whiteand for confining his right of debate to territorial matters were dismissed . on november 18 , 1794,the house approved the resolution to admit delegate white to a nonvoting seat in that body . ( 23 ) at least one delegate hasserved in every congress since , with the single exception of the fifth congress ( 1797-1799 ) . debate surrounding delegate white's taking the oath further revealed house members'various perceptions of his status . some members believed that mr. white should be required to takethe oath . representative james madison disagreed . he argued: the proper definition of mr. white is to be found in thelaws and rules of the constitution . he is not a member of congress , therefore , and so cannot bedirected to take an oath , unless he chooses to do it voluntarily . ( 24 ) describing delegate white as "no more than an envoy to congress," representative williamsmith maintained that it would be "very improper to call on this gentlemen to take such an oath. he characterized mr. white as "not a representative from , but an officer deputed by the people ofthe western territory. in making the case that it "would be wrong to accept his oath,"representative jonathan dayton emphasized mr. white's lack of voting power: "he is not amember . he cannot vote , which is the essential part. representative dayton compared delegatewhite's influence in the house to that of a printer who "may be said to argue and influence , whenhe comes to this house , takes notes , and prints them in the newspapers. ( 25 ) ultimately , the house decided that since mr. white was not a member , he was not requiredto take the oath . ( 26 ) atthe same time , congress , by law , granted mr. white the same franking privileges and compensationas members of the house . ( 27 ) the white case established several precedents for the treatment of future delegates .