innovation produces new knowledge . one characteristic of this knowledge is that it is a "public good," a good that is not consumed when it is used . this "public good" concept underlies the u.s. patent system . the value of these interactions has been documented . a study by the late professor edwin mansfield demonstrated that "over 10% of the new products and processes introduced in [the 8 industries explored] could not have been developed ( without substantial delay ) in the absence of recent academic research. more recent analysis reported that "during the past 40 years , 153 new fda - approved drugs , vaccines , or new indications for existing drugs were discovered through research carried out in psris [public - sector research institutions]. this same study indicated that between "9.3 and 21.2% of all drugs involved in new - drug applications approved during the period from 1990 through 2007," were the result of work performed by psris . additional research based on the 252 new drugs approved by the fda between 1998 and 2007 established that 31% of the 118 drugs considered "scientifically novel" were the result of research originally performed in universities . much of this cooperative work , whether government - industry , government - university , industry - university , or industry - industry , is facilitated by the patent system . patents protect the inventor's investments in generating the knowledge that is the basis for innovation . the u.s. constitution states that patents are intended to promote "the progress of science and the useful arts. as research and development become more expensive , ownership of title to inventions has been used by the federal government as a means to foster increased private sector activities to generate new and improved products and processes for the marketplace . in an academic setting , the possession of title is expected to provide motivation for the university to license the technology to industry for further refinement and application in expectation of royalty payments . the patent system is grounded in article i , section 8 , clause 8 of the constitution and is intended to stimulate new discoveries and their reduction to practice , commonly known as innovation . the grant of a patent provides the inventor with a means to capture returns to his invention through exclusive rights on its practice for 20 years from date of filing . this is designed to encourage those investments necessary to further develop an idea and generate a marketable technology . at the same time , the process of obtaining a patent places the concept on which it is based in the public domain . in return for a time limited monopoly right to specific applications of the knowledge generated , the inventor must publish the ideas covered in the patent . proponents argue that , as a disclosure system , the patent can , and often does , stimulate other firms or individuals to invent "around" existing patents to provide for parallel technical developments or meet similar and expanded demands in the marketplace . as professor john shoven points out , "the use of an idea or discovery by one person does not , in most cases , reduce the availability of that information to others.