the report to the bill ( h.rept . 109-520 ) recommends $36.102 million for cuba broadcasting , including $2.7 million to improve transmission capabilities via aerostat for broadcasting tv marti . the administration requested $36.279 for cuba broadcasting ( for further information , see " radio and tv marti " below ) . some analysts viewed the measure as an effort to turn back the clock on economic reform measures . on october 25 , 2004 , fidel castro announced that u.s. dollars no longer would be used in entities that currently accept dollars ( such as stores , restaurants , and hotels ) . instead , cubans would need to exchange their dollars for "convertible pesos," with a 10% surcharge for the exchange . cubans could exchange their dollars or deposit them in banks with the surcharge until november 14 . dollar bank accounts will still be allowed , but cubans will not be able to deposit new dollars into the accounts . beginning on april 9 , 2005 , convertible pesos were no longer on par with the u.s. dollar , but instead were linked to a basket of foreign currencies . this reduced the value of dollar remittances sent to cuba and provides more hard currency to the cuban government . in the early 1960s , u.s. - cuban relations deteriorated sharply when fidel castro began to build a repressive communist dictatorship and moved his country toward close relations with the soviet union . the often tense and hostile nature of the u.s. - cuban relationship is illustrated by such events and actions as u.s. covert operations to overthrow the castro government culminating in the ill - fated april 1961 bay of pigs invasion ; the october 1962 missile crisis in which the united states confronted the soviet union over its attempt to place offensive nuclear missiles in cuba ; cuban support for guerrilla insurgencies and military support for revolutionary governments in africa and the western hemisphere ; the 1980 exodus of around 125,000 cubans to the united states in the so - called mariel boatlift ; the 1994 exodus of more than 30,000 cubans who were interdicted and housed at u.s. facilities in guantanamo and panama ; and the february 1996 shootdown by cuban fighter jets of two u.s. civilian planes operated by the cuban american group , brothers to the rescue , which resulted in the death of four u.s. crew members . since the early 1960s , u.s. policy toward cuba has consisted largely of isolating the island nation through comprehensive economic sanctions . these sanctions were made stronger with the cuban democracy act ( cda ) of 1992 ( p.l . 102-484 , title xvii ) and with the cuban liberty and democratic solidarity act of 1996 ( p.l . 104-114 ) , often referred to as the helms / burton legislation . the cda prohibits u.s. subsidiaries from engaging in trade with cuba and prohibits entry into the united states for any vessel to load or unload freight if it has engaged in trade with cuba within the last 180 days .