feb. 2002. pp . west sacramento , ca . "power to arresttraining manual. the bush administration sharesthis view . in the national strategy for the physical protection of critical infrastructures and keyassets the administration identifies security guards as "an important source of protection for criticalfacilities. ( 2 ) the nation'sdependence on security guards for critical infrastructure protection gives rise to questions as to thestatus and capability of these guards , and federal efforts to help them combat terrorism . in 2003 , there were approximately one million security guards ( including airport screeners ) employed in the united states - - compared to 650,000 u.s. police officers . ( 3 ) nearly half of these guardswere employed directly by the institutions they served ; the rest , approximately 53% of all guards,worked for contract guard companies providing outsourced guard services . this report provides background information concerning security guards in the united statesand their role in critical infrastructure protection . it analyzes trends in the number and deploymentof security guards , including effects of the terror attacks of september 11 , 2001 ( 9 / 11 ) . it discussesthe wages paid to security guards compared to similar workers , and the relationship between pay andworkforce effectiveness . the report reviews the qualifications and training of security guards , including background checks , highlighting recent changes related to counter terrorism andstate - to - state differences in qualification requirements . finally the report discusses policyconsiderations of potential interest to congress . in considering the role of security guards in u.s. critical infrastructure protection , policyanalysts have focused on several key issues: staffing , pay , background checks , and training . a fewadditional policy issues , such as counter - terrorism support and contract guard cost - effectiveness,have also received some public attention . this report addresses critical infrastructure guards as a distinctive group , but crs is awareof no federal or state policy that explicitly makes a similar distinction . on the contrary , federalcriminal background legislation and state licensing regulations appear to apply uniformly to allguards under their jurisdiction , without consideration of differing guard assignments . as noted inthis report , uniform requirements for all one million u.s. guards may be excessive for some andinsufficient for others . questions remain , however , about what is the appropriate role of the federalgovernment with respect to security guards , especially private guards , protecting criticalinfrastructure . while there appears to have been relatively little congressional debate on this subject,it may become increasingly important as homeland security strategy evolves and the distinctivesecurity requirements of u.s. critical infrastructure become better understood . if homeland security policy does evolve towards special treatment of critical infrastructureguards , responsible agencies may face a challenge in identifying those guards because ofuncertainties in identifying critical assets . in april , 2004 , the dhs information analysis andinfrastructure protection directorate ( iaip ) reported that it had compiled the list of 1,700 criticalu.s . assets referred to earlier in ths report , but confusion among private sector and state governmentpartners about what constituted a critical asset cast doubt on the validity of that list .