clear skies would change numerous provisions of current law . some of thesechanges add new authorities or programs - - for example , the establishment ofnational cap - and - trade programs for utility emissions of nox and mercury , and theextension and revision of the title iv cap - and - trade program for so 2 . other changesremove existing authority ( eg , the hazardous air pollutant provisions of section 112,as they relate to mercury emissions from utilities and from opt - in facilities in otherindustries ) . and other changes modify and / or hold in abeyance certain provisions forseveral years ( eg , bart , section 126 , conformity ) . a list of the additional authorities would include ( 1 ) the cap - and - tradeprograms for so 2 , nox , and hg ; ( 2 ) statutory national emission standards for newand reconstructed electric generating units ( egus ) ; ( 3 ) authority for sources in otherindustries to opt into the cap - and - trade program ; and ( 4 ) establishment of an optional"transitional area" category in place of the traditional nonattainment area designationsunder sections 107 and 110 . the ability of industrialsources to opt into the clear skies program would further reduce state mercurycontrol options . atpresent , 45 states have issued fish consumption advisories because of mercurycontamination . in about half the cases , the advisories affect every water body in thestate . in someareas , the removal of an industrial source from part c or part d could greatly reducethe options state and local authorities would have to achieve naaqs attainment orto maintain psd increments . similar problems are anticipated for clear skies' mercury controls . clear skies proposes relatively modest controls on mercury from electricutilities , ( 27 ) and most other sources of mercury are alreadysubject to more stringent controls . ( 28 ) as currently drafted , clear skies wouldeffectively remove additional electric utility controls from the suite of optionsavailable to the states to further reduce mercury emissions . the response of the administration is to argue that reductions will beachieved sooner and less expensively under clear skies than under the clean airact , ( 29 ) even though clear skies would extend compliance deadlines 5 to 15 years for statesto achieve air quality standards . the record of title iv suggests that substantialovercontrol may be achieved in the early years of a market - based cap - and - tradeprogram . however , as the program also illustrates over the past couple of years,those early reductions can be used later to increase emissions in a given year over themandated cap . ( 30 ) thus , achieving reductions early under acap - and - trade program does not mean achieving more reductions over the longerterm . for state and local authorities , this additional flexibility allowing sources touse banked allowances can further complicate compliance strategies . ( 26 ) clear skies,as currently drafted , would effectively remove additional electric utility control fromthe suite of options available to states to achieve that additional level of control . itdepends where they go on those for utilities - - we are talking for utilities now - - as far as most ofthose are concerned .