crs report rl32714 . the senate passed h.r . 4818 , after substituting the text of s. 2812 , as amended . conferees reached agreement november 19 on the foreign operations measure , together with eight other pending appropriation bills for fy2005 . 4818 , originally the foreign operations measure , became the vehicle for the omnibus consolidated appropriations act , 2005 . foreign operations is included as division d of the act . the president signed the measure on december 8 . arguably , from the end of world war ii until the early 1990s , the underlying rationale for providing foreign aid was the same as that for all u.s. foreign policy — the defeat of communism . u.s. aid programs were designed to promote economic development and policy reforms , in large part to create stability and reduce the attraction to communist ideology and to block soviet diplomatic links and military advances . other security assistance activities provided defense equipment and training to american allies and friendly states , some of which faced soviet or soviet - proxy threats . aid programs also were used to help the u.s. gain access to military bases around the world in order to forward deploy american forces . foreign aid programs also supported a number of secondary u.s. policy goals , such as reducing high rates of population growth , promoting wider access to health care , expanding the availability of basic education in the developing world , advancing u.s. trade interests , and protecting the environment . if these secondary goals were also achieved , u.s. aid programs could be promoted as delivering "more bang for the buck. with the end of the cold war , the united states launched expansive aid programs in russia and many eastern - bloc states that were previously those that u.s. assistance tried to combat . while these and other new elements of american foreign aid emerged , no broad consensus developed over what should be the new overarching rationale for u.s. aid programs . throughout the 1990s , policymakers and congress explored a number of alternative strategic frameworks around which to construct a revised foreign assistance policy rationale . not only did a policy consensus fail to emerge , but efforts to overhaul the largely cold war - based foreign aid legislation also did not succeed . during this period , the clinton administration emphasized the promotion of "sustainable development" as the new , post - cold war main strategy of those parts of the foreign aid program under the aegis of the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) . economic assistance supported six inter - related goals: achievement of broad - based , economic growth ; development of democratic systems ; stabilization of world population and protection of human health ; sustainable management of the environment ; building human capacity through education and training ; and meeting humanitarian needs . early in the bush administration these goals were modified around three "strategic pillars" of 1 ) economic growth , agriculture , and trade ; 2 ) global health ; and 3 ) democracy , conflict prevention , and humanitarian assistance .