military. ) even if the pla has not increased assertive actions , its capabilities and range have improved . even on relatively innocuous and cooperative efforts such as the parallel anti - piracy naval operations in the gulf of aden since late 2008 , the pla has not described them as useful for mil - to - mil engagement or cooperation with the u.s. navy ( at odds with u.s. goals and views ) . u.s. engagement with the pla in anti - piracy included hosting the commander of the pla navy's task force at the headquarters of the u.s. 5 th fleet in bahrain in december 2010 . in february 2011 , admiral mike mullen , chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , issued the national military strategy in which he stated the goals of a deeper military relationship to "expand areas of mutual interest and benefit , improve understanding , reduce misperception , and prevent miscalculation" as well as promotion of "common interests through china's cooperation in countering piracy and proliferation of wmd , and using its influence with north korea to preserve stability on the korean peninsula. enacted as p.l . 112-81 on december 31 , 2011 , the final legislation required reporting on cyber threats against the defense department but did not require the change back to the original title . in 2012 , defense secretary panetta submitted the report late again , on may 17 , 2012 , after a visit by prc defense minister liang guanglie on may 4-10 . on july 11 , chairman howard mckeon of the house armed services committee wrote to secretary panetta to express concerns that the annual report was submitted after the statutory deadline , was "wholly inadequate," and "minimizes the uncertainty and challenges posed by china's military build - up. he also called for the secretary to rescind a policy of limiting the length of all reports to congress . that day , the defense department issued a statement denying an intent to restrict information to congress . the next day , a spokesman said the department rescinded the guidance to restrict the page limit on reports to congress . the ndaa for fy2013 ( enacted as p.l . 112-239 on january 2 , 2013 ) required reports on the prc's tunnel sites and nuclear weapons program ; and on any critical gaps in intelligence and capabilities to counter challenges from the prc , north korea , and iran . the legislation also required additional reporting to strengthen the annual report on the pla to include assessments of the prc's cyber , space , nuclear , anti - access / area denial , c4isr , and maritime law enforcement capabilities , among other information ; and limit funds to no more than $7 million for the center of excellence on nuclear security in china . secretary of defense hagel submitted the annual report late in may 2013 . based on s. 1197 , section 1242 of the fy2014 ndaa ( p.l . 113-66 ) required the report to cover the pla's 5 th generation fighters . also , section 233 prohibited the defense department from using funds to integrate the prc's missile defense systems into u.s. missile defense systems .