hubris . enron's management was apparently unable to grasp that its arcane financial maneuvers would actually be the firm's downfall , making them unwilling to issue accounting restatements ( or listen to internal objections ) . the board wasn't paying attention . though technically independent , enron's directors repeatedly allowed management to make legally risky decisions . lack of information and undue trust in management's ability to sustain the company's meteoric rise made directors' decisions little more than rubber stamps . many of these problems have existed at other companies , during other periods in time . in order to effectively detect and prevent fraud in the future , it is important to understand some of the reasons why the recent wave of control fraud came when it did . some possible explanations that may be unique to this period in history are listed below: the long bull market allowed companies to conceal financial difficulties , because stock analysts , regulators , and ( above all ) investors were willing to believe in company financials that defied traditional , rational explanation . in addition , the technology and internet booms created furious investor demand for new companies with rosy forecasts but no revenues . the conventional wisdom was: if you can make money at it , great ! the increasing acceptance of financial innovations in both the business and accounting fields created an environment in which accounting creativity was rewarded . auditing was a loss leader as consulting became the major profit center for big accounting firms . therefore , the pressure was strong for accounting companies to overlook audit irregularities in order to help sell the client their consulting services . an alternative view is that accounting and management scandals are to be expected whenever a long period of market exuberance winds down . if the phenomenon is seen as primarily cyclical , the unique circumstances of the 1990s listed above may have influenced the scope and particular features of the scandals , but the underlying dynamics have appeared before and will return . finally , some observers , whose faith in market discipline has not been shaken by the outbreak of fraud , would say that the post - enron reaction is simply evidence of the system working by purging the markets of bad apples . until the next time . or does it reflect a more basic problem that regulators face: by focusing on individual acts of egregious misbehavior , they may miss systemic problems "hidden in plain sight" that gradually evolve into business as usual . criminal prosecutions related to corporate fraud exert considerable fascination , based partly on puzzlement . why do corporate managers , already well - compensated , seek ill - gotten gains that put their reputations , families , and social positions at risk ? edwin sutherland coined the term "white - collar crime" in a 1939 speech he gave to the american sociological society . he found in his research that crime could not always be associated with poverty , dysfunctional family life , or mental illness because these factors did not explain the many large privately owned companies that participated in criminal activity .