in enacting p.l . 94-142 , congress provided grants to the states to help pay for education for children with disabilities and also delineated specific requirements the states must follow in order to receive these federal funds . these requirements did not contain a discipline provision per se but rather contained a requirement that if there is a dispute between the school and the parents of a child with a disability , the child "stays put" in his or her current educational placement until the dispute is resolved using the due process procedures set forth in the statute . the concept of "stay put" was placed in the statute to help eliminate the then common discriminatory practice of expelling children with disabilities from school . a revised "stay put" provision remains as law in the current version of idea . issues relating to children with disabilities who exhibited violent or inappropriate behavior have been raised for a number of years . in 1988 , the question of whether there was an implied exception to the stay put rule was presented to the supreme court in honig v. doe . honig involved emotionally disturbed children one of whom had choked another student with sufficient force to leave abrasions on the child's neck and who had kicked out a window while he was being escorted to the principal's office . the other child in the honig case had been involved in stealing , extorting money and making lewd comments . the school had sought expulsion , but the supreme court disagreed finding that "congress very much meant to strip schools of the unilateral authority they had traditionally employed to exclude disabled students , particularly emotionally disturbed students , from school. however , the court observed that this holding did "not leave educators hamstrung....where a student poses an immediate threat to the safety of others , officials may temporarily suspend him or her for up to 10 school days....and in those cases in which the parents of a truly dangerous child adamantly refuse to permit any change in placement , the 10-day respite gives school officials an opportunity to invoke the aid of the courts under section 1415 ( e ) ( 2 ) , which empowers courts to grant any appropriate relief. this statement about the school's right to seek judicial relief has come to be known as a honig injunction . the supreme court's interpretation of idea in honig did not quell all concerns about discipline and children with disabilities . in 1994 , congress amended idea's stay put provision to give schools the unilateral authority to remove a child with a disability to an interim alternative educational setting if the child was determined to have brought a firearm to school . this provision was expanded upon in the idea amendments of 1997 to include weapons , not just firearms , and drugs and is further expanded in the 2004 reauthorization to include situations where a student has inflicted serious bodily injury upon another person while at school . the department of education ( ed ) had received numerous questions from schools about discipline and in 1995 issued a memorandum discussing numerous discipline issues including the use of manifestation determinations .