they are cited and summarized below . in addition to the laws which are discussed below , two other states — colorado and massachusetts — have "family friendly jury duty legislation" that do not appear to accommodate breastfeeding activities . at the current time , one state's legislature is considering a bill which , if enacted , would impact breastfeeding mothers and their jury duty responsibilities . the bill is cited and summarized below . however , it should be considered , as it is early in the state legislative sessions , that additional bills may be subsequently introduced . this section of the report deals only with state - wide court rules and federal district court rules for jury service relating to breastfeeding . it does not deal with local , county , or municipal court rules which may provide 1 ) a specific excuse for breastfeeding mothers ; or 2 ) a general excuse under "family friendly" court rules . the following chart compares the ways in which states currently deal with the issue of breastfeeding and jury duty . some states have enacted legislation which provides a specific excuse or deferral from jury duty for a breastfeeding mother . other states have enacted more general "family friendly" legislation that excuses a prospective juror from duty when faced with various family responsibilities . depending upon the language of the statute and its implementation , such legislation may or may not excuse or defer breastfeeding mothers from jury duty . legislation is currently pending in wyoming to legislatively respond to the issue of breastfeeding and jury duty . california has a specific state - wide court rule which deals with the issue of breastfeeding mothers and jury duty . it is likely that local and state courts — where there is no uniform rule — may have varied , and not necessarily implemented consistent policies in dealing with breastfeeding mothers and jury duty responsibilities . the laws vary significantly in their language and scope . these laws are cited and summarized below . additionally , wyoming is considering legislation to defer or excuse jury duty . some state statutes excuse or postpone jury duty for family caregivers . while they vary , some of these laws may apply to breastfeeding mothers . another state legislative development is the enactment of "family friendly" jury duty legislation that permits parents who care for a young child on a full time basis , or who are caretakers of an elderly or disabled relative , to have jury service deferred or excused upon their request . usually , breastfeeding mothers fall with the coverage of these statutes , although the statutes vary , and may not be applicable under every circumstance . currently , twelve states — alaska , colorado , florida , georgia , illinois , massachusetts , new jersey , south carolina , tennessee , texas , virginia , and wyoming have some form of "family friendly jury duty legislation. ( the laws of colorado and massachusetts probably are not applicable to the excuse or deferral of breastfeeding mothers from jury duty. ) california has adopted a state - wide court rule which uniformly deals with breastfeeding and jury service .