no cases have been reported in the united states . the fda feed ban both prior to and since the announcement of enhanced safeguards in january , 2004 , permits beef by - products in u.s. commercial cat food , which is technically regulated as "feed. the fy2006 appropriation for usda ( h.r . 109-97 ) postpones cool for an additional two years , until september 30 , 2008 . meanwhile , debate over the pros and cons of cool continues into the 110 th congress , where some members still oppose the delay , and have expressed their intention to require implementation sooner . others are working to make cool a voluntary , not mandatory , program for industry . among the reasons that cool is needed , according to supporters , is that consumers have a right to know where their food is from , particularly in light of recent animal health and food safety concerns such as the two bse cases in canadian - born cows . other bills in the 109 th congress included h.r . 1254 , the national farm animal identification and records act , h.r . 1256 , to limit animal id information disclosure , and h.r . 3170 , creating a private livestock identification board to oversee the program . a provision of s. 2002 would have required usda to establish a ruminant id program . continuing differences over animal id have propelled the issue into the 110 th congress . many observers expect that these differences could be resolved in a part of the next omnibus farm bill , which the house and senate agriculture committees hope to complete in 2007 . as of mid - may , two animal id bills had been introduced: h.r . 1018 , to prohibit usda from implementing a mandatory program ; and h.r . 2301 , to establish a producer - governed program . u.s. law requires most imports , including many food items , to bear labels informing the "ultimate purchaser" of their country of origin . various raw agricultural products have been exempt . the 2002 farm bill ( p.l . 107-171 ) required many retailers to provide , starting september 30 , 2004 , country - of - origin labeling ( cool ) on fresh fruits and vegetables , and unprocessed red meats , fish , and peanuts . past congresses delayed the implementation deadline several times . the conference report on the omnibus fy2004 appropriation , which included usda funding ( h.rept . 108-199 ) delayed the effective date for mandatory cool for two years , until september 30 , 2006 ( except for fish ; that portion is now in effect ) . cool critics have countered that it is a thinly - disguised trade barrier intended to increase the costs of imports , and that it undermines u.s. efforts to reform world agricultural trade ; moreover , they argue that , as designed , the mandatory program for industry will be extremely expensive to maintain , and might hold them legally accountable for inadvertent or minor mistakes in records . prior to enactment of mandatory cool in 2002 , industry leaders were seeking from usda a voluntary program for labeling beef of u.s. origin .