b . an affidavit delivered pursuant to subsection a of this section shall state in substance each of the following: ( 1 ) the name of the proceeding and any docket number assigned to such proceeding as shown on the subpoena itself . ( 2 ) the name of the affiant and his business title or other description indicating his position or relationship to the party to whom the subpoena was issued if he is not the person to whom it was directed . ( 3 ) the dates of publication or broadcast records searched and the dates of publication or broadcast of the documents or records actually produced . ( 4 ) a statement that the documents or records produced were published or broadcast by the news media organization . ann . § 12-2237 ( west 2004 ) ) § 12-2237 . reporter and informant a person engaged in newspaper , radio , television or reportorial work , or connected with or employed by a newspaper , radio or television station , shall not be compelled to testify or disclose in a legal proceeding or trial or any proceeding whatever , or before any jury , inquisitorial body or commission , or before a committee of the legislature , or elsewhere , the source of information procured or obtained by him for publication in a newspaper or for broadcasting over a radio or television station with which he was associated or by which he is employed . arkansas ( ark . code ann . § 16-85-510 ( west 2003 & supp . 2004 ) ) § 16-85-510 privilege before any editor , reporter , or other writer for any newspaper , periodical , or radio station , or publisher of any newspaper or periodical , or manager or owner of any radio station shall be required to disclose to any grand jury or to any other authority the source of information used as the basis for any article he may have written , published , or broadcast , it must be shown that the article was written , published , or broadcast in bad faith , with malice , and not in the interest of the public welfare . california ( cal . evid . code § 1070 ( west 2005 ) ) § 1070 . refusal to disclose news source ( a ) a publisher , editor , reporter , or other person connected with or employed upon a newspaper , magazine , or other periodical publication , or by a press association or wire service , or any person who has been so connected or employed , cannot be adjudged in contempt by a judicial , legislative , administrative body , or any other body having the power to issue subpoenas , for refusing to disclose , in any proceeding as defined in section 901 , the source of any information procured while so connected or employed for publication in a newspaper , magazine or other periodical publication , or for refusing to disclose any unpublished information obtained or prepared in gathering , receiving or processing of information for communication to the public .