assistance efforts in sudan . in 1991 president george h.w . bush suspended trade preferences afforded sudan under the generalized system of preferences . sudan was reassessed based in large part on the government's commitment to implement a plan of action to end sexual violence against women in darfur . we will look to the sudanese government to ensure quick and effective implementation of the plan . in fine - tuning the imposition of economic sanctions on sudan , congress made an effort to distinguish between the government of sudan , the people of sudan , and areas of the country outside of control of the government , to make aid and commerce available to the general population , with enactment of the following in the assistance for international malaria control act: sec . ( a ) additional authorities. — notwithstanding any other provision of law , the president is authorized to undertake appropriate programs using federal agencies , contractual arrangements , or direct support of indigenous groups , agencies , or organizations in areas outside of control of the government of sudan in an effort to provide emergency relief , promote economic self - sufficiency , build civil authority , provide education , enhance rule of law and the development of judicial and legal frameworks , support people - to - people reconciliation efforts , or implement any program in support of any viable peace agreement at the local , regional , or national level in sudan . ( b ) exception to export prohibitions. — notwithstanding any other provision of law , the prohibition set forth with respect to sudan in executive order 13067 of november 3 , 1997 ( 62 fed . register 59989 ) shall not apply to any export from an area in sudan outside of control of the government of sudan , or to any necessary transaction directly related to that export , if the president determines that the export or related transaction , as the case may be , would directly benefit the economic development of that area and its people . the foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations act , 2005 , further limits the implementation of economic sanctions to only those parts of the country under control of the government of sudan . thus , despite fairly comprehensive and longstanding restrictions on foreign aid imposed under various statutes for terrorism , debt arrearage , or military dictatorship , language in the assistance for international malaria control act , and subsequent acts , authorizes the president to override those restrictions as they might apply to large portions of sudan's population . congress also singled out the national democratic alliance of sudan as exempt from economic sanctions restricting foreign aid in the foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations act , 2005 . economic support funds may be made available to that group "to strengthen its ability to protect civilians from attacks , slave raids , and aerial bombardment by the sudanese government forces and its militia allies..." though such funding is "subject to the regular notification procedures of the committees on appropriations.