the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act ( p.l . 108-458 ) required the president to submit to congress within 180 days a strategy for collaboration with the people and government of saudi arabia , including a framework for cooperation on efforts to combat terrorist financing . in the 110 th congress , section 2043 of the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act ( p.l . 110-53 , signed august 3 , 2007 ) finds that "the kingdom of saudi arabia has an uneven record in the fight against terrorism , especially with respect to terrorist financing," and requires the administration to submit a report 180 days after enactment describing the long term strategy of the united states , "to work with the government of saudi arabia to combat terrorism , including through effective measures to prevent and prohibit the financing of terrorists by saudi institutions and citizens. the document submitted in january 2008 does not describe a strategy for future counter - terrorist financing cooperation with saudi arabia , but does review in general terms saudi actions to date to improve their counter - terrorist financing measures . members of congress may seek to support executive branch efforts to encourage implementation of new saudi laws and regulations . section 575 of the fy2005 omnibus appropriations bill ( p.l . it is given to a people ..." to help them deal with a difficult humanitarian situation . saudi arabia made significant efforts to support a palestinian unity government prior to the intra - palestinian violence of early 2007 , and , in december 2007 , saudi arabia pledged between $500 and $750 million to the palestinian authority over three years . charitable giving ( zakat ) is a religious obligation for muslims , constituting one of the five "pillars of islam. many wealthy saudis contribute approximately 2.5 percent of their annual income or more to charitable causes and relief organizations that fund religious education programs , orphanages , hospitals , and other development projects both within saudi arabia and around the world . one expert estimates saudi charitable donations , in general , to be about $3 billion to $4 billion annually , of which 10-20% is disseminated abroad . saudi officials estimate that $100 million in charitable donations are directed abroad each year . as part of the government's effort to combat potential terrorist financing activities , saudi charities reportedly are now prohibited from sending funds abroad , although international charities headquartered in the kingdom continue to raise funds for international activities via saudi banks and private saudi citizens may direct domestic and externally - held assets to overseas charitable endeavors . it seems clear that challenges to internal security and terrorist incidents in saudi arabia have impelled the saudi leadership to devote heightened attention to countering the financing of terrorism . this has been particularly true since mid - 2003 , when terrorists began mounting a series of attacks on residential and office compounds , apparently in an effort to target the saudi government as well as the western presence in saudi arabia . both u.s. officials and independent observers have welcomed the mechanisms that saudi authorities have put in place with the aim of stemming the flow of funds destined for terrorist groups .