jobs are created and destroyed . what is produced and what is traded for will not be determined just by relative wages , but rather the relative efficiency in the production of traded products . low wages will likely attract certain types of production . however , because of differences among countries in their capacity for innovation , in their technical prowess , and in their workers' skills and productivity , there will be many things that can be produced more efficiently in high - wage economies such as the united states . over time an economy's relative advantages may change but there need be no general deterioration in what it gains from trade . there is an economic gain from inducing more r&d by companies , but the knowledge that is produced will not be widely disseminated for the term of the patent . given the cumulative nature of knowledge production , this restriction on the flow of knowledge will tend to slow the rate of production of knowledge generally . another policy device that attempts to coax more r&d out of business firms is the r&d tax credit . while the evidence indicates that the research tax credit does raise r&d spending by firms , many economists have significant doubts about how well the tax credit does at targeting and inducing r&d projects with large social benefits . the absolute level of inflation - adjusted government spending on basic research has increased from about $1.4 billion in 1953 to about $39 billion in 2004 . the intensity of government - funded basic research , however , has fallen , decreasing from about 0.7% of gdp in 1953 to about 0.2% of gdp in 2004. international evidence has shown that there is a positive correlation of the intensity of government - funded basic research and economic growth . nevertheless , the understanding of linkage between basic research and economic growth is not well specified , making it difficult to predict the precise pay - off in economic growth from a given increase in spending on basic research . this , in turn , makes it difficult to say what the optimal level of such spending should be . a second policy issue with government - funded basic research is the mix of that funding across areas of scientific inquiry . the share of government research spending in health - related areas has risen steadily for the last 30 years and has increased dramatically over the last 10 years . funding for life - sciences now accounts for 60% of the government's basic research expenditures . in contrast , inflation - adjusted funding for basic research in the physical sciences has not risen over the last 30 years and accounts for only 10% of the government's budget for basic research . some argue that this disparity in funding is inconsistent with the often interdisciplinary nature of major innovations and is a movement away from the balanced basic research portfolio that is most likely to yield the maximum long - run return . this argument is not that research funds should be reallocated away from health areas , but rather that there should be a more balanced increase across all areas of basic research .