this was rejected by pyongyang . china remains the dprk's chief ally . in addition to sharing its status as one of the last communist regimes in the world , china views the korean peninsula as vital to its strategic interests . beijing values north korea as a buffer between the democratic south korea and the u.s. forces stationed there , as a rationale to divert u.s. and japanese resources in the asia pacific toward dealing with pyongyang and less focused on the growing military might of china , and as a destination for chinese foreign investment and trade . beijing arguably has more influence in pyongyang than any other nation . cooperation between the two countries is extensive but often strained . in 1961 , china and the dprk signed a mutual defense pact , but recently a chinese official reportedly said that they are not "well informed of the internal situation of the north korean military" and that the dprk "does not listen to what china has to say. ( this presumably referred to pyongyang's missile and nuclear tests. ) also with respect to north korean refugees , their first destination is usually northeastern china . according to human rights watch , china labels north korean border - crossers as illegal economic migrants , rather than refugees or asylum seekers , and usually sends them back to north korea . china also is hosting and facilitating the ongoing six - party talks that seek a resolution to the north korean nuclear problem . liberalization of north korean trade and investment relations , moreover , can work through the economy in the same way that it did in china and russia by exposing the public to the benefits of increased wealth . the major negative to establishing trade with north korea is that , unless it is part of a larger package that includes other concessions , the united states could be viewed as exchanging an important bargaining chip for minimal gain . the united states could ease economic sanctions on north korea if the country resolves the issues that caused the sanctions to be imposed initially . since north korea's other trading partners have more liberal trade with north korea , it is mainly american companies and traders that are impacted by the sanctions . pyongyang can spend its available foreign exchange in any of a number of world markets — in china , russia , europe , southeast asia , or elsewhere . moreover , as north korea opens its economy , u.s. businesses would be able to decide whether or not to invest there based on their own economic interests and not because they are hindered from doing so by u.s. law . the united states could stop blocking the dprk from joining the major ifis , particularly the asian development bank , world bank , and international monetary fund . pyongyang is particularly interested in joining the asian development bank , but ifi procedures require membership first in the international monetary fund . the imf requires certain economic data which the world bank or asian development bank needs to evaluate projects and loan requests .