australia fits that model . ( 3 ) the usafta builds on theu.s. they are pleased that the u.s. beef market will be opened graduallyto australian exporters over an 18-year period . the american farm bureau supports the usaftaas long as the sps issues and other issues that affect u.s. agricultural exports are resolved beforethe congress votes on the agreement . ( 31 ) u.s. manufacturers strongly support the usafta , calling for immediate congressional approval . national association of manufacturers ( nam ) vice - president frank vargo has labeledthe usafta "the manufacturers agreement. united states trade representative robert zoellick and australian trade minister mark vailesigned the agreement on may 18 , 2004 , in washington . within 60 days after signing the agreement,the president must submit a preliminary list of u.s. laws that will have to be changed in order tocomply with the agreement . after entering into the agreement , but within no specific time frame,the president then can submit a draft of the agreement , the implementing legislation , and statementof administrative action to both houses of congress . the three documents must be submitted ondays in which both houses are in session . the congress then has a total of 90 legislative days inwhich to act: the house committees with jurisdiction over the agreement have 45 legislative daysduring which to review and report out the agreement followed by 15 legislative days for floor action . the senate committees of jurisdiction have an additional 15 legislative days to consider and reportout the implementing legislation followed by an additional 15 legislative days for floor action . under trade promotion authority the amount of time for debate on the agreement in both housesis limited and the vote is strictly yea or nay ( no amendments ) . ( 33 ) on june 23 , 2004 , the house ways and means committee and the senate finance committee each held a "mock mark - up" of implementing legislation . the ways and means committeeapproved by voice vote the "legislation" on june 23 without amendment . on a largely party - linevote , the finance committee approved an amendment that will require the ustr to obtain approvalfrom the ways and means and finance committees before he could waive requirement to implementa safeguard measure against imports australian beef . on june 24 , senate finance reported thelegislation out unfavorably ( 7-14 ) . the bush administration was expected to submit implementinglegislation based on the house ways and means committee version . on july 6 , 2004 , the president formally submitted legislation to implement the agreement . on july 8 , the house ways and means committee favorably reported out the implementing bill , h.r . 4759 , by voice vote , and the full house approved the measure ( 314-109 ) on july15 . on july 15 , the senate finance committee reported out bill , and the full senate approved themeasure ( 80-16 ) on july 16 . the bill was sent to the president for his signature . president bushsigned the u.s. - australia free trade agreement implementation act on august 3 , 2004 ( p.l.108-286 ) .