109-177 , 120 stat . while both the house and senate considered free - standing bills that provided for inclusion of the secretary of dhs , this action was incorporated into comprehensive legislation to enhance and reauthorize the usa patriot act . additional succession - related proposals have been offered that have not been introduced as legislation . they seek particularly to address post - 9 / 11 concerns over the prospect of a "decapitation" of the u.s. government by a terrorist attack or attacks , possibly involving the use of weapons of mass destruction . one proposal , suggested by john c. fortier at joint senate committee hearings held in september , 2003 , would have congress establish a number of additional federal officers whose specific duties and function would be to be ready to assume the acting presidency if necessary . fortier envisions that the president would appoint them , subject to senate confirmation , and that obvious candidates would be governors , former presidents , vice presidents , cabinet officers , and members of congress , in other words , private citizens who have had broad experience in government . they would receive regular briefings , and would also serve as advisors to the president . a further crucial element is that they would be located outside the washington , d.c. area , in order to be available in the event of a governmental "decapitation. fortier further suggested that these officers should be included ahead of cabinet officers "lower in the line of succession. although he was not more specific in his testimony , it could be argued that these officers might be inserted after the "big four" , i.e. , the secretaries of state , the treasury , and defense , the attorney general , and , possibly the secretary of homeland security , should that officer be included at that place , as proposed in some pending legislation . miller baker offered other proposals during his testimony at the september , 2003 , hearings , all of which would require amending the succession act of 1947 . under one , the president would be empowered to name an unspecified number of state governors as potential successors . the constitutional mechanism here would be the president's ability to call state militias ( the national guard ) into federal service . baker argues that , by virtue of their positions as commanders - in - chief of their state contingents of the national guard , governors could , in effect be transformed into federal "officers" by the federalization of the guard . another proposal by fortier would amend the succession act to establish a series of assistant vice presidents , nominated by the president , and subject to approval by advice and consent of the senate . these officers would be included in the order of succession at an appropriate place . they would be classic "stand - by" equipment: their primary function would be to be informed , prepared , and physically safe , ready to serve as acting president , should that be required .