the reason is clear . brand - name prescription drugs often cost less abroad — particularly for the uninsured and many of the elderly who pay retail prices . under current law , only the manufacturer of a prescription drug may legally bring it into the united states . the law allows u.s. pharmacists and wholesalers to do so only if the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) first certifies that those drugs would be safe and that the program lowered drug costs for u.s. consumers . after issuing that certification , the secretary must issue regulations allowing individuals to import prescription drugs . because no hhs secretary has ever taken that step , consumers , pharmacists , and wholesalers are prohibited from importing prescription drugs . given the difference between prices in the united states and elsewhere , many americans , including some members of congress , want legislation eliminating the restrictions on imports . this report does not address whether drug prices are too high or unfair . it does focus on the issues recent legislative proposals raise in attempting to help u.s. consumers — themselves or through importing pharmacists and wholesalers — gain access to safe and less expensive food and drug administration ( fda ) - approved prescription drugs from abroad . the report begins with an overview of the domestic drug distribution system and how congress has handled prescription drug importation . it then discusses the current situation following its upsurge in the volume of drug imports , state and local government initiatives , the drug industry and fda's reactions , and the legislative proposals introduced to consider this issue . it goes on to examine three broad sets of issues surrounding importation . the first involves ensuring drug safety and effectiveness , by attending to product integrity and appropriate use . the next set explores whether a drug import program would be feasible administratively and in the context of international trade and pharmaceutical research and development . the report concludes by discussing the likelihood that a drug import program would save u.s. consumers money . ( a separate crs report provides a detailed side - by - side comparison of current law and selected major importation bills introduced but not passed during the 109 th congress . other crs reports focus in more detail on legal and drug price issues. ) since 1938 , the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca , p.l . 75-717 ) has required that drugs sold to u.s. consumers be safe . with its 1962 kefauver - harris amendments ( p.l . 87-781 ) , all drugs had to be proven effective as well . the ffdca is the major law that set up the current u.s. system of drug regulation ; subsequent legislation amends it . in the last 17 years , congressional and fda actions have addressed the importation of prescription drugs by , in turn , limiting imports , establishing exceptions to those restrictions , and attempting to broaden access to imports .