first , h.r . 1591 would have extended the straight - line 15-year cost recovery period for leasehold and restaurant improvements through 2008 , while h.r . 2 would have extended that treatment only through march 2008 . only one of the three tax preferences targets most of its benefits at small firms: a one - year extension ( through the end of 2010 ) of the enhanced small business expensing allowance enacted under jgtrra . the other two — a reduction in the period for recovering the cost of new restaurant buildings through depreciation allowances from 39 years to 15 years and a repeal of the surtax for the federal unemployment trust fund enacted in 1976 — could benefit firms of all sizes . it seems reasonable to maintain that h.r . 324 is intended , in part , to set forth some of the key conditions that must be satisfied before the republican leadership could accept an increase in the federal minimum wage . representative nadia velazquez , chairwoman of the house committee on small business , introduced h.r . 46 in early january 2007 . among other things , the bill would allow buyers of eligible small firms to amortize over five years up to $5 million in qualified intangible assets , increase the capital gains exclusion for the sale of eligible small business stock from 50% to 62.5% , raise the minimum home office deduction to $2,500 , and expand the maximum number of shareholders for subchapter s corporations to 150 . senator john kerry , chairman of the senate committee on small business and entrepreneurship , introduced a bill ( s. 99 ) that would create a partially refundable tax credit for certain small firms that provide health insurance coverage to employees . the credit would range from 50% of qualified health insurance expenses for employers with fewer than 10 such employees , to 20% for employers with 25 to 49 employees . firms with 50 or more employees would be ineligible for the credit . senator max baucus , chairman of the senate finance committee , introduced a bill ( s. 41 ) that seeks to bolster the domestic climate for technological innovation . while its central focus is improving the efficacy of the research tax credit under irc section 41 , the bill includes a new non - refundable personal tax credit to encourage an increased flow of equity investment in small firms that invest heavily in research and development ( r& d ) . the credit would be equal to 5% of the amount paid to a qualified research entity for an equity stake . it could be claimed for the first five years an investor owns stock in such an entity . a qualified research entity is defined as any domestic corporation or partnership that provides "investment capital for qualifying small business innovation companies. an explanation of how these and other legislative proposals would change current tax law follows . the discussion is divided between proposals to enhance current small business tax benefits and proposals to establish new ones .