program . the carfa legislation defines program as "any activity or function of an agency. faca . the carfa legislation is silent on whetherthe commission would be considered an "advisory committee" that is covered by the federaladvisory committee act ( faca ; 5 u.s.c . the hoover commission's concluding report prominently remarked on "the wastes ofoverlapping and duplication. however,critics might argue that the terms are inherently subjective , and that the legislation's expeditedprocedures for congressional consideration ( discussed and analyzed further , below ) would not allowsufficient scrutiny of a commission's recommendations and implementation bill . ( 91 ) more recently , other terms , in addition to duplicative and overlapping , have been used to describe several agencies or programs engaging in activities thatsome observers see as similar or related . these terms include crosscutting , fragmented , and redundant . gao's analysis of mission fragmentation and program overlap in federal agencies , forexample , provides the analytical foundation for much of the current discourse regarding federalprograms that appear to do similar or related things . ( 92 ) an underlying framework that gao used for making thesecategorizations is the federal government's set of budget function classifications , which , as notedpreviously , refer to broad categories of federal spending , organized according to the purpose ormission of government ( eg , defense , income security , and law enforcement ) . ( 93 ) however , gao offeredthe following caveat with regard to the term duplication : although [the budget function classification] systemcan indicate broad categories of fragmentation and overlap , it does not directly address the issue ofprogram duplication . while mission fragmentation and program overlap are relativelystraightforward to identify , determining whether overlapping programs are actually duplicativerequires an analysis of target populations , specific program goals , and the means used to achievethem . ( 94 ) furthermore , when appearing before the house committee on government reform's subcommitteeon government efficiency and financial management , a former omb career official testified thatmaking such assessments involves several subtleties . he stated that , while some programs mightbe "in competition with one another" ( i.e , duplicative ) , it is also possible that similar programs mightuse different methods , serve different populations , or even be complementary to each other . ( 95 ) wasteful , inefficient , outdated , irrelevant , or failed . the other terms insection 3 ( c ) of the carfa legislation have less complex histories , but also might be more difficultto define in ways that would achieve consensus among varied stakeholders and observers . section3 ( c ) ( 2 ) defines wasteful and inefficient in three possible ways , either requiring ( house version of thecarfa legislation ) or allowing ( senate version ) the proposed commission to "recommend therealignment or elimination of any agency or program that has wasted federal funds by - - ( a ) egregious spending ; ( b ) mismanagement of resources and personnel ; or ( c ) use of such funds forpersonal benefit or the benefit of a special interest group.