this report considers these topics in turn . should congressional interest continue in this area , a variety of options are available . if thecurrent scope of the common law experimental use privilege is deemed to be appropriate , then noaction need be taken . alternatively , congress could enact legislation confirming the narrowlycabined view of the experimental use privilege as set forth in madey v. duke university andpredecessor cases . if reform of the experimental use privilege is deemed prudent , however , another possibilityis the introduction of some additional form of the experimental use privilege into the patent act of1952 . this infringement exemption could supplement or replace the narrow experimental useprivilege introduced by the hatch - waxman act . one option is to incorporate a generally applicableprivilege of the sort contemplated by the proposed , but unenacted patent competitiveness andtechnological innovation act of 1990 . 5598 was introduced before the 101st congress onseptember 12 , 1990 . section 402 of that bill provided: it shall not be an act of infringement to make or use apatented invention solely for research or experimentation purposes unless the patented invention hasa primary purpose of research or experimentation . if the patented invention has a primary purposeof research or experimentation , it shall not be an act of infringement to manufacture or use suchinvention to study , evaluate , or characterize such invention or to create a product outside the scopeof the patent covering such invention . 5598 was reported by the house judiciary committee on october 26 , 1990 . other intellectualproperty statutes , including the plant variety protection act , semiconductor chip protection act,and the vessel hull design protection act , also provide examples of the manner in which agenerally applicable statutory experimental use privilege could be drafted . a more limited statutory experimental use privilege presents another law reform option . such a privilege might be limited to patented inventions that arise in particular technological fields,in the fashion of the proposed , but unenacted genomic research and diagnostic accessibility actof 2002 . 3967 would have exempted from patent infringement the use of genetic sequenceinformation for purposes of research . in addition , this bill would have limited the remedies that theowner of a patent on genetic diagnostic testing could obtain during infringement litigation . following its introduction in the 107th congress on march 14 , 2002 , h.r . 3967 was referred to thesubcommittee on courts , the internet and intellectual property on may 6 , 2002 , but no further actionwas taken . another possibility would be to limit the experimental use privilege to patented researchtools , in whatever technological field they might arise . yet another option is to grant anexperimental use privilege in favor of universities or non - profit research institutions , but retain thecurrent law of experimental use with respect to for - profit enterprises . consideration of any sort of statutory reform with respect to experimental use privilegeshould take into account the agreement on trade - related aspects of intellectual propertyrights . ( 124 ) theunited states is a signatory to the so - called "trips agreement," which is a component of theinternational agreements that form the world trade organization ( wto ) .