the institutionalized persons provisions of rluipa apply to any facility that accepts federal funding . rfra statutorily reinstated the strict scrutiny standard in all circumstances where government actions burdened religious exercise . rfra provided that the government could substantially burden a person's exercise of religion only if the burden ( 1 ) is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest and ( 2 ) is the least restrictive means of furthering that interest . as originally enacted , rfra applied the strict scrutiny standard for governmental action at the federal , state , and local levels . congress justified applying strict scrutiny to the states as an exercise of power under section 5 of the fourteenth amendment , which grants "congress the power to enforce , by appropriate legislation , the provisions of this article [guaranteeing individuals equal protection and due process of law]. in ex parte virginia , the supreme court explained section 5 of the fourteenth amendment as follows: whatever legislation is appropriate , that is , adapted to carry out the objects the amendments have in view , whatever tends to enforce submission to the prohibitions they contain , and to secure to all persons the enjoyment of perfect equality of civil rights and the equal protection of the laws against state denial or invasion , if not prohibited , is brought within the domain of congressional power . the court has described congress's power under section 5 as a "remedial" power because it extends only to "enforc[ing]" the provisions of the fourteenth amendment . in city of boerne , texas v. flores , the supreme court held rfra unconstitutional as it applied to states and localities because the statute exceeded congress's remedial powers to enforce rights under the fourteenth amendment . in boerne , the court considered whether rfra could exempt a church from local zoning requirements in a historic district . the supreme court held that "by enacting rfra , congress had exceeded [its remedial authority under section 5] by defining rights instead of simply enforcing them. the court explained that congress's powers under section 5 of the fourteenth amendment were limited to the extent that there must be a "congruence and proportionality" between the injury to be remedied and the law adopted to that end . in order to satisfy the court's "congruence and proportionality" test , congress must limit the scope of the remedial measure to only those instances where the record clearly demonstrates a pervasive pattern of violations of the fourteenth amendment . the court was unable to find a pattern of the use of neutral laws of general applicability to disguise bigotry and animus against religion , and therefore struck down rfra as an overbroad response to a relatively non - existent problem . the court held that a compelling interest analysis was an inappropriate constitutional test for neutral laws of general applicability . congress responded to the smith decision by enacting the religious freedom restoration act ( rfra ; p.l . in the wake of boerne , congress enacted the religious land use and institutionalized persons act of 2000 ( rluipa ; p.l .