management of alerts . the cmsaac recommended that a federal agency act as an aggregator in accepting , verifying , and routing messages . the fcc continues to refine the rules for providing cmas . the most recent set of requirements is contained in the third report and order , released august 7 , 2008 ( docket no . the warn act did not provide a mandatory deadline for the implementation of cmas . the ncp directorate will take on the responsibility of acting as a gateway and aggregator of alerts for dissemination through cmas . on december 7 , 2009 , fema and the fcc jointly announced that fema had adopted the cmas government interface design specifications . this triggered requirements in the third report and order for wireless carriers that have agreed to participate in the cmas program to begin development and testing . the deadlines established by the fcc give these carriers until april 7 , 2012 , to provide cmas alerts sent through the ipaws gateway . according to press reports , the major wireless carriers have indicated that they will participate in the program . in the long term , ipaws should be able to accept any legitimate alert or action announcement , verify it , and relay it to a wide variety of devices . information would be available in multiple languages and formats accessible to those with special needs . the technology to achieve this would reside in servers that would act as information gateways . the development and implementation of ipaws is part of the response to the order . it subsequently scaled back its activities for lack of funding . on june 26 , 2006 , president george w. bush issued an executive order stating that u.s. policy is "to have an effective , reliable , integrated , flexible , and comprehensive system to alert and warn the american people. to achieve this policy , the president set out a list of functional requirements for the secretary of homeland security to meet that respond to the recommendations of experts in this field . in summary , these requirements cover evaluating existing resources ; adopting common protocols , standards , and other procedures to enable interoperability ; delivering alerts on criteria such as location or risk ; accommodating disabilities and language needs ; supporting necessary communications facilities ; conducting training , testing , and exercises ; ensuring public education about emergency warnings ; coordinating and cooperating with the private sector and government at all levels ; administering the existing emergency alert system as a component of the broader system ; ensuring that the president can alert and warn the american people . the order also specified the level of support expected from other departments and agencies in meeting the requirements for a better warning system . the secretary of homeland security was ordered to "ensure an orderly and effective transition" from current capabilities to the system described by executive order . the warning , alert , and response network act ( warn act ) , as signed into law as title vi of p.l . 109 - 347 , required the establishment of a commercial mobile service alert advisory committee by the fcc .