they can represent such persons in the modificationhearing . they can advocate on their client's behalf to get driver's licenses , professional licenses , orpassports reinstated . they can advise noncustodial parents of their rights regarding child custodyand visitation . they can petition the court for custody or visitation rights on the noncustodialparent's behalf . the lsc is funded through congressional appropriations . they can help noncustodial parents getarrest or conviction records expunged . the lsc has invested about $3 million over the last couple of years from its informationtechnology budget to provide that every state has a comprehensive legal services internet websitewhere clients can access important legal materials . other information technology grants havesupported the creation of websites specifically designed to assist self - represented litigants by offeringdownloadable self - help materials , referrals to legal and social services providers , and other usefullinks . ( 25 ) recent efforts on the part of legal services programs to coordinate and improve clientoutreach and community legal education provide one way for noncustodial parents to gain assistancein resolving many of their child support issues . just as divorce , paternity issues , child custody,visitation , eviction , etc. , are important issues for mothers who historically have received help fromlegal services , they also are pivotal for fathers as well . the lscdoes not provide legal services directly , but rather it provides grants to independent local legalservices programs selected through a competitive process . the primary responsibility of the lscis to manage and oversee the congressionally appropriated federal funds that it distributes in the formof grants to local legal services providers that in turn provide civil legal assistance to low - incomeclients in the 50 states , the district of columbia , and five u.s. territories . in fy2004 , the lscdistributed $316.6 million of its $335.3 million appropriation in the form of grants to 143 local legalservices programs . the remaining funds were allocated for management and administration,information technology , and its office of the inspector general . lsc funding accounts for about half of all funding in the united states for civil legal servicesfor the poor . in 2004 , there were approximately 45 million persons who were potentially eligiblefor lsc - funded services , ( 2 ) but according to lsc surveys only about 20% of those eligible for and in need of services actuallyreceived services . although low - income noncustodial parents who owe child support are among thepersons eligible for lsc - funded services , they aren't among the groups that have traditionally beenhelped by legal services programs and therefore may have a hard time accessing services that arealready in short supply . the child support enforcement ( cse ) program ( title iv - d of the social security act ) wasenacted in january 1975 ( p.l . the cse program is a federal / state program that promotesself - sufficiency of families in which one of the biological parents is living outside of the home byensuring that noncustodial parents meet their financial responsibility to their children .