john f. kennedy. — the secretary of the navy may not retire the u.s.s . how quickly could they be transferred ? what military construction work , if any , would be required at mayport to accommodate these ships , and what would be the cost of this work ? how would the local economic impact of homeporting these other ships at mayport compare to the economic impact of homeporting a nuclear - powered carrier there ? the house armed services committee , in its report ( h.rept . 109-452 of may 5 , 2006 ) on h.r . 5122 , stated: the committee is concerned by the chief of naval operation's plan to retire the uss john f. kennedy . according to the navy's long range shipbuilding plan , if the navy retires the kennedy , then the aircraft carrier force will drop to 11 between now and 2012 , and then drop to 10 in 2013 and 2014 . with the commissioning of cvn - 78 in 2015 , the aircraft carrier force increases to 11 and then back to 12 in 2019 and beyond . the committee believes it is the objective of the chief of naval operations to maintain a force of 12 aircraft carriers since the long range shipbuilding plan shows a total of 12 aircraft carriers between 2019 and the far range of the plan in 2036 . it is apparent to the committee that the decision to allow the force structure to fall to 10 in the near future is fiscally rather than operationally driven . the committee believes that the navy should continue to maintain no less than 12 operational aircraft carriers in order to meet potential global commitments . the committee believes that a reduction below 12 aircraft carriers puts the nation in a position of unacceptable risk . ( page 67 ) the report also stated: the committee notes that the department of defense's legislative proposal for fiscal year 2007 , included a section that would effectively allow retirement of the conventionally - powered aircraft carrier , uss john f. kennedy , thereby reducing the carrier force structure from 12 to 11 ships . the committee believes that the navy's decision to reduce the number of carriers was not based on mission requirements analysis ; rather , the decision was based on fiscal constraints . section 126 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 ( public law 109-163 ) amended section 5062 of title 10 , united states code , to set a minimum carrier force structure of not less than 12 operational aircraft carriers . the committee believes the aircraft carrier force structure should be maintained at 12 ships in order to meet worldwide commitments . however , the committee would like to explore options for maintaining the uss john f. kennedy in an operational status either within or outside the u.s. navy , to include the possibility of transferring operational control to the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) . therefore , the committee directs the secretary of defense to submit a report to the congressional defense committees by march 1 , 2007 , that examines options for maintaining the uss john f. kennedy in an operational status both within and outside the u.s. navy .