appendix a . strategic and budgetary context this appendix presents some brief comments on elements of the strategic and budgetary context in which u.s. navy force structure and shipbuilding plans may be considered . the construction cost of this new design is uncertain , but is estimated to be likely somewhere between point a ( a minimum possible figure ) and point d ( a maximum possible figure ) . ( point d , in other words , would represent a cost estimate with a 100% confidence factor , meaning there is a 100% chance that the cost would come in at or below that level. ) if the navy wanted to avoid cost growth on this ship , it could simply set the ship's procurement cost at point d. industry would likely be happy with this arrangement , and there likely would be no cost growth on the ship . the alternative strategy open to the navy is to set the ship's target procurement cost at some figure between points a and d — call it point b — and then use that more challenging target cost to place pressure on industry to sharpen its pencils so as to find ways to produce the ship at that lower cost . ( navy officials sometimes refer to this as "pressurizing" industry. ) in this example , it might turn out that industry efforts to reduce production costs are not successful enough to build the ship at the point b cost . as a result , the ship experiences one or more rounds of procurement cost growth , and the ship's procurement cost rises over time from point b to some higher figure — call it point c. here is the rub: point c , in spite of incorporating one or more rounds of cost growth , might nevertheless turn out to be lower than point d , because point c reflected efforts by the shipbuilder to find ways to reduce production costs that the shipbuilder might have put less energy into pursuing if the navy had simply set the ship's procurement cost initially at point d. setting the ship's cost at point d , in other words , may eliminate the risk of cost growth on the ship , but does so at the expense of creating a risk of the government paying more for the ship than was actually necessary . dod could avoid cost growth on new procurement programs starting tomorrow by simply setting costs for those programs at each program's equivalent of point d. but as a result of this strategy , dod could well wind up leaving money on the table in some instances — of not , in other words , minimizing procurement costs . dod does not have to set a cost precisely at point d to create a potential risk in this regard .