these are actually votes for the electors committed to those candidates . december 8 , 2020 ―the "safe harbor" deadline . as noted earlier , if , on or before election day , a state has provided by law for determination of controversies or contests over the electors and electoral votes , and if these procedures have been applied , and results have been determined on or before this date , these results are considered to be conclusive , and will govern in the counting of the electoral votes . december 14 , 2020 ―the electoral college meets . state delegations of electors meet separately in their respective states at a place designated by the state legislature . it united in an eminent degree all the advantages the union of which was to be wished for . notwithstanding the founders' efforts , the electoral college system almost never functioned as they intended , but , as with so many constitutional provisions , the document prescribed only the system's basic elements , leaving ample room for development . as the republic evolved , so did the electoral college system ; by the late 19 th century the following range of constitutional requirements , federal and state legal provisions , and political party practices that make up the contemporary system were in place . this timeline for the 2020 presidential election relies on existing procedures governing the election process . it does not anticipate any major changes that might be effected between this time of this writing ( may 2017 ) and then . may - august 2020 ―in each state , party organizations and other groups that are eligible to be included on the general election ballot , including minor parties and independent candidacies , will nominate a ticket of candidates for elector for president and vice president in their states , following procedures outlined earlier in this report at "nominating elector - candidates: diverse state procedures. november 3 , 20 20 ―general election day . voters cast one ballot for the joint ticket of their preferred candidates for president and vice president . in practice , the electors usually meet in the state capital , often in the state house or capitol building . the electors vote "by ballot"―paper ballot―separately for president and vice president . certificates of the results are then transmitted to the president of the u.s. senate ( one copy ) , the archivist of the united states ( two copies ) , the secretary of state or equivalent officer of the state in which the electors met ( two copies ) , and the judge of the u.s. district court of the district in which the electors met ( one copy ) . december 23 , 2020 ―certificates must be delivered to the officers specified earlier in this report ( see under "the electors convene and vote" ) not later than the fourth wednesday in december . january 6 , 2021 ―on this date , or another date designated by congress , the senate and house of representatives assemble in joint session to count the electoral votes . the announcement of the state of the vote is deemed sufficient declaration of the persons elected president and vice president .