only theuse of such weapons is constricted by customary international law . ( 14 ) while many states have agreedto limit their production and possession of some types of wmd and conventional weapons , they mayhave conditioned their consent on the conduct of other states , and may be able to revoke theirconsent in accordance with any such conditional agreement . while secret development of wmdon the part of a state that has agreed not to engage in such conduct would constitute a breach of atreaty obligation , it is not necessarily a crime or an act of aggression under international law merelyto possess such weapons . the concept of 'sovereignty' lies at the heart of the international political system . nation - states ( states ) are considered the "international persons" who are both the creators and the subjects ofinternational law . each state is independent and has supreme authority over its territory and generalauthority over its citizens . the term "jurisdiction" refers to the authority of the state to affect thelegal interests of individuals and entities . jurisdiction may describe a state's authority to make itslaw applicable to certain actors , events , or things ( jurisdiction to prescribe ) ; a state's authority tosubject certain persons or things to the processes of its courts ( jurisdiction to adjudicate ) ; or a state'sauthority to compel compliance with its laws and punish transgressors ( jurisdiction to enforce ) . ( 39 ) the ability to interdict , seize , and destroy weapons would most significantly implicate thejurisdiction to prescribe and enforce under international law . a state's ability legally to assert jurisdiction over persons and things within its reach depends on principles of international law designed to prioritize the rights of various states which may havea claim to jurisdiction over a matter . historically , the most commonly asserted basis for jurisdictionis the "territoriality principle" ( determining jurisdiction by reference to the place where the offenseis committed ) . ( 40 ) other bases of jurisdictioninclude the "nationality principle" ( determiningjurisdiction by reference to the nationality of the person accused of committing the offense ) ; the"protective principle" ( determining jurisdiction by reference to the national interest injured by theoffense ) ; and the "passive personality principle" ( determining jurisdiction by reference to thenationality of the victim ) . where more than one state can assert jurisdiction over a particular matter,the state with the greatest interest should prevail . ( 41 ) the right of each state to control its sovereign territory and the territorial waters extending no more than 12 miles from its coast ( "territorial sea" ) is well - recognized in international law . statesmay also exercise extraterritorial jurisdiction under certain circumstances , but in general , this doesnot include the right to enforce laws on the territory of another state without that state's permission . for certain crimes , there may exist "universal jurisdiction" permitting a state to try crimes thatoccurred outside of its territory that did not involve any of its nationals , but the scope of universaljurisdiction is not well - settled , and may not include the authority to take enforcement action on theterritory of another state without its permission .