cir . ( 5 ) the condor operating co . and paradissiotis decisions demonstrate that heightened judicialdeference is not restricted to international dangers of the traditional - war variety , or even to hostilitiesat all . one element of the general regulatory takings analysis is a balancing of the governmental interest advanced by the challenged government action against the burden imposed on the propertyowner . ( 6 ) the foregoing decisions in the internationalconflict and terrorism realms often do notexplicitly link their statements of deference to this broad takings - test factor - but such a relativeweighing is obviously what they are doing . in the case of major threats to the security of the state,the governmental interest is deemed to be so compelling as to be dispositive , or nearly so . reduced expectations when doing business internationally another factor in the general regulatory takings test is the extent to which the government's action frustrated the reasonable investment - backed expectations of the property owner - plaintiff . ( 7 ) citing this factor , the courts unanimously have spurned the takings claims of persons whose relations with foreign countries - through contracts , leaseholds , causes of action for compensation,etc . - were frustrated when the united states responded to deteriorating or hostile relations withthose countries . when dealing in foreign commerce , these decisions say , the possibility of changingworld circumstances and u.s. response thereto make any expectation of government noninterference unreasonable . one is charged with awareness that relations between the affected countries mightsour , and that the government might act in a way that interferes with one's property rights . ( 8 ) see , eg,767 third avenue assocs . v. united states , 48 f.3d 1575 ( fed . cir . 1995 ) ; chang v. unitedstates ,859 f.2d 893 ( fed . cir . 1988 ) ; paradissiotis v. united states , 49 fed . cl . 16 ( 2001 ) , affirmed , 304f.3d 1271 ( fed . cir . in rockefeller center properties v. unitedstates , 32 fed . cl . 586 ( 1995 ) , the merits of the taking claim were reached . the treasurydepartment's blocking of assets pursuant to the international emergency economic powers act wasfound to further the important public interest in the president's ability to deal with internationalevents . this public interest entered the takings analysis through the "character of the governmentaction" factor , a component of the canonical takings test . ( 15 ) no taking was found . the protection extended by the takings clause depends first on the legal status of the property'sowner - whether a u.s. citizen , friendly alien , or enemy alien . in the case of friendly aliens , itdepends further on the territorial or extraterritorial location of the property . the law developing inthis area is particularly important in light of the increasing frequency with which congressionalstatutes reach extraterritorial conduct , and with which u.s. offices abroad pursue the fight againstterrorism , drug trafficking , counterfeiters , and corrupt financiers . u.s. citizens the general rule is that the takings clause protects the property of u.s. citizens against takings by the united states wherever in the world the property may be located . ashkir v. united states , 46fed .