table 3 . land under coca and poppy cultivation in colombia,1999-2004 - - unodc surveys ( in hectares and acres ) source: united nations office on drugs and crime , coca cultivation in the andean region: asurvey of bolivia , colombia and peru , june 2005 , and world drug report , 2004 . most observers agree that public safety conditions in colombia have improved . police havebeen redeployed to areas from which they had been previously ousted by armed groups , and nowhave a presence in every municipality . a greater security presence has significantly givencolombians more confidence to travel by road . according to the state department , the colombiannational police has trained and deployed 9,176 officers to rural areas , 8,166 to protect majorroadways , and 397 to defend 12 of the country's 16 petroleum pipelines . although the rate ofkidnappings has decreased significantly , colombia still has the highest kidnapping rate in the world . various studies conclude that the cost of the armed conflict to the colombian economy is between3% and 7% of gdp . ( 24 ) table 4 . measures of violence source: ministry of defense , government of colombia . a major goal of the colombian government is to end the armed conflict that has plagued thecountry for more than 40 years . several illegally armed groups of both the right and left operate inthe country and derive profit from participating in the drug trade . the two main leftist guerrillagroups are the revolutionary armed forces of colombia ( farc ) and the national liberation army ( eln ) . most of the rightist paramilitary groups are coordinated by the united self - defense forcesof colombia ( auc ) . the auc , with estimated membership ranging from 12,000 to 19,000 , hasagreed to demobilize , resulting in their planned disbandment by the end of 2005 . legislation thatwould provide for conditional sentencing for their human rights abuses and other crimes , as well astheir reintegration into society , was approved by the colombian legislature , and the demobilizationprocess has been proceeding . the new peace and justice law has been controversial in bothcolombia and the united states . critics believe it is too lenient and could interfere with theu.s. - colombia extradition treaty . supporters believe it is the only possible way to end paramilitaryactivities . it is estimated that about half of auc members have demobilized , leaving 10,000 yet tolay down their arms . ( 25 ) negotiations with the farc have not taken place under the uribe administration , since thefarc has refused uribe's demands that they first agree to a cease - fire and demobilization . thefarc controls vast territory in the country , mainly in the southern and eastern regions . there isconflicting evidence of farc resources , most likely due to the difficulty in determining the extentof their business activities . the united nations estimates that the farc's average annual incomeis $342 million of which $204 million comes from the drug trade . however , the colombian financeministry reports farc revenue in 2003 at $77.16 million , of which drug trafficking accounted for$11.54 million .