as a result of the enactment of h.r . 115-97 ) in december 2017 , the current lineup of small business tax benefits differs somewhat from the 2017 lineup . under previous tax law , the graduated corporate income tax ( whose rates ranged from 15% to 35% ) was considered a small business tax benefit . 115-97 permanently replaced those rates with a single corporate tax rate of 21% , starting in 2018 . the act repealed a second small business tax benefit from 2017: the rollover of gains from the sale of publicly traded securities into specialized small business investment companies under section 1044 . the findings suggested that well - functioning credit markets are critical to the formation and success of new small firms . the federal government is using several measures to improve access to capital for new businesses , including sba loan guarantees , tax preferences for investment in small startup firms and business startup costs , and the recent dismantling of regulatory obstacles to using a method of raising equity capital known as "crowdfunding. under this method , aspiring small business owners can raise small amounts of money from a large pool of investors , usually through the internet , without running afoul of federal securities laws . congress might consider whether additional measures could accelerate the rate of new entrepreneurial business formation and growth . in addition , by repealing the corporate amt , the act also did away with another small business tax benefit: an exemption under section 55 ( e ) from the amt for corporations whose average annual gross receipts did not exceed $5 million in their first three tax years and $7.5 million in each succeeding three - year period . the current lineup makes no reference to the taxation of passthrough businesses . some have argued that the tax rates that apply to this income should be considered a small business tax benefit when the returns to passthrough business investment are taxed at lower rates than the returns to corporate business investment . such a difference existed under the tax law that was in effect in 2017 . first , what is the appropriate definition of a small business in the context of public policy ? two considerations seem paramount in finding an answer to that question: ( 1 ) choosing the appropriate size measure ( eg , employment , assets , or receipts ) and ( 2 ) determining whether that measure should apply to all small business tax benefits , as well as other forms of federal assistance for small businesses . second , is there a sound economic justification for supporting small firms ? if no such rationale can be found , then government support for small businesses may do more harm than good by distorting the allocation of domestic economic resources . third , are tax benefits the most cost - effective way for the federal government to assist small firms ?