investment . unlike many chapters in nafta that have analogous counterparts in the wto agreements , the investment chapter in the wto does not provide the same level of protection for investors as do nafta , subsequent u.s. trade agreements , or bilateral investment treaties . if the united states withdrew from nafta , u.s. investors would lose protections in mexico . countries would have more leeway to block individual investments . u.s. investors would not have recourse to the investor - state dispute settlement ( isds ) mechanism , but would need to deal with claims of expropriation through domestic courts , recourse to government - to - government consultation , or dispute settlement . canada and mexico likely would maintain investor protection between them through the prospective cptpp or through maintenance of nafta provisions . policymakers may consider issues on how the united states can improve cooperation with mexico in the areas of border trade , transportation , competitiveness , economic growth , and security enhancement through the hled , hlrcc , and the 21 st century border management programs mentioned earlier in this report . some policy experts emphasize the importance of u.s. - mexico trade in intermediate goods and supply chains and argue that the two governments can improve cooperation in cross - border trade and can invest more in improving border infrastructure . it will be updated as events warrant . mexico is one of the united states' most important trading partners , ranking second among u.s. export markets and third in total u.s. trade ( imports plus exports ) . under nafta , the united states and mexico have developed significant economic ties . trade between the two countries has more than tripled since the agreement entered into force in 1994 . through nafta , the united states , mexico , and canada form one of the world's largest free trade areas , with about one - third of the world's total gross domestic product ( gdp ) . mexico has the second - largest economy in latin america after brazil . it has a population of 129 million people , making it the most populous spanish - speaking country in the world and the third - most populous country in the western hemisphere ( after the united states and brazil ) . mexico's gross domestic product ( gdp ) was an estimated $1.15 trillion in 2017 , about 6% of u.s. gdp of $19.39 trillion . measured in terms of purchasing power parity ( ppp ) , mexican gdp was considerably higher , $2.35 trillion , or about 12% of u.s. gdp . per capita income in mexico is significantly lower than in the united states . in 2017 , mexico's per capita gdp in purchasing power parity was $17,743 , or 30% of u.s. per capita gdp of $59,381 ( see table 1 ) . ten years earlier , in 2007 , mexico's per capita gdp in purchasing power parity was $13,995 , or 29% of the u.s. amount of $48,006 . although there is a notable income disparity with the united states , mexico's per capita gdp is relatively high by global standards , and falls within the world bank's upper - middle income category .