provisionsof h.r . 4166 were incorporated into title iv of p.l . 108-447 , the consolidatedappropriations act for fy2005 . specifically , it states that an alien is ineligible for an l visa if ( i ) the alien will be controlled and supervised principally by such unaffiliated employer ; or ( ii ) the placement of the alien at the worksite of the unaffiliatedemployer is essentially an arrangement to provide labor for hire for the unaffiliated employer , ratherthan a placement in connection with the provision of a product or service for which specializedknowledge specific to the petitioning employer is necessary . ( 31 ) the act also requires the secretary of homeland security to impose a fraud prevention anddetection fee of $500 on h - 1b ( foreign temporary professional workers ) and l ( intracompanybusiness personnel ) petitioners . the act requires that the h - 1b and l fraud prevention and detectionfee be divided equally among dhs , the dos and dol for use in combating fraud in h - 1b and lvisa applications with dos , investigating h - 1b and l petitions with uscis , and carrying out dollabor attestation activities . ( 29 ) the house committee oninternational relations held a hearing on "l visas: losing jobs through laissez - faire policies ? "on february 4 , 2004 . ( 30 ) l visa reform and fraud prevention . l visa reform . the comprehensive immigrationreform act ( s. 2611 / s. 2612 ) includes a substantial revision of the lawon l visas . most importantly , â§411 of s. 2611 / s . 2612 would add certainrequirements for l visa applicants seeking to come to the united states to work in new or unopenedfacilities and would expand the staffing resources of dhs , dos , and dol to investigate abuses andenforce violations of the l visa . the identical language was introduced by senator specter ( s.2611 ) and senator hagel ( s. 2612 ) and is expected to be debated on the senatefloor before the memorial day recess . ( 33 ) representative nancy johnson has introduced the usa jobs protection act of 2005 ( h.r . 3322 ) , which would do the following: add labor attestation requirements to thel visa , enact lay - off protections for u.s. workers employed by firms using l visas , restrict theoutsourcing of l - 1 visa holders to other firms , give dol authority to investigate complaints , andauthorize dol to assess a fee to process the application . more specifically , h.r . 3322would require - - only in the case of the specialized knowledge provision of the l - 1 visa - - that theemployer , prior to filing the petition , file with dol an application stating that the employer hastaken good faith steps to recruit ( using procedures that meet industry - wide standards ) u.s. workersfor the jobs for which the l - 1 nonimmigrants are sought . representative rosa delauro has introduced the l - 1 nonimmigrant reform act ( h.r .