food . the conferees recommend that the foods program of the center for food safety and applied nutrition and thecenter's field activities have a budget of $439 million for fy2005 , the same amountrecommended by the senate , a 1.7% reduction from the house recommendation , buta 6.8% increase over the fy2004 appropriated level of $411 million . in addition , theconference report provides an increase of $8.3 million ( or a total of $29.8 million ) for programs related to bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( bse ) or "mad cow"disease . in report language , the conferees direct fda to expedite the publication offinal regulations to tighten bse safeguards for food , animal feed and cosmetics . they also want the agency to establish an alternative mechanism to its priornotification and import facility registration requirements for imports of food productsthat are not intended for human consumption so they can continue to be imported forresearch and analytical testing . the conference report includes $5.36 million for thefood center's adverse events reporting system ( caers ) of which $1.5 million isto be used for reports on dietary supplements . the conferees accepted a house amendment affecting the recall of food products , requiring fda to announce the internet address of the food manufacturerthat markets the recalled product and to print a photograph of the food item on thefda website . counterterrorism . the fy2005 conference report contains a total of $215 million for fda counterterrorism funding . this is 12% less than the president's request of $245 million , but a 22% increaseover the $177.2 million appropriated in fy2004 . ( see table 3 below. ) this fundingis part of each program center's request and is included in the total appropriationapproved for fda . most of the increase in counterterrorism funding is for food defense . this $151 million is 16% below the requested amount of $181 million , but $34 million or 30%more than the fy2004 appropriation of $116 million . these additional funds willbe used for the food emergency response network ( fern ) , a nationwidefda - fsis network of federal and state laboratories capable of testing thousands offood samples within days for certain biological , radiological , and chemical threatagents . the increase will also fund research on food testing methods and relatedareas , about 97,000 food import field inspections ( up 60% from the number forfy2004 ) , and will increase crisis management capability by boosting fda's rapidand coordinated response to food threats and food - associated crises . ( for moreinformation , see crs report rl31853 , food safety issues in the 108th congress . ) a $5 million increase in funding for medical countermeasures will be spread over the various categories in table 3 . some of these medical countermeasureactivities will also be funded under project bioshield , a program designed to helpensure that medical products for use in the event of war or catastrophic events arereviewed and approved quickly for safety and effectiveness . the funding also willbe used to assist companies in developing new countermeasures . it also will allowfda to implement regulations to provide for "emergency use authorization" whenthe countermeasure is still in a developmental stage . ( for more information , see crs report rs21507 , project bioshield . ) table 3 .