they further claim widespread support among scientists for their views . in july 2002 , a letter from more than 300 scientists was sent to members of congress requesting that the "current debate over science in the esa not lead to changes that could weaken the esa's provisions to stem the loss of biological resources. they were concerned that adding requirements would cause additional delays and increase bureaucratic procedures for crucial decisions , that added peer review requirements were unnecessary , that new statutory limits on the use of scientific methods ( eg , analysis of population viability ) for the collection and analysis of scientific data would reduce protection , and that policy - makers should follow the precautionary principle and take "the most prudent course of action by choosing alternatives that are not likely to harm listed species. fws raised concerns about "sound science" legislation when testifying before the 107 th congress: [w]e have concerns with the structural and budgetary impacts of enacting this legislation . we also believe that the department has existing authority to implement improvements that will greatly enhance the science we use.... we believe that the additional processes added by the two bills would be costly to implement.... we are concerned that the considerable new process required in both bills will impact the fish and wildlife service's ability to provide consultations and other decisions in a timely manner and , in some cases , may compromise the fish and wildlife service's ability to meet statutory deadlines . the application of science under the esa is periodically controversial in debates over the act . yet of the thousands of science - based decisions involved in administration of the law , relatively few become controversial or generate headlines . when they do , there are those who argue that actions by fws or nmfs provide more protection than necessary at some cost to economic welfare ; others assert that insufficient attention is paid to science , resulting in insufficient or delayed protections of species that warrant more concern . to date , the relatively low number of actions judged under the two agencies' scientific integrity policies suggests that outright scientific misconduct is exceedingly rare . whether all the remaining science - based actions ( both controversial and non - controversial ) under esa reach a substantially higher standard is uncertain ; the debate concerning under - or over - protection based on science continues . one case struck down regulations that totally banned duck hunting in an area to protect one species of duck . another case stated that low numbers of a particular species alone did not necessarily warrant listing — other factors must be considered , such as the reasons for the low numbers , whether the numbers are declining , and how experts view the population numbers . another court stated that the bar fws has to clear in terms of evidence is very low , but it must at least clear it .