however , a recent development appears to revive the issue of whether and under what circumstances issue advocacy can be regulated . mcconnell v. fec is a sweeping decision upholding pivotal aspects of bcra's comprehensive overhaul of the federal campaign finance law . most notably , the supreme court upheld restrictions on the raising and spending of previously unregulated political party soft money and a prohibition on corporations and labor unions using treasury funds to finance "electioneering communications," requiring that such ads may only be paid for with corporate and labor union political action committee ( pac ) funds . on january 16 , 2004 , in anderson v. spear , the u.s. court of appeals for the sixth circuit found that the supreme court in mcconnell v. fec "left intact the ability of courts to make distinctions" between issue and express advocacy "where such distinctions are necessary to cure vagueness and overbreadth in statutes which regulate more speech than that for which the legislature has established a significant governmental interest. reversing a district court decision , the sixth circuit ruled unconstitutional a kentucky statute prohibiting "electioneering" within 500 feet of a polling place . the statute defines "electioneering" to include "the displaying of signs , the distribution of campaign literature , cards , or handbills , the soliciting of signatures to any petition , or the solicitation of votes for or against any candidate or question on the ballot in any manner , but shall not include exit polling. the plaintiff in this case , hobart anderson , who filed to run as a write - in candidate in kentucky's 1999 gubernatorial election , challenged the definition of "electioneering" on the grounds that it would regulate constitutionally protected issue advocacy , including the distribution of write - in voting instructions . in striking down the statute , the sixth circuit found that mcconnell v. fec "in no way alters the basic principle that the government may not regulate a broader class of speech than is necessary to achieve its significant interest. according to the court , unlike the record in mcconnell , the record in anderson lacks evidence that such a broad definition of electioneering is necessary to achieve the state's interest in preventing corruption . further distinguishing this case from mcconnell , the court noted that unlike bcra , there is no evidence that "an express advocacy line would be 'functionally meaningless' as applied to electioneering proximate to voting places. a notable aspect of the supreme court's ruling in mcconnell v. fec is the extent to which the majority of the court deferred to congressional findings and used a pragmatic rationale in upholding bcra . as some commentators have observed , the fact that the court upheld both key provisions of bcra was unexpected and many experts continue to sort out the implications of this complex decision on the regulated community as well as on the court's campaign finance jurisprudence . one important question that has been raised in the wake of mcconnell v. fec is whether the line between issue and express advocacy retains any constitutional significance .