proponents of h.r . 1932 contended that legislation is needed to prevent criminal aliens who cannot be removed to their home countries from being released and committing additional crimes . they argued that the supreme court in zadvydas v. davis ( 2001 ) , did not deny congress the authority to provide for extended periods of detention . indeed , they contended that the court "invited" congress to amend existing law to clarify circumstances and procedures under which extended detention would be permissible . nonetheless , others argued that the criminal justice and civil commitment systems already exist to keep dangerous individuals away from the public . they also contended that h.r . 1932 would allow for the prolonged , unnecessary , and expensive detention of asylum seekers and other immigrants by preventing bond determination hearings and limiting habeas corpus review to the u.s. district court for the district of columbia . the number of noncitizens in immigration detention and the funding for immigration detention has increased fairly steadily over the past decade . under law , there is broad authority to detain noncitizens in the united states while awaiting a determination of whether the alien should be removed from the country . in addition , the law specifies certain categories of aliens that must be detained while the secretaries of dhs and the attorney general , operating through their delegates , can parole or release on bond aliens who are not mandatory detainees . aliens in immigration detention have certain rights , but the courts have afforded the administration much discretion in decisions related to where aliens are detained , the management of detention facilities , and the treatment of aliens . congressional interest in detention policy has included hearings and legislation dealing with concerns about the number of aliens subject to mandatory detention ; the justness of mandatory detention ; detention conditions ; and the proper limits on the length of time in detention for aliens who have been ordered removed but cannot be returned to their home country . several bills — including h.r . 1274 — would have mandated that dhs increase the amount of detention space . in addition , other bills ( eg , h.r . 933 , s. 1258 ) would have required the propagation of regulations concerning detainee care , and expanded the alternatives to detention program . other proposed legislation , such as h.r . 713 , would have made changes to the mandatory detention provisions , providing the administration with more discretion on who should be detained . only one bill , h.r . 1932 , received any congressional action . it begins with a discussion of the authority to detain noncitizens while awaiting a determination of whether the noncitizen is removable from the united states . among other things , h.r . the report continues with a discussion of the resources for immigration detention and concludes with a discussion of legislation in the 112 th congress related to detention .