hope vi is a public housing reform program . through hope vi , the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) provides funds to rehabilitate or demolish public housing and replace it with housing that serves both the poor as well as the middle class . in order to understand hope vi and its issues , it is important to first understand a brief history of the larger public housing program . it is unclear if reauthorization legislation will be considered in the 112 th congress . the homes that are built in place of the demolished units are typically lower - density , safer , and more attractive . the new designs also generally connect the public housing developments with their surrounding communities , both functionally and aesthetically . despite the hope vi program's successes , there are several issues in the program that have led some to call for reforms to the program . however , it is broader in scope than hope vi in that it targets distressed neighborhoods with hud - assisted housing , not just distressed public housing communities . key differences between choice neighborhoods and hope vi , as outlined by the administration , include the following: eligible choice neighborhood grantees may include local governments , nonprofit entities , and for - profit entities partnered with local governments , in addition to phas . phas are the only eligible grantees in the hope vi program . while choice neighborhood grant funding is to be primarily focused on the transformation of distressed housing , the funding could also be used , on a limited basis , for improvements to the surrounding community . hope vi funding can only be used for public housing demolition and development and related supportive services ( including relocation ) . choice neighborhood grants are targeted to distressed neighborhoods with assisted housing and severely distressed public housing developments . hope vi grants are limited to severely distressed public housing developments . while the choice neighborhoods initiative has received some support for its concept of broadening the focus beyond public housing , it has also been met with concerns . those concerns include whether the program will have the same displacement and loss of affordable housing stock effects as hope vi , and whether in a limited funding environment cni , with its broader pool of eligible applicants , will lead to more entities competing for a limited pot of funds , resulting in less funding available for public housing . legislation to authorize the choice neighborhoods initiative was approved by the house financial services committee in the 111 th congress but was not enacted before the end of the 111 th congress ( h.r . choice neighborhoods authorizing legislation has been introduced in the 112 th congress ( h.r . 762 and s. 624 ) , but no further action has been taken . while the program is not formally authorized , a choice neighborhoods demonstration was funded in fy2010 and fy2011 at $65 million and in fy2012 at $120 million . the first round of choice neighborhoods implementation grants was announced in august 2011 .