aid in fy2002 was $2.5 billion . ( 46 ) the council on foreign relations praised the hipc initiative , and noted that peace andsecurity are being promoted through u.s. , british , canadian , and other efforts to supportpeacekeeping and train peacekeepers . in keeping with the sea island decisions , the bushadministration's fy2006 budget request seeks funds to begin a new global peace operationsinitiative to train foreign peacekeeping troops , with an emphasis on africa . ( 47 ) at the same time , thecouncil's report cited several areas in which it said the g8 needed to do more , including increasedsupport for nepad , a review of proposals for ending agricultural subsidies and quotas , additionalassistance for health infrastructure , and further debt relief . many feel that the g8 have not done nearly enough . after the 2003 evian meeting,for example , omar kabbaj , president of the african development bank , wrote that there had beensome good initiatives with respect to aid , but sub - saharan africa required $50 billion per year toachieve sustainable , broad - based growth . ( 43 ) jeffrey sachs has argued repeatedly for a vastly expandeddeveloped country aid program for africa , most recently in the millennium project report notedabove . after the sea island summit , the jubilee usa network and the 50 years is enough network,leading advocates of debt relief , expressed their "outrage" that the g8 had not acted on 100% debtcancellation for the poorest countries . ( 44 ) many have questioned the g8 commitment to peace andsecurity , criticizing as inadequate , for example , the response of the developed countries to theconflict and human rights crisis in sudan's darfur region . in may 2004 , on the eve of the sea island summit , the new york - based council on foreignrelations issued a report that took something of a middle ground on g8 performance . italy had earlier endorsed blair's plans . some argued that the bush administration should endorse blair's initiative as well , not onlyto help africa but also to reciprocate the strong support blair has given the administration in itspolicy toward iraq and in the war on terrorism . a wide range of countries have freed up markets in varying degreesand undertaken governance reforms since the late 1980s under pressure from the world bank , theimf , and bilateral donors ; but corruption remains a problem . kenya , for example , had been thesource of much optimism for africa's future after free and fair elections were held in december2002 , but recently both the u.s. and british ambassadors have criticized the government of presidentmwai kibaki for failing to tackle corruption . the united states has suspended an anti - corruptionassistance program in kenya in response to the problem . ( 39 ) some also feel that african leaders have done too little on a regional basis to deal with thecontinent's problems . in 2001 , african leaders launched the new partnership for africa'sdevelopment ( nepad ) , intended to improve governance , strengthen institutional capacity , andreduce corruption . ( 40 ) nepad includes an african peer review mechanism ( aprm ) designed to assure accountabilityin governance and economic policy .