the houseversion of h.r . 6 would establish market transparency rules , explicitly prohibitround - trip trading , and increase criminal penalties under the federal power act . like the house - passed electricity provisions of h.r . 1412 would , in a more limited fashion , give ferc rate authority over municipal and cooperativetransmission systems , create an electric reliability organization , repeal puhca and give ferc andstate public utility commissions access to books and records , prospectively repeal the mandatorypurchase requirement of purpa , clarify the right of transmission owners to serve native load,explicitly prohibit round - trip trading , establish market transparency rules , and increase criminalpenalties under the federal power act . unlike the house - passed h.r . 1412 does not contain provisions that would allow transmission owners to exercise the right of eminent domain to site newtransmission lines . 1412 contains provisions that are not included in the house - passed h.r . 4 from the 107th congress . for acomparison of the house - and senate - passed versions of h.r . 6 , see crs report rl32033 , omnibus energy legislation ( h.r . 6 ) : side - by - side comparison of non - taxprovisions . before debate on s. 14 was suspended , senator domenici proposed s.amdt . 1412 on july 29 , 2003 , to completely replace the electricity title of s.14 as introduced in the senate . the proposed amendment was withdrawn on july 31,2003 , and is not included in the senate - passed energy bill . however , majority staff of the senateenergy and natural resources committee have indicated that provisions of the amendment mightbe brought up in conference . ( 1 ) title vi of the house - passed h.r . 6 would , in part , provide for incentive - basedtransmission rates , allow transmission owners in certain instances to exercise the right of eminentdomain to site new transmission lines , create an electric reliability organization , give new , butlimited , authority to the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) over municipal andcooperative transmission systems , and clarify the right of transmission owners to serve existingcustomers ( native load ) . in addition , the house bill would repeal the public utility holding company act ( puhca ) and give ferc and state public utility commissions access to books and records , prospectivelyrepeal the mandatory purchase requirement of the public utility regulatory policies act of 1978 ( purpa ) , and require utilities to provide real - time rates and time - of - use metering . these include provisions that prohibit ferc from requiring utilities to transferoperational control of transmission facilities to a regional transmission organization ( rto ) , giveauthority to power marketing administrations and the tennessee valley authority to join rtos,remand ferc's standard market design ( smd ) notice of proposed rulemaking , and strengthenferc's merger review authority . for additional information , see crs report rl32728 , electric utility regulatory reform:issues for the 109th congress . the house passed h.r . electric utility provisions are included in comprehensive energy legislation that has passedboth the house and senate . 6 on april 11 , 2003 .