a hearing concerning h.r . on may 25 , 2010 , s. 3417 , the research in aquaculture opportunity and responsibility act of 2010 was introduced . it would prohibit offshore aquaculture until three years after the submission of a report on the impacts of offshore aquaculture . several terms for open ocean aquaculture are used interchangeably , including offshore aquaculture and offshore fish farming . open ocean aquaculture facilities generally consist of systems ( eg , cages , net - pens , longline arrays ) that can be free - floating , secured to a structure , moored to the ocean bottom , or towed by a vessel . currently operating commercial aquaculture farms in nearshore waters and estuaries use a variety of methods including ponds with earthen dikes , cages and net - pens moored to the ocean bottom , enhancement and seeding of the bottom , and suspended lines . there has been some experimentation in offshore shellfish culture on the seabed and from suspended ropes and longlines . internationally , research and commercial open ocean aquaculture facilities are in operation or under development in australia , chile , china , france , ireland , italy , japan , mexico , and norway . currently , four commercial open ocean facilities are operating in u.s. state / territorial waters . cates international , inc. , cultivates moi ( pacific threadfin ) near hawaii , and snapperfarms , inc. , cultivates cobia ( ling ) near puerto rico . in september 2005 , kona blue water farms of hawaii celebrated its first harvest of kahala reared in deepwater pens in state waters . in 2007 , a. e. lang fisheries began cultivating blue mussels off the coast of new hampshire in collaboration with the university of new hampshire's atlantic marine aquaculture center . although these are open ocean operations , all four are currently sited in waters under state or territorial jurisdiction . thus far , only a few aquaculture research facilities have operated farther offshore in the u.s. eez . 2010 was held before the house committee on natural resources , subcommittee on fisheries , wildlife , and oceans , but no further action was taken on either of these bills . on january 28 , 2009 , the gulf of mexico fishery management council voted to approve a plan to issue aquaculture permits and regulate aquaculture in the gulf of mexico . on september 3 , 2009 , the plan took effect because the secretary of commerce declined to oppose it within the required statutory period . environmentalists and some fishing industry representatives have opposed the plan because of concerns related to environmental protection and potential negative effects on wild fish populations . many who oppose the plan support a precautionary approach and development of national aquaculture standards . on september 8 , 2009 , h.r . 3534 , the consolidated land , energy , and aquatic resources act of 2009 , was introduced . a complex and unpredictable mix of technological , biological , and economic elements will likely determine the profitability of open ocean aquaculture . however , the future will also likely depend on the tradeoffs between benefits associated with aquaculture production and costs of potential environmental and social impacts .