it begins with a review of patent policy and procedures . the report then discusses the current legal framework for analyzing the permissibility of the parallel importation of patented pharmaceuticals , including both the domestic and international exhaustion doctrines . in its 2001 decision in jazz photo corp. v. united states international trade commission , the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit ( "federal circuit" ) rejected the "international exhaustion" position and instead limited the exhaustion doctrine to sales that occur within the united states . there the federal circuit issued a succinct statement explaining: united states patent rights are not exhausted by patent rights of foreign provenance . to invoke the protection of the first sale doctrine , the authorized first sale must have occurred under the united states patent . see boesch v. graff , 133 u.s. 697 , 10 s.ct . some commentators have criticized the federal circuit's reasoning in the jazz photo case , and in particular the court's reliance on the boesch v. graff decision . in boesch v. graff , the plaintiff owned a u.s. patent for a lamp burner . an individual named hecht , who was not a party to the litigation , enjoyed a "prior user right" pertaining to the lamp burners under german law . the german patent statute allowed individuals who had used an invention prior to the date of another's patent application the privilege of continuing to exploit the invention commercially , without regard to the patent . hecht had met the conditions for this prior user right to apply , and as a result could sell the burners in germany . hecht eventually sold some burners to the defendants , who in turn imported them into the united states and commenced sales . the plaintiff brought suit to enjoin the sale of the imported burners in the united states . in opposing the injunction , the defendants argued that they had lawfully purchased the burners and that the u.s. patent should be subject to the exhaustion doctrine . the supreme court rejected the defendant's arguments , holding: the right which hecht had to make and sell the burners in germany was allowed him under the laws of that country , and purchasers from him could not be thereby authorized to sell the articles in the united states in defiance of rights of patentees under a united states patent . the sale of articles in the united states under a united states patent cannot be controlled by foreign laws . the facts and holding of boesch have suggested to some commentators that its precedential reach is quite limited . in boesch , it was a prior user , rather than the patentee or its licensee , which made the foreign sale . it should be noted , however , that there appears to be no precedent , either domestically or abroad , for establishing an international exhaustion doctrine that is specific to pharmaceuticals . at least two statutory mechanisms exist for implementing the international exhaustion doctrine into u.s. patent law . one possible approach would be to declare that importation into the united states of goods sold abroad by a patent proprietor or its representative is not a patent infringement .