forces . the secretary of defense stressed that "brac provides the opportunity to configureour infrastructure to maximize capability and efficiency. ( 15 ) on july 1 , 2003 , dod officials issued a memo reorganizing its installations and environmentoffice in anticipation of the impending 2005 base realignment and closure round . it created a newbrac directorate that would identify which bases to eliminate . in the past , dod has acceded tothe individual services' recommendations on closures . we are at war . it sends a terrible signal , and it is bad for theeconomy. he later suggested that , perhaps , delaying the next round to 2006 might be worthconsidering. ( 13 ) inopposition , senator saxby chambliss said that "putting off the brac 2005 round now will onlyprolong the anxiety in our communities surrounding our military installations. ( 14 ) in the final vote , theamendment was defeated 42 to 53 - - a margin that many might regard as surprisingly close . in contrast , letters sent to the committees by pentagon officials strenuously argued that dodwas overburdened with an infrastructure that was simply no longer needed to support the size of theu.s . in the new round , it appears the office of thesecretary of defense is poised to exercise a much greater degree of control . ( 16 ) the house defense appropriations bill for 2004 included a provision that would closeroosevelt roads naval station , puerto rico's largest employer . several members of congressinsisted that without the live - fire bombing range on vieques island , there was little military valuein retaining the military base . ( 17 ) the senate's appropriations bill did not contain language forclosing the base . under section 8132 of the department of defense appropriations act for fy2004 ( p.l.108-87 ) , the secretary of the navy was directed to close the naval station roosevelt roads not laterthan six months after its enactment , which occurred on september 30 , 2003 . virtually all themilitary activity at the naval station has ceased , and military units and functions have beentransferred to other installations located in the southeastern continental united states . the act also required that the closure be carried out in accordance with the procedures andauthorities contained in the relevant defense base closure and realignment act of 1990 , ascurrently amended . on december 23 , 2003 , the pentagon issued its initial criteria for selecting bases for closureand realignment , sending it to the federal register for public comment as required by law . ( 18 ) dod stated that it wouldtake into consideration military installations' current and future capabilities , cost and manpower,location availability , economic impact on communities , ability to support personnel , andenvironmental impact . in addition , the president was required to certify that there was need for anew brac round and that there would be an annual net savings by the end of fy2011 . on august 16 , 2004 , the president announced that the pentagon would redistribute itsoverseas bases as a means of achieving a more agile and flexible force . the initiative , as part of aglobal posture review , came after three years of study and consultation .