table 1 . u.s. trade with the atpa countries,2005 source: usitc interactive tariff and trade dataweb at http: / / dataweb.usitc.gov . data are foru.s . imports for consumption ( customs value ) and domestic exports ( fas value ) . regional sharesmay not add to 100% due to rounding . the following highlights some of the more difficult issues in the andean - u.s. ftanegotiations . ( 24 ) inaddition to the following , the negotiations also covered other issues such as services trade , electroniccommerce , and government procurement . trade negotiators identified the difficulties in agricultureand intellectual property rights as the main obstacles in reaching agreement . andean negotiatorsstated at the time that the united states needed to be more flexible in these areas . u.s. trade officialssaid that the united states was very interested in reaching agreement in these areas , but that it hadalso been clear in laying out its expectations before the negotiations began . the last round of negotiations in which the united states and the three andean countries allparticipated was held in washington on november 14-22 , 2005 . subsequently , peru and colombiaconcluded bilateral ftas with the united states and talks with ecuador have been postponed severaltimes due to a number of differences . the main outstanding issues are related to agriculture . ecuadorian president alfredo palacio has said that he would like to see a trade agreement with theunited states but would not sign a deal that is unfair to ecuador . he is facing considerable pressurefrom indigenous groups not to enter into an agreement . thousands of ecuadorean indians have beenprotesting the free trade talks saying that they cannot compete with farm products from the unitedstates . they believe a trade agreement would put them at a disadvantage with u.s. farmers anddisrupt their ancestral culture . ( 39 ) there has been some speculation that the united states will not renew the atpdea in theabsence of a ptpa . in september 2005 , the house ways and means committee released a reporton a bipartisan congressional trade mission to colombia , ecuador , and peru . ( 40 ) the purpose of the tripwas to focus on the ongoing negotiations of the u.s. - andean free trade agreement and to discussinvestment and security issues in the region . the report states that the current unilateral tradepreferences received by the andean countries set to expire in december 2006 may not be renewed . it indicates that a "reciprocal , mutually beneficial arrangement must take the place of the unilateralaccess. ( 41 ) a senior us trade official recently said that the u.s. trade agreements with colombia andperu are likely to be treated as separate agreements by the congress , thereby narrowing thepossibility of a stand - alone andean - u.s. fta . ( 42 ) under current deadlines in the trade promotion authority act ( tpa ) , expedited legislative procedures apply to implementing bills for trade agreements , if , amongother requirements , the agreements are entered into by june 30 , 2007 . given the tpa notificationprocedures , the free trade agreements with colombia and peru could be voted on by the congresssometime this summer . it is not known if or when a u.s. - ecuador fta might be reached .