appendix a . the ambiguity of results in a life cycle model to understand the basic issues , including the uncertainty , surrounding the effect of cutting taxes on capital income using an inter - temporal model , consider a simple model where individuals live for two periods . although more realistic multiperiod models are normally used to study tax issues , this model can provide important insights into what drives the results . in a two period model the individual lifetime budget constraint is: ( 1 ) c 1 + c 2 / ( 1 + r ( 1 − t ) ) = wl 1 + wl 2 / ( 1 + r ( 1 − r ( 1 − t ) ) where c 1 and c 2 are consumption in periods one and periods two , r is the rate of return , t is the tax rate , w is the wage rate , and l 1 and l 2 are labor hours in each period . a typical utility function will result in a relationship between c 2 and c 1 as the following: ( 2 ) c 2 / c 1 = ( b ( 1 + r ( 1 − t ) ) ) s where b is the relative valuation placed on the second period consumption ( b normally less than 1 ) , indicating that future consumption is discounted in value relative to present consumption , r is the rate of return , and s is the substitution elasticity between consumption in the two periods with respect to the relative price ( the price of consumption in period one is one and the price in period two is 1 / ( 1+r ( 1-t ) ) . it is not possible using this approach to differentiate between the effect of the ies on growth and the short run shifting of the tax . that is , the growth rate of consumption might be unaffected by the tax rate because the ies is close to zero or because a change in r offsets a change in t ( short run shifting ) . mulligan uses estimates from another paper to set the ies to 1 by regressing consumption growth against after - tax income — an estimate that itself comes from a paper using similar data and that might be questioned . in this case [because he regresses consumption growth against the log of ( 1-t ) ] a coefficient of zero implies there is short run shifting and a coefficient of 0.08 ( equal to the after tax return ) suggests that there is no shifting . the results are mixed and since he is using the same data set for estimating both the ies and short run shifting , it is not clear what the findings are . and although claims are made about long run shifting , it seems difficult to reconcile these results with the data from the first part of his study , which seems to show that pre - tax returns do not change very much over long periods of time .