water protection . a series of directives enumerateundesirable or dangerous substances and establish standards for protecting water sources and / orsafeguard water quality . ( 20 ) nitrates . the nitrate directive aims to reducewater pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources by requiring member states to implementaction programs in areas identified as being vulnerable to pollution . among other requirements , thedirective limits the application of manure to 170 kg of nitrogen per hectare . ( 21 ) pesticides . a number of directives , issued from1976 to the early 1990s , aim to reduce the public health risks associated with the use of plantprotection products . these directives establish and regulate maximum residue limits ( mrls ) ofpesticides for various products , including fruits and vegetables , cereals , and livestock products . ( 22 ) other directives deal withharmonization of various national regulations concerning conditions , arrangements , and proceduresrelated to the classification , packaging and labeling of pesticides , and with registration and controlof sales of pesticides . habitats and wild birds ( the natura network ) . these directives aim to protect natural habitats of wild fauna and flora and to protect wild birds intheir habitats . ( 23 ) member states have to take the necessary measures to achieve these aims and to notify protectedareas to the european commission . most of the designated areas are in agricultural or wooded areascreated and maintained by farming or other human activity . environmental objectives initially were omitted from the cap , which was conceivedprimarily as a policy to support the operation of agricultural commodity markets for the benefit offarmers and consumers . however , the cap did include an objective with respect to "structural"aspects of agriculture ( eg , farm size , farm population characteristics , farm organizations , investmentin production or marketing facilities , or regional disparities ) , which served subsequently as a legal ( and financial ) framework for agri - environmental measures . until 1992 ( see below ) , agri - environmental measures were financed from a separatestructural fund , the guidance section of the european agricultural guarantee and guidance fund ( eaggf ) , while commodity support was financed from the guarantee section . guidance fundsaveraged about 10% of the total funding of the cap ( around eur 4 billion ) ; agri - environmentalprograms were only a small portion of total guidance spending . as structural measures , pre - 1992agri - environmental programs that meet the general definition of green payments used in this memowere co - financed on a 50-50 basis by the eu and member states , although the percentage of eufinancing could be larger for projects in poorer regions . these programs , which are nowincorporated into the eu's rural development policy , provide compensation to farmers forundertaking specific agri - environmental measures . among the programs are the following . the less favored area program ( lfa ) . ( 24 ) the lfa targets farmersin mountainous areas , areas threatened with abandonment , and other areas where agriculture isdeemed necessary for the conservation or improvement of the environment , management oflandscape , promotion of tourism , or protection of coastlines .