the measure is then considered by the house . table 1 provides the requested and authorized levels of funding for committees for the 115 th congress . table 2 through table 12 provide committee funding requests and primary expense resolution authorizations in nominal dollars for house committees in the 104 th - 114 th congresses . table 13 through table 23 provide the authorization levels , calculated in constant ( january 2017 ) dollars , for the 104 th through 114 th congresses . all tables calculate the absolute and percentage differences between the total requested and the total authorized funding levels . the chair and the ranking minority member from each committee typically testify at these hearings . the chair of cha then typically introduces an omnibus funding resolution , which , after its referral to the cha , typically serves as the legislative vehicle for a full committee markup . the resolution is based in part on committee requests for funds to cover their necessary expenses for the two years of a congress . the budgetary requests include estimated salary needs for staff , costs of consulting services , printing costs , office equipment and supply costs , and travel costs for committee members and staff . some costs , such as pension and insurance contributions for committee employees , are paid from other appropriated funds , and are excluded from committee budgets . some committees discuss and approve their proposed budgets at committee organization meetings . committee chairs normally introduce house resolutions to provide their committees with the requisite funds for the two years of the congress . these individual resolutions are then referred to the committee on house administration , which may hold a public hearing on the committee's request . pursuant to house rule x , clause 6 , the committee on house administration ( cha ) reports an omnibus , biennial "primary expense resolution" to cover the expenses of each standing and select committee , except the appropriations committee .