in july 2007 , brig . gen. bergner , a u.s. military spokesman , told journalists that mashhadani is an intermediary between al - masri and bin laden and zawahiri . its home base is anbar province . al qaeda has helped make anbar the most violent area of iraq outside the capital . a captured al qaeda document describes the terrorists' plan to infiltrate and seize control of the province . this would bring al qaeda closer to its goals of taking down iraq's democracy , building a radical islamic empire , and launching new attacks on the united states at home and abroad . in a july 24 , 2007 , speech specifically on the issue , president bush said: ... our troops are....opposing ruthless enemies , and no enemy is more ruthless in iraq than al qaeda . they send suicide bombers into crowded markets ; they behead innocent captives and they murder american troops . they want to bring down iraq's democracy so they can use that nation as a terrorist safe haven for attacks against our country... . critics of this view maintain that al qaeda or pro - al qaeda elements were motivated by the u.s. invasion to enter iraq to fight the united states there . according to this argument , the u.s. presence in iraq has generated new al qaeda followers — both inside and outside iraq — who might not have become active against the united states had the war against iraq not occurred . this view draws some support from the unclassified "key judgments" of a july 2007 national intelligence estimate ( nie ) that said: ...we assess that [al qaeda central leadership's] association with aq - i helps al qaeda to energize the broader sunni extremist community , raise resources , and to recruit and indoctrinate operatives , including for homeland attacks . other critics maintain that the administration has emphasized an "al qaeda" component of the insurgency as a means of bolstering u.s. public support for the war effort in iraq . according to this view , the administration has repeatedly attempted to link in the public consciousness the iraq war to the september 11 attacks in part because of consistent public support for a military component of the overall war on terrorism . in analyzing the debate over al qaeda involvement in iraq , a major question is the degree to which aq - i has driven the insurgency against u.s. forces and the government of iraq . few dispute that there has been , from almost the inception of the insurgency in mid - 2003 , a "foreign fighter" component . in november 2003 , early in the insurgency , one senior u.s. commander in iraq ( 82 nd airborne division commander maj. gen. charles swannack ) said , in response to reports that foreign fighters were key to the insurgency: "i want to underscore that most of the attacks on our forces are by former regime loyalists and other iraqis , not foreign forces.