imports . agricultural imports from these sixcountries equaled almost $2.5 billion , or nearly 5% of all u.s. farm and food imports ( see table 1 ) . these countries combined ranked as the fourth - largest source of u.s. agricultural imports in 2004 . u.s. purchases of bananas , raw coffee , other fresh fruit , raw cane sugar , and fresh and frozenvegetables led the list . costa rica was the largest supplier of food products - - shipping $899 million,or 37% of all agricultural imports from the region , followed by guatemala ( $784 million , or 32% ) . entries under two unilateral u.s. trade preference programs ( the caribbean basin initiativeand the generalized system of preferences ) accounted for almost 47% of u.s. agricultural importsfrom the six countries in 2004 - - meaning they entered duty free . practically all other agriculturalimports ( primarily tropical products such as bananas and raw coffee ) entered at mfn zero dutyrates . ( 1 ) though importsof certain commodities ( sugar , beef , dairy products , peanuts , tobacco , among others ) that the unitedstates protects using tariff - rate quotas ( trqs ) generally entered duty - free , amounts allowed to enterwere limited by quotas . the united states and the six countries primarily use tariffs and trqs to protect theiragricultural sectors . the five central american countries and the dominican republic committedunder the multilateral uruguay round agreement on agriculture ( uraa ) to bind their averagetariffs on agricultural imports at relatively high levels ( ranging from honduras's 35% to nicaragua's73% ) , compared to the u.s. commitment to bind its average rate at 12% . ( 3 ) however , in practice , the sixcountries generally have imposed much lower average tariffs on agricultural imports ( with appliedtariffs ranging from 6.7% in nicaragua to 23.3% in the dominican republic ) , and at times haveallowed larger amounts of commodities than spelled out in their trq minimum commitments toenter duty free or at a lower duty . ( 4 ) the average u.s. applied tariff on imports from these six countriesis very low ( 0.2% ) when u.s. trade preference benefits are taken into account ( see table 2 ) . theseapplied tariff averages , though , understate the higher level of border protection the united states andthe six countries provide their most sensitive agricultural products through the use of quotas andother restrictive measures . table 2 . average tariffs and tariff - rate quotas on agriculturalimports: united states and the dr - cafta countries source: u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) and u.s. international trade commission ( itc ) forbound and applied rates ; world trade organization ( wto ) for commodities subject to trqs . note: reflects level of protection before dr - cafta was negotiated . 2001 for united states , 2000 for the central american countries and the dominican republic . b . the u.s. applied tariff on agricultural imports from the five central american countries and thedominican republic is much lower - - 0.02% , reflecting duty - free treatment of imports thatentered under two trade preference programs and the commodity / product composition ofimports .