the current outlook is much different . administrative costs are usually very low . given these advantages , paygo systems looked very attractive in the immediate post - world war ii years . projections of labor force growth , coupled with forecasts of real wage growth , implied a potential total annual return near 5% for a fully mature paygo system . in contrast , the common view of a funded system involved investing contributions in government securities with a return of 1% or less . in the aftermath of the great depression , the market for equities seemed far too risky , and many countries lacked private bond markets . furthermore , most countries instituting a new pension system were unwilling to delay initial benefit payments for several decades , as would have been required under a funded system . there was a desire to address the immediate problem of high poverty among the elderly , and most countries provided benefits to an older generation of workers which had not contributed fully to the system . also , to many at that time , a high rate of population growth ( and subsequent work force growth ) seemed inevitable , in which case pay - as - you - go seemed a good way to finance an old age pension program . birth rates have fallen considerably while the life expectancy at the older ages has increased significantly , resulting in less favorable old - age dependency ratios ( as shown in figures 1 and 2 ) . while the old - age dependency ratio had already been increasing since 1950 , the upcoming retirement of the baby - boom generation will accelerate the rate at which it grows . however , even after the youngest of the baby - boom generation has passed away , the number of older dependents per 100 persons of working age will still continue to increase , albeit at a slower pace than will be experienced during the years in which the baby boomers retire . concurrent with these demographic trends , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projects that federal spending for social security , adjusted for inflation , will rise substantially — from $483 billion in 2003 to $2.5 trillion in 2075 . the projected rise in social security spending is due , in part , to the demographics of an aging society ; cbo estimates that approximately 55% of the higher spending is due to the expected increase in the number of beneficiaries , as the number of new claimants grows and as life expectancy rises . the remaining 45% of the rise is due to a projected increase in the real value of social security benefit checks . specifically , they note that , under rules put into effect in 1979 , benefits of newly eligible recipients are based on a formula and earnings records that are adjusted for wage growth . those adjustments , referred to as wage indexing , are designed to keep the ratio of initial benefits to pre - retirement earnings — that is , replacement rates — approximately the same from one generation of new recipients to the next .