reconsolidation . in many ways the debate on"reconsolidation" is an extension of the debate on the fixed rate benefit . borrowers who have lockedin fixed rates through consolidation in high interest periods sometimes miss out on moreadvantageous variable rates that they would have had on underlying loans . this introduces a facetof the fixed rate benefit some find troubling - - some borrowers fare worse under the high fixed ratesthey lock in . this raises concern , particularly with regard to those using consolidation for repaymentrelief ( i.e. , extended repayment ) , because these borrowers may have to consolidate in years in whichthe fixed rate is disadvantageous . one way to address this situation is through offering borrowers multiple refinanceopportunities ( i.e. , offering borrowers with relatively high fixed rates the prospect of securing abetter rate ) . any added interest benefit for a borrower , however , would likely expand federal subsidycosts . another way to address this is to eliminate consolidation loans' fixed rate benefit . thiswould prevent borrowers from locking in disadvantageous rates in the future , but would not offerassistance to those having already done so . borrowers' ability to choose amongconsolidators . a complex set of provisions has been enacted to regulatecompetition for consolidation loan refinance business among loan holders within the ffel programand across the dl and ffel programs and to protect borrowers - - ensuring they are affordedequitable refinancing options . in effect , some of these provisions constrain borrowers' ability tochoose among consolidators . ffel borrowers whose loans are held by one holder must first attempt to consolidate theirloans with that holder . ( 11 ) if a consolidation loan is unavailable from that lender or thelender does not provide the borrower with an income sensitive repayment plan acceptable to theborrower , then the borrower may pursue other ffel consolidation loans . other ffel borrowers,with loans from more than one ffel lender , may seek a consolidation loan through any ffellender . if ffel borrowers certify that they are unable to secure a consolidation loan through ffellenders , or that they are unable to secure a ffel consolidation loan with income sensitive repaymentterms ( deemed to be acceptable by the borrower ) , ( 12 ) the borrower may pursue a dl consolidation loan . ( 13 ) dl borrowers may pursue consolidation loans within the dl program . dl borrowers arealso able to consolidate their loans through ffel lenders . it is likely that proposals calling for the elimination of provisions that constrain borrowers'choice among consolidators will receive consideration during reauthorization . those in favor ofsuch changes suggest it is important to afford all borrowers , not just some , the opportunity to shopamong consolidators . some ffel lenders object to making a change in this area , asserting they offersome up front discounts on stafford and plus loans based on the assumption they will be able tohold the loan over its life , and their anticipated level of income from the loan will be jeopardized ifthe borrower can consolidate elsewhere . comparable consolidation loan benefits across the ffel anddl programs . interest is often expressed in promoting greater comparability amongffel and dl consolidation benefits . there are several ways in which consolidation loan benefitsdiffer across the ffel and dl programs .