, or fisa , or both . subsection 224 ( a ) cites several sections and subsections of title ii that are not subject to its declaration of sunset . what is a "potential offense" ? does the phrase refer to pre - sunset circumstances whose criminality is determined in a post - sunset investigation ? or does the phrase also include post - crimes that evolved out of pre - sunset circumstances which themselves constituted neither crimes nor elements of a crime ? as a general rule , when congress uses ordinary words , it is presumed to have intended them to have their commonly understood meaning . the word "potential" usually contemplates the incomplete , the unfulfilled , the undeveloped , or the unawakened possibility , rather than the suspected or uncertain possibility . that might suggest the term was intended at least in part to apply to post - sunset crimes that grow out pre - sunset circumstances . although hardly a term of art , earlier federal courts have used the term to describe possible past offenses in some cases , and to describe possible future offenses in others . congress in subsection 224 ( b ) , however , is not referring to all "potential offenses," but only to those "that began or occurred" before sunset . offenses occurring entirely after sunset cannot be said to have begun or occurred beforehand . thus , although it is scarcely beyond debate , congress appears to have added the term "potential offense" out of an abundance of caution lest the exception be read to extend only to investigations of conduct whose criminality was known prior to sunset but not of pre - sunset conduct whose innocence or criminality was only ultimately determined after sunset . the expiring law enforcement sections of title ii of the usa patriot act involve three communications - related aspects of federal law: wiretapping ; stored electronic communications and communication transaction records ; and pen registers and trap and trace devices . federal law prohibits the interception of telephone , face to face , and electronic communications ( wiretapping ) , subject to certain exceptions including a procedure for judicially supervised law enforcement interceptions , 18 u.s.c . 2510-2520 ( title iii ) . with the approval of senior justice department officials , federal law enforcement authorities may apply for a court order approving the use of wiretapping in connection with the investigation of certain serious federal crimes , 18 u.s.c . the orders must be narrowly drawn , of short duration , and based upon probable cause to believe that they will generate evidence relating to the predicate offenses under investigation , id . when the orders expire , those whose communications have been intercepted must be notified , 18 u.s.c . the procedure for law enforcement access to the content of wire and electronic communications stored with communications providers and to provider transaction records is somewhat less demanding , although it generally requires a court order , warrant , or subpoena , 18 u.s.c . pen registers and trap and trace devices surreptitiously capture the identity of the sender and recipient of communications .