appendix a . legislation in the 111 th congress the 111 th congress revisited several issues previously considered in the 110 th congress . for example , congress considered amendments to dc voting rights bills that would have further overturned dc gun laws ( s. 160 and h.r . in addition , congress passed several other gun - related provisions included in enacted legislation that address carrying firearms on public lands ( p.l . 111-24 ) , transporting firearms in passenger luggage on amtrak trains ( p.l . 111-117 ) , widening law enforcement off - duty concealed carry privileges ( p.l . 111-272 ) , prohibiting higher health care premiums for gun owners ( p.l . 111-148 ) , and prohibiting the department of defense ( dod ) from regulating firearms privately owned but lawfully held by service members , dod civilian personnel , and their family members off - base ( p.l . the 111 th congress also reconsidered or newly considered several other provisions that were not enacted: gun rights restoration for veterans previously deemed to be mentally incompetent ( s. 669 and h.r . 6132 ) , interstate reciprocity of concealed carry privileges ( s. 1390 and s. 845 ) , firearms possession in public housing ( h.r . 4868 ) , and the treatment of firearms under bankruptcy proceedings ( h.r . constitutionality of dc handgun ban and related legislation on june 26 , 2008 , the supreme court issued its decision in district of columbia v. heller on the constitutionality of a dc law that banned handguns for 32 years , among other things . passed by the dc council on june 26 , 1976 , the dc handgun ban required that all firearms within the district be registered and all owners be licensed , and it prohibited the registration of handguns after september 24 , 1976 . in a 5-4 decision , the supreme court found the handgun ban to be unconstitutional because it violated an individual's right under the second amendment to possess a handgun in his home for lawful purposes such as self - defense . dc council passes emergency law on july 15 , 2008 , the dc council passed a temporary , emergency law that allowed residents through a registration / certificate process to keep a handgun in their home as long as that firearm had a capacity of fewer than 12 rounds of ammunition and was not loadable from a magazine in the handgrip , which in effect limited legal handguns under the temporary law to revolvers as opposed to semiautomatic pistols . the emergency law also continued to require that handguns be kept unloaded and disassembled , or trigger locked , unless an attack in a home was imminent or underway . pro - gun groups immediately criticized the council's emergency law for not being in the "spirit" of the supreme court's decision because it continued to ban semiautomatic pistols and did not fully roll back the trigger lock requirement . since the initial emergency law was passed , the dc council has passed several other pieces of similar temporary , emergency laws related to the heller decision .