sloan et al. , "the fragility of the u.s . vaccine supply," new england journalof medicine , 351:2443-2447 , dec. 2 , 2004 . j. treanor , "weathering the influenza vaccine crisis," new england journal ofmedicine , 351:2037-2040 , nov. 11 , 2004 . r. giffin et al. , "childhood vaccine finance and safety issues," health affairs , 23 ( 5 ) : 98-111 , sept. / oct . according to cdc surveys ( discussed in an earlier section"shortage to surplus ? ) , persons not in designated priority groups mostly deferredvaccination , while a small number of them reported that they sought vaccination butwere unsuccessful . of particular concern were findings that significant numbers ofhigh - risk individuals did not seek vaccination because they doubted they could getit , and that willingness to be vaccinated dropped off when the vaccine wasinvestigational and required signing a consent form . these findings remind publicofficials of an important premise for public health preparedness: that imperfectcompliance with recommendations is expected and should be taken into account inplanning . serious questions remain about the exercise of federal authority during aninfluenza pandemic . many of these questions were raised in the face of the 2004 fluvaccine shortage . should the federal government have , or exercise , authority toidentify and control doses of scarce flu vaccine ? should the federal governmenthave , or exercise , authority to control administration of vaccine by healthcareproviders ? is the current model , which leverages state authorities with federalassistance , adequate for the current shortage , or for pandemic influenza or otherpublic health emergencies ? given that the federal government has overarchingemergency authorities but has not used them , will federal officials know how toconduct themselves if such authorities were invoked in an emergency ? the fluvaccine shortage presents a small study of these important questions . it is intuitively appealing to think that federal officials , when faced with apublic health emergency , could take charge of information and assets , and assure thatremedies and burdens were equitably and efficiently distributed . actually , theshortage of flu vaccine illustrates two serious challenges that the federal governmentfaces in a public health emergency . law and tradition place much of theresponsibility for preventing or managing the shortage either with the states , or withthe private sector , and the threshold over which the federal government would wrestcontrol from either appears high . the federal government does not dictate thepractice of medicine or compel companies to do business . as a result , in situationslike this one , free market forces operate , the public health system responds in adecentralized fashion , efforts may seem disorganized , and the federal governmentmay appear unresponsive . since the terror attacks of 2001 , some barriers have been overcome withoutsubstantial changes in the legal landscape . an example is state preparednessplanning with uniform guidance , so that states aim for the same targets in planningfor mass drug distribution , or in overhauling their emergency public healthauthorities . decentralization of public health authority to states is less of a problemif all of them can respond capably and in a consistent fashion . another example isthe government use of proprietary information , such as drug store sales , to conductsurveillance for unusual health events .