withdrawal . while the unitaf asf is judged as achieving some success inproviding police forces that offered protection to citizens and enjoyed a legitimacythat it conferred by extension upon unitaf , its success was attributed by someanalysts to the commitment of unitaf to back it up when it faced a level ofviolence that it could not control . nevertheless , by the end of the 1990s , the need for the development and reform of existing police institutions was widely recognized . the august 2000 brahimipanel report recommended a "doctrinal shift" in the use of civilian personnel inpeace operations . ( 117 ) according to the panel,the primary role and function of civpolpersonnel should be to build local police services capacity . enforcement and institutional gaps in somalia and haiti . unosom ii's lack of a commitment to back upuncivpols , like that which the unitaf had made to the asf , contributed to thedevelopment of the concept of a law "enforcement gap. analysts perceived insomalia , as previously in cambodia and as in several future operations , that thepresence of an adequate police force to maintain law and order in normalcircumstances may not be sufficient to control the sporadic outbreaks of violence ormore organized violent challenges in post - conflict situations , often due to the lackof a widely - accepted peace accord . as a result , the use of military force may beneeded to maintain law and order , often in a primary role when violence is high,other times as a supplement to police forces when the level is lower . the somalia operation also demonstrated several other problems , in the judgment of many analysts . these were that ( 1 ) an international civilian police forcecannot function where there is no effective cease - fire , ( 2 ) uncivpol missions,because of the sheer diversity of their experiences , are not , as currently constituted,particularly well - suited for training local police , and ( 3 ) an "institutional" gap ( i.e.,the lack of adequate courts and prison system ) and lack of a political settlement willundermine even successful police reform efforts in the long run . ( 118 ) similar gaps were highlighted in haiti , where six years of intensive u.s. and u.n. police reform efforts demonstrated dramatically , in the opinion of someanalysts , the problems created by the institutional gap . reform efforts in haiti beganunder the u.s. - led multilateral force ( mfn , sept 1994- march1995 ) . the mfn'spolice component , the international police monitoring force ( ipm ) , with about 820monitors from 20 countries , was formed to create , develop , and train a new haitiannational police force ( hnp ) . ( as a complementary step , the ipm vetted formermembers of haiti's armed forces in order to select those fit to serve on an interimpublic security force which the ipm also supervised. ) ipm members were allowedto carry arms , to use force when necessary , and to make arrests , as were members ofthe uncivpol which followed . ( 119 ) theuncivpol under the subsequent u.n.mission in haiti ( unmih , which actually deployed in force from march 1995through june 1996 ) took over the monitoring and training functions .