seq. ) removed oil and gas from the patenting process and placed it under a leasing system . underthe leasing system , the federal government has raised billions of dollars in revenues from royalties,rents and bonus bids . ( 3 ) minerals owned by the federal government under lands held privately ( patented ) creates a"split - estate. there are other split - estate situations as well: surface and mineral rights held bydifferent private interests , or state owned mineral rights and privately held surface rights . threemajor federal statutes ( 4 ) allowed the federal government to issue patents to land but reserve the right to the minerals . underthese statutes the mineral estate became the dominant estate and the surface use servient . there arespecific policies and procedures that must be followed by the mineral estate holder in order todevelop minerals . generally , for oil and gas , a federal lessee must meet one of the followingconditions: a surface agreement ; written consent or a waiver from the private surface owner foraccess to the leased lands ; payment for loss or damages ; or the execution of a bond not less than$1,000 . under the taylorgrazing act , 140 million acres were withdrawn from homesteading laws . the organic act was usedto regulate and designate recreation and "primitive areas. under flpma , withdrawals can be madeby the executive branch or the congress . congressional designations as "wilderness" were later considered essential by many becausean administrative wilderness designation could be revoked administratively any time . the alaskanative claims settlement act withdrew large areas of alaska from availability for resource use ordevelopment pending congressional disposition . the wilderness act required that the forest servicestudy 5.4 million acres of designated primitive areas and report on wilderness suitability . wildernessis generally defined as an area "off limits to development to avoid destruction of pristinecharacteristics of nature. ( 64 ) the wilderness act states that "no federal lands shall bedesignated as wilderness areas except as provided for in the wilderness act or by an act ofcongress" ( 16 u.s.c . currently , there are four types of withdrawal: first , there are instances where congress hasthe sole authority to withdraw or reserve public lands . for example , creating national parks andwilderness areas and in some cases national wildlife refuges can only be done by an act of congress . second , the executive branch has used power delegated to it by congress under the previouslymentioned antiquities act of 1906 and the pickett act of 1910 . third , congress may withdrawspecific resources such as when oil , gas , coal , and like minerals were removed from the generalmining law of 1872 . lastly , there is the "general congressional" withdrawal , ( 65 ) which allows lands to beremoved from potential development pending "final disposition. modern executive withdrawals are governed by flpma . ( 67 ) flpma ( 68 ) established a federal landuse management policy that includes land use planning based on a multiple - use approach that allowsfor significant public and congressional input .