227 et seq. ) the federal trade commission act does not provide for lawsuits by individual consumers . rather , consumers may file complaints with the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , which may take legal action when it deems it appropriate . the federal trade commission act does not apply to banks , savings and loan institutions , federal credit unions , common carriers ( railroads and airlines ) , or "persons , partnerships , or corporations insofar as they are subject to the packers and stockyards act of 1921 . all these entities , and their advertising , are regulated by federal agencies other than the ftc . there are numerous federal statutes regulating advertising that do not fit within any of these categories . as random examples , the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) requires disclosures in advertisements for prescription drugs ; the truth in lending act governs the advertising of consumer credit ; and a federal criminal statute makes it illegal falsely to convey in an advertisement that a business is connected with a federal agency . the federal alcohol administration act makes it unlawful to engage in interstate or foreign commerce in distilled spirits , wine , or malt beverages , unless such products conform to regulations of the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives , which is in the department of the justice . the act requires that these regulations , among other things , prohibit statements on labels and in advertisements "that are disparaging of a competitor's products or are false , misleading , obscene , or indecent. a 1988 amendment to the act requires that alcoholic beverages sold or distributed in the united states , or to members of the armed forces outside the united states , contain a specified health warning label . in 1995 , the supreme court held unconstitutional a provision of the act that prohibited beer labels from displaying alcohol content unless state law requires such disclosure . on november 23 , 1998 , attorneys general from 46 states , the district of columbia , and the five u.s. territories signed an agreement with the major tobacco companies to settle all the lawsuits the states have brought to recover the public health costs of treating smokers . ( the four other states — mississippi , texas , florida , and minnesota — had previously settled. ) the settlement had to receive court approval in each state before it took effect , but it did , and it has . it limits tobacco advertising in various ways , including banning the use of cartoons , banning public transit advertising , and limiting billboard and retail - store advertising . section 5 of the federal trade commission act is the basic federal statute prohibiting unfair or deceptive advertising . subsection ( a ) of section 5 reads: unfair methods of competition in or affecting commerce , and unfair or deceptive acts or practices in or affecting commerce , are hereby declared unlawful . the warnings must be rotated quarterly in accordance with federal trade commission regulations .