in short , the house has the final say over house contested election cases . a recount would not necessarily be ordered by the committee on the mere assertion of fraud or irregularity . a party to a contested election case who would claim that the state recount of the ballots was in error would have the burden of proof to establish such error before the committee would order a recount . the burden would be on the contestant to prove to the committee that a recount would show substantial fraud and irregularity , change the result of the election , and make him or her the winner . moreover , a contestant arguably should exhaust state remedies in obtaining a recount under state election laws or through the state courts before requesting the committee to conduct such a recount . although the committee has the power to undertake a recount outside of state recount proceedings when it deems it necessary , it may wait until the contestant has exhausted state remedies including state court actions . the committee , after voting for a recount , may reconsider its action and determine that such a recount is not necessary . should the committee decide that a recount , limited or districtwide , is necessary , a set of stipulations is generally agreed upon by counsel for the parties subject to the approval of the committee , and the committee may issue a set of rules that would govern the recount . stipulations made by the parties or a motion or house resolution stipulating certain ground rules could include , inter alia , such matters as controlling house precedents ; controlling statutory and / or constitutional provisions relating to recounts , ballots ; conduct of election , etc . ; disputes over qualifications of voters ; scope of recount ; procedure by which committee counsel , auditors , or staff are to examine ballots , ballot boxes , tally sheets , and records and other pertinent documents and materials ; procedure for counting ballots ; decision on presence of press during counting ; designation of election ( counting ) judges ; comparison of registration books and poll books , counting of spoiled and mutilated ballots ; determination of fraud and any irregularities ; criteria for proper marking of ballots to determine clear intention of the voter ; and allowing counsel to file objections and evidence at any stage of the recount proceedings . under the u.s. constitution , there is a division of authority with respect to elections to federal office , whereby the states have significant administrative authority over the procedures of federal elections , that is , authority over the "times , places and manner" of federal elections ( unless congress designates otherwise ) . article i , section 5 , clause 1 of the constitution expressly provides , however , that each house of congress is the judge of the elections of its own members , and thus the house has sole and exclusive jurisdiction to make an unconditional and final judgment determining the right to a seat in the house .