appendix a . priority groups and their eligibility criteria appendix b . with the enactment of p.l . 99-272 in 1986 , congress authorized va to collect payments from third - party health insurers for the treatment of veterans with nonservice - connected disabilities , and it also established copayments from veterans for this care . under current law , va is authorized to collect from third - party health insurers to offset the cost of medical care furnished to a veteran for the treatment of a nonservice - connected condition . if va treats an insured veteran for a nonservice - connected disability , and the veteran is also determined by va to have copayment responsibilities , va will apply the payment collected from the insurer to satisfy the veteran's copayment debt related to that treatment . under the current copayment billing process , in cases where the cost of a veteran's medical care for a nonservice - connected condition appears to qualify for billing under reimbursable insurance and copayment , va medical facilities sends the bill to the insurance provider . the veteran's copayment obligation is placed on hold for 90 days pending payment from the third - party payer . if no payment is received from the third - party payer within 90 days , then a bill is sent to the veteran for the full copayment amount . however , when insurers reimburse va after the 90-day period , va must absorb the cost of additional staff time for processing a refund if the veteran has already paid the bill . on all insurance policies , the entire amount of the claim payment is applied first to the copayment . the veteran is then billed only for the portion of the copayment not covered by the insurance reimbursement and the portion of the copayment for services not covered by the veteran's insurance plan ( see figure 1 ) . according to two reports released by the government accountability office ( gao ) , the practice of satisfying copayment debt with recoveries made from third - party insurers has resulted in reduced overall cost recoveries and increased administrative expenses . under the administration's proposal , va would bill and collect copayments from patients regardless of any amounts recovered from the veterans private health insurance plan . as the patient's bill is generated , va would bill the insurer for the full cost of va care provided to a veteran for a nonservice - connected condition ( see figure 2 ) . according to va's estimates , if this proposal is enacted it would contribute approximately $31.0 million toward va's collections . this issue was not addressed in the 109 th congress . veterans' payments for health care services by priority group appendix c. financial income thresholds for va health care benefit . provided below are brief descriptions of these accounts . during the past year , congress considered several appropriation measures to provide funding for vha . aside from the regular fy2006 appropriations bill that provides funding for vha , congress passed several measures that included funding to bridge the shortfall for vha for fy2005 and provided additional funding for fy2006 . given below is a brief description tracking congressional action on fy2006 appropriations for vha .