a shorthand definition of "monopoly" is "the power to control prices or exclude competition. the significance of the ability to exclude competition or control prices , however , lies in the supposed deleterious effect of the lack of competition on , consumers , who are presumed to benefit from the existence of largely competitive markets . the impact on excluded competitors is relevant only insofar as it affects the fate of competition : '[t]he antitrust injury requirement obligates [complainants] to demonstrate , as a threshold matter , "that the challenged conduct has had an actual adverse effect on competition as a whole in the relevant market ; to prove it has been harmed as an individual competitor will not suffice." assuming that a market participant has been legally determined to be a monopolist ( as opposed to being so determined by reference to the popular definition — i.e. , one who possesses at least a 51% market share ) , the question arises , "does that monopoly entity have a legal obligation to deal with any or all of its actual or potential competitors ? the courts have generally answered , "no," but the situation long thought to create such an obligation — monopolist ownership or control of an "essential facility" — is , currently , not as settled as was once thought . in 2004 , the supreme court opined that "we have never recognized such a doctrine ... and we find no need either to recognize it or to repudiate it here. the recent prosecutions by the antitrust division of the department of justice ( microsoft ) and the federal trade commission ( intel ) ( both discussed below ) are particularly illustrative of the monopoly / monopolization dichotomy . antitrust doctrine holds that robust competition will best protect consumers ; it is concerned with the viability of individual competitors only insofar as their fates affect marketplace competitiveness . there is neither an arbitrary antitrust directive concerning the requisite amount of competition deemed acceptable in any given market , nor any predetermination of the point beyond which a market participant may grow ; nor is there any absolute number of competitors a market participant must face . although there are general prohibitions against monopolization and attempted monopolization in the sherman and clayton acts , and a prohibition against "unfair acts" in commerce in section 5 of the federal trade commission act , "monopoly" and "monopolist" are merely descriptive terms , used to illustrate a situation in which a single entity possesses effective control of the market in which it operates . neither term implies anything about the lawfulness of the monopoly possessed: there is no concept of "no fault" monopolization in united states antitrust law . absent a finding by a court of "guilty behavior" by a monopolist , therefore , there can be no finding of "monopolization. further , the antitrust rule of reason has modified the concept of competition by recognizing that in certain situations the anticompetitiveness of some actions must be balanced against any procompetitive effects that might be produced by those actions . accordingly , any assessment of whether any of the prohibitions against monopolization have been violated requires two inquiries .