fuel is not the only output of an ethanol facility , however . the basic steps of both processes are similar . first , the corn is processed , with various enzymes added to separate fermentable sugars from other components such as protein and fiber ; some of these other components are used to make coproducts , such as animal feed . next , yeast is added to the mixture for fermentation to make alcohol . the alcohol is then distilled to fuel - grade ethanol that is 85% - 95% pure . then the ethanol is partially dehydrated to remove excess water . finally , for fuel and industrial purposes the ethanol is denatured with a small amount of a displeasing or noxious chemical to make it unfit for human consumption . in the united states , the denaturant for fuel ethanol is gasoline . ethanol is produced largely in the midwest corn belt , with roughly 70% of the national output occurring in five states: iowa , nebraska , illinois , minnesota and south dakota . because it is generally less expensive to produce ethanol close to the feedstock supply , it is not surprising that the top corn - producing states in the u.s. are also the main ethanol producers . this geographic concentration is an obstacle to the use of ethanol on the east and west coasts . most ethanol use is in the metropolitan centers of the midwest , where it is produced . when ethanol is used in other regions , shipping costs tend to be high , since ethanol - blended gasoline cannot travel through petroleum pipelines , but must be transported by truck , rail , or barge . however , due to clean air act requirements , concerns over other fuel additives , and the establishment of a renewable fuels standard , ethanol use on the east and west coasts is growing steadily . for example , in 1999 california and new york accounted for 5% of u.s. ethanol consumption , increasing to 22% in 2003 , and 33% in 2004 . the potential for expanding production geographically is one motivation behind research on cellulosic ethanol . if regions could locate production facilities closer to the point of consumption , the costs of using ethanol could be lessened . furthermore , if regions could produce fuel ethanol from local crops , there could be an increase in regional agricultural income . historically , ethanol production was concentrated among a few large producers . however , that concentration has declined over the past several years . table 2 shows that currently , the top five companies account for approximately 42% of production capacity , and the top ten companies account for approximately 48% of production capacity . critics of the ethanol industry in general — and specifically of the ethanol tax incentives — have argued that the tax incentives for ethanol production equate to "corporate welfare" for a few large producers . however , the share of production capacity controlled by the largest producers has been dropping as more producers have entered the market .