gc art . 49 states: individual or mass forcible transfers , as well as deportations of protected persons from occupied territory to the territory of the occupying power or to that of any other country , occupied or not , are prohibited , regardless of their motive . there is an exception that allows the temporary evacuation of an area when absolutely necessary for the security of the population or for imperative reasons of military necessity . however , evacuees are not to be transported outside the occupied territory unless such a measure is unavoidable . under gc art . 147 , the "unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement of a protected person" is a "grave breach" of the convention . it may also be permissible to relocate persons outside of the occupied territory when it is to their benefit . gc art . 132 allows parties to the geneva conventions to "conclude agreements for the . accommodation in a neutral country . certain classes of internees , in particular children , pregnant women and mothers with infants and young children , wounded and sick , and internees who have been detained for a long time. some argue that there is a class of persons who , as terrorists or "unlawful combatants" in the context of an international armed conflict , are neither entitled to pow status nor civilian rights under the geneva conventions . u.s. military doctrine has long held that even persons who commit hostile acts but are not entitled to pow status have the status of civilians . traditionally , such persons , as "unprivileged" or "unlawful combatants," may be punished for acts of violence for which legitimate combatants could not be punished . gc art . 5 appears to contemplate the treatment of "unlawful combatants," providing some exceptions for the treatment of protected persons deemed security risks: where in occupied territory an individual protected person is detained as a spy or saboteur , or as a person under definite suspicion of activity hostile to the security of the occupying power , such person shall , in those cases where absolute military security so requires , be regarded as having forfeited rights of communication under the present convention . in each case , such persons shall nevertheless be treated with humanity , and in case of trial , shall not be deprived of the rights of fair and regular trial prescribed by the present convention . they shall also be granted the full rights and privileges of a protected person under the present convention at the earliest date consistent with the security of the state or occupying power , as the case may be . gc art . 143 , providing that the delegates of the protecting power or icrc are to have unlimited access to prisoner of war camps and internment facilities for interviewing protected persons , also contains an exception for security . the detaining power may prevent such visits for reasons of "imperative military necessity," but only as an "exceptional and temporary measure.