how can an agency spend more than its appropriations ? in most situations , it can't . however , provisions in the annual interior appropriations acts authorized doi and the fs to borrow unobligated funds from other accounts for emergency firefighting . this , in effect , was an open - ended reprogramming authority . historically , the authority to borrow funds from other accounts was not a significant problem . the fs has several mandatory spending accounts , funded primarily from timber receipts ; prior to 1990 , several of these accounts had substantial running balances . one , the knutson - vandenberg ( k - v ) fund , was particularly useful , since it had a running balance of about $500 million ( about three years of spending ) . firefighting funds could be borrowed from the k - v fund ( or other accounts ) , and repaid later with regular or supplemental appropriations , without a significant effect on agency activities , such as reforestation . the decline in timber sales since 1990 has led to a comparable decline in k - v ( and other mandatory spending account ) balances , and thus the fs has had to turn to other accounts to borrow funds to pay for firefighting . another reason why the borrowing authority was not a problem historically is that , prior to fy2000 , there were more discretionary funds to borrow . as noted above , fy1993-fy2000 wildfire management appropriations averaged 25% of discretionary fs appropriations for the fs , leaving significant funds in other accounts to borrow from . ( this is less of an issue for doi , since it can borrow from any doi accounts. ) however , since fy2001 , fire management expenditures have averaged 47% of discretionary fs appropriations , and totaled 56% of fs discretionary appropriations in fy2008 . thus , there were relatively fewer funds available to borrow , and borrowing to pay for firefighting was having a relatively greater effect on those other accounts . various interests increasingly expressed concerns about the effects of firefighting borrowing on the agencies' abilities to implement other programs . legislation was introduced to address the situation . freestanding bills in the 110 th and 111 th congresses sought to establish a separate fund for major wildfire suppression efforts . one , the federal land assistance , management and enhancement ( flame ) act , was enacted in title v of p.l . it established separate flame wildfire suppression reserve funds for the fs and doi , to be funded from annual appropriations . the flame funds can be used if the secretary declares that ( 1 ) an individual wildfire covers at least 300 acres or threatens lives , property , or resources , or ( 2 ) cumulative wildfire suppression and emergency response costs will exceed , within 30 days , appropriations for wildfire suppression and emergency responses . it also directed the secretaries to report annually on use of the funds , and to report on estimated suppression costs periodically through the year . the funds terminate if there have been no appropriations to or withdrawals from the accounts for three consecutive fiscal years .