table 9 . state department and public diplomacybudget authority and fee collections ( $s - billions ) sources: department of state , house and senate appropriations committees , andcrs calculations . fy2006 includes supplemental appropriations and 1% rescissionof regular appropriations . beginning in fy1996 , figures also include fees collectedby the state department for visa processing and other services . table 4 . "core" bilateral developmentassistance discretionary budget authority ( $s - billions ) sources: department of state , usaid , house and senate appropriationscommittees , and crs calculations . fy2006 includes supplemental appropriationsand 1% rescission of regular appropriations . figure 3 . foreign aid discretionary budget authority key trends foreign aid spending - - the combined resources for development , humanitarian , security / economic , and military assistance - - hasgrown significantly since 9 / 11 , augmented by the launch of two major aid initiatives for hiv / aids and the millennium challengeaccount . the $25.2 billion total for fy2006 is about 9% higher than the $23.1 billion annual average since fy1977 . fy2004 , including iraq reconstruction , was the highest foreign aid budget in 30 years . foreign aid spending declined substantially following the collapse of the soviet union and the end of the cold war . betweenfy1990 and fy1997 , funding for foreign assistance fell by 31% , to a 30-year low of $15.2 billion . during the first term of the reagan administration , foreign aid grew at a steady pace . larger contributions to the world bank,increased assistance to central america and countries providing the u.s. with military base access , famine relief in africa , and an economic stabilizationpackage for israel culminated in fy1985 with the third largest foreign aid budget in 30 years . the following year , congress enacted the gramm - rudman - hollings deficit reduction act and foreign assistance , like most otherfederal spending programs , fell sharply . the one - year costs of security assistance in support of the camp david accord pushed foreign aid in fy1979 to the highest point,other than fy2004 . as noted above , foreign assistance includes a wide - breadth of programmatictools utilized in support of various , and in some cases , divergent u.s. foreign policyobjectives . spending patterns for different components of foreign aid have variedconsiderably over the past three decades , as illustrated in the charts that follow . although there is no precise definition of major bilateral foreign aidcategories , this discussion divides programs into four clusters: 1 ) "core" developmentassistance that generally employs long - term poverty reduction and economic growthstrategies ; 2 ) humanitarian relief activities that aim to save lives and provide basicservices immediately following a natural or man - made disaster , or support the needsof refugee populations over an extended length of time ; 3 ) political / securityeconomic aid , intended to help bolster the economies of countries of special strategicinterest to the united states or nations undergoing transitions to democratic andmarket economic systems , such as the states of the former soviet union ; and 4 ) military assistance that helps american friends and allies strengthen their defensecapabilities . besides foreign aid , the other major component of the international affairsbudget supports diplomacy and american engagement in the internationalcommunity .