appendix a . enacted / promulgated mercury controls appendix b . other state action . / gwh . during this phase , averaging would be limited to units located at a single electric generating plant . the rule would prohibit interstate trading of allowances . a second option in the stappa / alapco model rule , like a provision in new jersey's law , would provide more flexibility to electric generating units in return for the installation of control technologies designed to capture additional pollutants . under this option , an owner or operator could delay compliance with the mercury emission limits for four years at up to 50% of its generating capacity if it agreed to meet stringent standards for emissions of sulfur dioxide , nitrogen oxides , and particulate matter , in addition to mercury by the end of 2012 . while no state has adopted the stappa / alapco model intact , the model serves as a window on what state and local officials closely involved in regulating power plant emissions believe is feasible . nineteen of the 22 states that have proposed or adopted programs more stringent than the federal camr rule have done so since the model rule's unveiling . with a few exceptions , it is a general precept of federal environmental laws that more stringent state standards are not preempted . relying on this authority , some states ( particularly , california and a number of northeastern states ) have adopted various environmental requirements that address problems that are judged to be unique to their state or more severe in their state than elsewhere . thus , state actions to set more stringent limits on mercury emissions are not considered unprecedented or unusual . nevertheless , the degree to which states are opting out of the federal program and the speed with which they are doing so appear noteworthy . in part , the development of these state programs reflects a judgment by state regulators or legislators that the camr rule is not sufficiently stringent . in part , it reflects a judgment that epa's assessment of the availability and cost of technology to control mercury emissions are unduly pessimistic . state actions were also dictated by a looming deadline for submission of programs for epa approval . under the camr rule , states had until november 17 , 2006 to submit their programs ( either programs adopting camr or programs at least as stringent ) to epa . failure to submit can leave states liable to imposition of a federal implementation plan ( fip ) , which would impose the camr rule's requirements on a state through an epa - run program . epa officials have aggressively promoted camr and the threat of fips , testifying before state legislatures against the adoption of more stringent state programs , and questioning the authority of states to prohibit interstate trading of allowances . at the same time , many of the states adopting more stringent requirements are pursuing legal action to overturn epa's rule and force the agency itself to adopt more stringent requirements . it may be some time before these issues are resolved .