the group met in new york in september 2009 . u.s. engagement with syria and iran on matters pertaining to iraq has grown since early 2007 . insurgent and terrorist threats to energy infrastructure in the region constitute the other main security risk . as described above , the bush administration also opened discussions with iranian government representatives regarding iraq , and a working group chaired by the u.s. and iranian ambassadors to iraq met periodically in baghdad . the key questions with regard to diplomatic outreach proposals remain: how much political and material support will iraq's neighbors be willing to provide to sustain the implementation of iraqi reconciliation arrangements ; and , which iraqis will be willing to cooperate with regionally supported initiatives ? statements agreed to and commitments made by iraqis and their neighbors in regional conferences held since 2003 generally have not been implemented , although as security conditions have improved , some neighboring states have expanded their engagement with iraq . the ability and willingness of the iraqi people and their leaders to resolve outstanding political differences and to eliminate residual security threats from insurgents , terrorists , and criminal organizations may remain limited or deteriorate significantly . greater coordination between the united states and its regional allies may improve u.s. chances of meeting and overcoming these challenges . however , regional political rivalry and local political developments may limit the ability of governments to respond effectively to these threats or to coordinate among themselves and with the united states . the success of u.s. efforts to contain terrorist elements within iraq and reduce the flow of foreign fighters to and from iraq remains largely dependent on the success of iraq's security forces , who now hold responsibility for security in iraq , and the cooperation of regional governments . the concern over potential iraqi government cooperation with terrorist groups that drove u.s. policy toward iraq in 2002 and early 2003 has given way to a wider concern that instability in iraq created safe havens for expanded operations by al qaeda and regional terrorist entities such as the pkk . success against al qaeda in iraq has reduced these threats , although iranian and turkish concerns about kurdish militants persist , and sunni governments are uniformly wary about returning fighters from iraq . while al qaeda's presence in iraq is now reportedly small and under threat , its organization there could regenerate in an atmosphere of renewed instability . the dispute between iraq and syria following the august 2009 ministry bombings in baghdad illustrated the potential for continuing tension stemming from allegations of cross - border interference . iran's role in the strategic balance of the persian gulf region has been a central policy concern for the united states since the second world war . the removal of the saddam hussein regime and the disbanding of iraq's armed forces removed the region's principal military counterweight to iran . the subsequent political successes of iraq's shiite arab majority have created new opportunities for the expansion of iran's political influence .