funding . funding of $1 billion expressly for interoperable communications is mandated for 2007 . this would be in the form of a distribution from the digital television transition and public safety fund created by the deficit reduction act . according to language directing distributions from the fund , grants are to be spent for "the acquisition of , deployment of or training for the use of interoperable communications systems that utilize , or enable interoperability with communications systems that can utilize" spectrum at 700 mhz . or take some other action to assign responsibility for planning and implementation ? spectrum management . what are the best policies to encourage efficient use of spectrum by public safety ? market - driven pricing has been proposed by the fcc , among others . if this is applied only to usage at 700 mhz , would it be effective policy to have a two - speed regulatory framework for public safety spectrum licenses , with one set of rules for 700 mhz and different rules for other spectrum holdings ? congressional jurisdiction . in the law that created the office of emergency communications , congress specified that , in reviewing interoperable emergency communications plans , the emergency communications director would exclude the review of spectrum allocation and management . congress has yet to make decisions about jurisdiction for programs planned and funded by dhs that operate on spectrum managed by the fcc and the ntia . new federal funding for interoperable communications is under consideration . many propose that the cost of a new network built on public safety spectrum be funded with access fees from users . how will existing and planned federal funding programs be applied to include a private operator for the key interoperable network ? in the light of these and other questions , congress may decide to revisit emergency communications policy and management at the federal level through hearings and oversight , as well as to clarify congressional priorities and goals regarding interoperability . this report has described three separate policy initiatives from different sectors of the federal government that appear to be moving in different directions . this situation can be attributed , in part to the division of jurisdictional and institutional responsibilities in both the executive and legislative branches of government , and in part to the absence of any recent crisis that would raise the profile of emergency communications needs . without guidance from congress or the administration , it is possible that these three initiatives will continue to develop along dissimilar paths with little or no apparent coordination . if so , what would be the likely impact on emergency communications policy ? of the three initiatives , the proposal by the fcc — which is sponsored by the public safety and homeland security bureau it created in 2006 — seems to be the most far reaching . although it is possible that the fcc will extend the time for public comments and also deliberate extensively , it could move to allocate the spectrum to a quasi - commercial entity in 2007 for development by 2010-2011 . this could possibly preempt any decisions or recommendations from the ntia and dhs , which are operating within unspecified but apparently longer time frames .