below are some examples of potential modifications . were congress to expand or enhance application of the gsp , the following options could be considered: expand the list of tariff lines permitted duty - free access . allow some import - sensitive products to receive preferential access . increase flexibility of rules of origin requirements . for example , allow more gsp beneficiaries to cumulate inputs with other beneficiaries to meet the 35% domestic content requirement . eliminate competitive need limitations for bdcs , or raise the thresholds that trigger them . the following is a list of possible approaches if congress desired to extend the program but restrict imports under gsp: consider mandatory graduation for "middle income" countries , similar to eu gsp changes , or strengthen the language giving the president authority to graduate countries based on competitiveness . reconsider criteria for graduation of countries from gsp or direct greater enforcement of the eligibility criteria . strengthen provision that allows graduation of individual industry sectors within beneficiary countries . modify the rule - of - origin requirement for qualifying products to require that a greater percentage of the direct costs of processing operations ( currently 35% ) originate in beneficiary developing countries . lower the threshold at which the president may ( or must ) withdraw , suspend , or limit the application of duty - free treatment of certain products ( cnls ) . require the president to more frequently and actively monitor ( currently an annual process ) the economic progress of beneficiary countries , as well as compliance with gsp criteria . add additional eligibility criteria ; for example , to include movement toward more reciprocal tariff treatment , sustainable development , or environmental preservation . appendix a. gsp implementation and renewal appendix b. gsp beneficiary countrie . the positions of various stakeholders regarding the value of the program are also discussed . supporters of the gsp program include beneficiary developing country governments and exporters , u.s. importers , and u.s. manufacturers who use inputs entering under gsp in downstream products . some members of congress favor gsp renewal , because they believe it is an important development and foreign policy tool . opposing the program are some u.s. producers who manufacture competing products and some in congress who favor more reciprocal approaches to trade policy . what follows is a thematic approach to the major topics of discussion in the gsp renewal debate . in previous years , members have suggested various reforms of the gsp program . possible options include supporting reciprocal tariff and market access benefits through ftas , renewing the gsp for least - developed beneficiaries only , extending the program in a modified form , or letting the program lapse altogether . although the gsp is a nonreciprocal tariff preference , any changes to the program may need to be considered in light of the requirements of the wto enabling clause , as it has been interpreted by the wto appellate body . at a minimum , the united states may need to notify — and possibly consult with — other wto members regarding any withdrawal or modification of gsp benefits , as required by paragraph 4 of the enabling clause .