this amendment was similar to h.r . 2127 in that it would have eliminated the tax benefits of coli , but it did not include the notification provisions common to both house bills . the amendment fell on a point of order made by senator john kyl under the congressional budget act of 1974 because it was ruled not germane to the underlying reconciliation measure . prior to this , a motion to waive the point of order was defeated by a vote of 37-63 . s. 2424 , the national employee savings and trust equity guarantee act was introduced by senator chuck grassley on may 24 , 2004 , and included language ( section 812 ) adding requirements to the tax code in order for a coli policy to enjoy the typical tax advantages of life insurance . some states provide for an insurable interest in both situations . if an insurable interest does exist , the next issue under state laws is whether companies must give notice to , or receive the consent of , employees covered under a coli policy . at least 48 states now have laws requiring some form of notification or consent from an insured employee before a coli policy can be issued . a number of states require actual consent ( opt - in ) , some in writing , but others assume consent if the employee does not object ( opt - out ) . in 1993 , state insurance regulators , through their trade association , the national association of insurance commissioners ( naic ) , adopted model coli guidelines explaining that coli is generally used to provide employee benefits , such as a retiree health benefit plan . following the controversy generated on the issue , the naic revised these guidelines at the end of 2002 . the revised naic guidelines recommend that states considering a legislative response to insurable interest concerns should consider the following elements for inclusion in their law ( 2002 additions in italics ) : 1 . the law should recognize that employers have a lawful and substantial economic interest in the lives of key employees and in other employees who have a reasonable expectation of benefitting from an employee welfare benefit plan . employers should be required to notify eligible employees of their proposed participation in the plan and the employees should be given an opportunity to refuse to participate . on a prospective basis , employers should obtain written consent of each individual being insured . consent would include an acknowledgment that the employer may maintain the life insurance coverage even after the insured individual's employment has terminated . an employer shall not retaliate in any manner against an employee or a retired employee for refusing consent to be insured . for non - key or non - managerial employees , the amount of coverage should be reasonably related to the benefits provided to the employees . with respect to employer - provided pension and welfare benefit plans , the life insurance coverage purchased to finance the plans should only be allowed on the lives of those employees and retirees who , at the time their lives are first insured under the plan , would be eligible to participate in the plan .