conventional forces and the role of nuclear deterrence . the answers to these questions can also inform decisions about the balance of nuclear andconventional capabilities in the u.s. military force structure . this report highlights a number of policy issues that may bear consideration in the ongoingdebate regarding investments in conventional and nuclear forces: it appears that china and the united states currently have a stable deterrentrelationship . this deterrence appears to be based on a complicated nexus of economic,political , and military factors . despite this deterrent relationship , military conflict might ensue either as partof a consciously planned strategy or due to mistakes , misperception , oraccident . together , u.s. nuclear and conventional capabilities contribute to militarydeterrence , and therefore it appears that it would be worthwhile to consider the interplay of nuclearand conventional capabilities in force structure and strategy decisions . nuclear and conventional military capabilities can simultaneously havepositive effects on deterrence or warfighting , and negative effects on crisis stability or wartermination objectives . therefore , it may be overly simplistic to make changes in military forcestructure or capabilities to improve deterrence , for example , without considering potential effectson crisis stability , for example . do others require greater commitment of ground forces ? perhapsmore important , how relevant are nuclear weapons in particular scenarios , and how exactly mightthey influence the conflict or crisis ? for example , some observers contend that the availability ofnuclear weapons can help de - escalate a conflict by reminding all the parties of the risks of escalation ; others argue that a nation's ability to strike critical targets at the start of a conflict can place pressureon the other nation to preempt such a potential attack , escalating the crisis and possibly complicatingefforts to end it short of all - out war . dod's 2006 report to congress on china's military capabilities notes that china's currentoptions to prevent taiwan from claiming formal independence include persuasion and coercion . ifchina were to resort to overt military force , the dod report outlines four possible "courses ofaction"the pla would be likely to take: missile strikes and information operations , an air and missilecampaign , a naval blockade , and an amphibious invasion . dod's scenarios are not exhaustive , however , as additional sources of conflict could emergebetween the united states and china . for example , taiwan , in expectation of a chinese attack,could take the initial overt military action in the conflict . further , possible conflicts between chinaand japan might unfold and draw in the united states . illustrative scenarios that capture theseadditional dynamics are addressed below . examining these scenarios can contribute to an understanding of u.s. force requirements andthe potential dynamics of the conflict . this assessment focuses on the possible interaction betweenconventional and nuclear forces , rather than on the specific order of battle and force levels the unitedstates might need in each particular scenario . the analysis that follows seeks to study the role that u.s. nuclear and conventional forcesmight play in four stages of each potential conflict: deterrence prior to the start of the conflict ; crisisstability in the early stages of the conflict ; warfighting during the height of the conflict ; and wartermination .