rothe argued that 10 u.s.c . § 2323 unconstitutionally deprived it of due process both as applied and on its face . rothe's as - applied challenge focused upon 10 u.s.c . § 2323 in its 1992 reenactment , which governed the dod's award of the contract to rothe's competitor , while rothe's facial challenge focused upon the 2006 reenactment of 10 u.s.c . § 2323 , which was in effect at the time when the court heard the case . the challenged sdb program in rothe incorporates the sba definition of small disadvantaged business , including the racial presumption , and establishes a 5% participation goal for such entities in dod contracts . the § 1207 program also authorizes dod to apply a price evaluation adjustment of up to 10% in order to attain the 5% goal . in effect , this means that dod may raise the bids of non - dbes by 10% in order to give disadvantaged entrepreneurs a preference . the statutory goal - setting provision in §1207 was reauthorized in 1989 , and again in 1992 , 1999 , 2002 , and 2006 . after lengthy litigation and a complicated procedural history , which included repeated appearances before both the district court and the federal circuit , the trial court ultimately held that the dod program was unconstitutional as applied because dod failed to demonstrate that there was sufficient statistical evidence of discrimination before congress when the statute was reenacted in 1992 . in contrast , the district court held that the statute was facially constitutional because there was sufficient statistical evidence of discrimination before congress when the statute was most recently reenacted in 2002 . however , the federal circuit reversed with respect to the facial challenge , holding that dod's sbd program was unconstitutional on its face because congress lacked a "strong basis in evidence" for concluding that race - conscious remedies were necessary when reenacting 10 u.s.c . the district court had found that six state and local disparity studies , along with other statistical and anecdotal evidence , constituted a "strong basis in evidence," but the federal circuit disagreed . it found that the six state and local disparity studies — which had been the "primary focus of the district court's compelling interest analysis and of the parties' arguments on appeal" — did not constitute a "strong basis in evidence" because they did not provide the "substantially probative and broad - based statistical foundation ... that must be the predicate for nationwide , race - conscious action. the federal circuit found significant methodological flaws with all of the disparity studies: two of the six studies failed to exclude unqualified businesses in calculating the number of minority businesses available for government contracts , and five of the six studies failed to account for the relative capacity of minority - owned small businesses in contracting with the government . these flaws , coupled with the fact that the studies' findings addressed only six of the more than three thousand counties and equivalent regions making up the united states , prompted the federal circuit to find that the studies were insufficient to constitute a "strong basis in evidence" for the nation - wide sdb program .