appendix a . other federal departments with immigration - related responsibilities department of state visa issuances the department of state's bureau of consular affairs is the agency responsible for issuing visas . dhs is responsible for formulating regulations on visa issuances and may assign staff to consular posts abroad to advise , review , and conduct investigations . as discussed earlier , uscis is charged with approving immigrant petitions , a prerequisite for obtaining a visa to become a legal permanent resident . the documentary requirements for visas are stated in §222 of the ina , with some discretion for further specifications or exceptions by regulation , most notably the visa waiver program . should immigration enforcement functions in cbp and ice be merged into one agency ? if immigration enforcement functions are merged together , should that agency resemble the statutory framework established by hsa ( bureau of border security ) or a super - agency of u.s. customs and immigration enforcement ? would any substantial reorganization of immigration functions — no matter how optimal — be too disruptive to be prudent at this time ? should uscis have a formal enforcement arm to investigate benefit fraud and other adjudications - related violations ? ultimately , these questions are addressed in the broader policy making context . congress weighs at least three elements ( i.e. , the immigration laws and regulations , the funding resources and staffing , and the management and administration ) as it seeks to achieve an efficacious immigration policy . all aliens seeking visas — prospective immigrants and nonimmigrants — must undergo admissibility reviews performed by dos consular officers abroad . these reviews are intended to ensure that they are not ineligible for visas or admission under the grounds for inadmissibility , which include criminal , national security , health , and indigence grounds as well as past violations of immigration law . as a result , all aliens arriving with visas have had background checks . for the past several years , moreover , consular affairs has been issuing machine - readable visas . as of october 2004 , all visas issued by the united states use biometric identifiers ( eg , finger scans ) in addition to the photograph that has been collected for some time . the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( also known as the 9 / 11 commission ) argued that targeting travel is at least as powerful a weapon against terrorists as targeting their money . the 9 / 11 commission recommended that the united states combine terrorist travel intelligence , operations , and law enforcement in a strategy to intercept terrorists , find terrorist travel facilitators , and constrain terrorist mobility . 108-458 establishes a visa and passport security program within the bureau of diplomatic security at dos to target and disrupt individuals and organizations at home and in foreign countries that are involved in the fraudulent production , distribution , or use of visas , passports , and other documents used to gain entry to the united states .