the juvenile court was designed to be more than a court for children . the underlying theory behind a separate juvenile court system was that the state has a duty to assume a custodial and protective role over individuals who cannot act in their own best interest . as such , the separate system for juvenile offenders was predicated on the notion of rehabilitation — not punishment , retribution , or incapacitation . in duncan v. louisiana , the u.s. supreme court held that the right to jury trial is fundamental and guaranteed by due process . in williams v. florida , the court reaffirmed that the "purpose of the jury trial ... is to prevent oppression by the government. the u.s. supreme court recognized the superiority of group decision - making over individual judgments in ballew v. georgia , which defined the constitutional minimum number of jurors that a state must empanel in a criminal prosecution . in ballew , the court , relying on empirical data , found that a jury composed of less than six members was less likely to foster effective group deliberation and more likely to lead to inaccurate fact - finding and incorrect application of the community's common sense to the facts . when the court decided mckeiver , it did so to maintain the civil and rehabilitative nature of the juvenile justice system . at the time of the decision , juvenile adjudication hearings were closed to the public , the system was informal , and the records of the juvenile adjudications were confidential and not relied on in criminal prosecutions . currently , some juvenile adjudication hearings are open to the public , the system is more formal and adversarial , and juvenile adjudications are frequently used in criminal prosecutions for sentence enhancement . from their perspective , the civil and rehabilitative nature of the juvenile justice system has shifted to a more punitive one which more closely resembles the adult criminal justice system . central to the mckeiver ' s holding was the court's conclusion that juries were not essential to accurate fact - finding . however , this premise may be called into question in light of the court's reemphasis on the importance of a jury . in a series of cases , the u.s. supreme court has recognized and emphasized the important role that juries play in criminal proceedings . in addition , the court concluded that a smaller panel could increase the risk of convicting an innocent person . more recently , the court has stressed the constitutional necessity of juries , rather than judges , making factual determinations upon which sentences are based . the court's reasoning in ballew and subsequent cases regarding fact - finding by juries during sentencing may call into question the court's conclusion in mckeiver that a jury would not improve the fact - finding ability and fairness of juvenile courts . first , some are likely to argue that the increasingly punitive nature of cases adjudicated in the juvenile justice system calls into question the validity of the court's reasoning underlying its holding in mckeiver that juveniles are not entitled to the right to a jury trial .