industry influence . some critics think that , through its provision of fees , the industry has too much influence over fda actions . they believe that , by structuring industry participation into the setting of performance goals , the law creates conflicts of interest . this is compounded because , they say , the process of setting performance goals is not transparent . until an amendment in pdufa iv that requires consumer participation as well , the law directed fda and manufacturers to meet , in preparation for each pdufa reauthorization , to discuss workload and revenue needed . fda then submitted a letter to the authorizing committees that presents performance goals for the following five years . the performance goals regarding review activities were structured to include a length of time ( in months ) and the percent of applications that would be completed in that time . the industry participation in goal negotiation and the focus on review time created what some see as actual or the appearance of industry influence on the management of fda resources . at the least , those speculations could threaten confidence in fda reviews . at the worst are the concerns of some that the fee system contributes to quick and suboptimal reviews . fda staff reports of pressure to meet performance goal deadlines suggest to some that safety and effectiveness data are being inadequately evaluated . interaction with congressional appropriations decisions . as previously noted , user fees are an increasing part of fda's budget . in fy2008 , user fees contribute 24.2% of fda budget . patients had to wait for access to the products . for some patients , a drug in review — and therefore not available for sale — could be the difference between life and death . manufacturers , in turn , had to wait to begin to recoup the costs of research and development . at that time , fda estimated that each one - month delay in a review's completion cost a manufacturer $10 million . fda argued that it needed more scientists to review the drug applications that were coming in and the ones already backlogged in its files . it had not received sufficient appropriations to hire them . for decades fda had asked congress for permission to implement user fees ; the pharmaceutical industry generally opposed them , believing the funds might go into the treasury to reduce federal debt rather than help fund drug review . the 1992 law became possible when fda and industry agreed on two steps: performance goals , setting target completion times for various review processes ; and the promise that these fees would supplement — rather than replace — funding that congress appropriated to fda . those steps helped persuade industry groups the fees would reduce review times — and gave fda the revenue source it had sought for over 20 years . pdufa has attracted both criticism and praise from industry , fda staff , consumers , and members of congress . the issues they raised played out in the legislative debate leading up to pdufa iv , as they had at each earlier reauthorization .