the rule did not establish a new safety standard . fra noted that prior to publication of the rule , train horns were already being sounded at more than 98% of public grade crossings ; thus , the rule formalized an already prevailing industry standard . the majority of the text of the rule deals with exceptions to the requirement that train horns be sounded at all public grade crossings , and particularly with procedures for establishing quiet zones . the terms of the exceptions are intended to balance the risk of removing one safety measure ( the sounding of the train horn ) by adding other safety measures . however , under some circumstances communities can ban the sounding of train horns at grade crossings without additional safety improvements , where adequate safety features are already in place or where the risk of accidents is below one of the thresholds established in the regulation . fra estimated that 66% of the approximately 2,000 whistle ban crossings in existence at the time the rule was finalized could qualify for conversion to quiet zones without any improvements , while the remaining 34% would require supplementary or alternative safety measures to maintain their existing ban . 103-440 ( codified as 40 u.s.c . fra exempted the chicago region from the rule , pending a re - analysis of grade - crossing accident data for that area . the chicago area includes 45% of the nationwide population fra estimated to be potentially affected should pre - existing bans on sounding train horns at road crossings ( "whistle bans" ) be eliminated as a result of this regulation . the fra train horn rule preempted roughly 2,000 existing state and local whistle bans . the rule allows communities to establish "quiet zones" where the sounding of locomotive horns can be banned , provided that the risk of grade - crossing collisions is below a certain level or that the community provides safety measures that compensate for the absence of the warning provided by the train horn . in some cases communities may establish quiet zones without making any safety improvements ; in other cases , communities will be required to make safety improvements to grade crossings in order to obtain fra approval to establish a quiet zone . the united states has approximately 250,000 highway - rail at - grade crossings . collisions at these intersections are typically responsible for nearly 40% of all railroad - related deaths . the vast majority of grade - crossing collisions are caused by motorists , and the vast majority of injuries and deaths resulting from these collisions are experienced by motorists . reducing the number of injuries and deaths resulting from grade - crossing collisions has been a federal concern for decades . congress has provided more than $4.1 billion since 1974 specifically for grants to states to reduce the risks of grade crossings , and reducing risks at public grade crossings is an eligible expense under several federal highway funding programs . this funding has resulted in the installation of around 30,000 active warning devices at grade crossings , and the closing of many other crossings , since 1974 . both the number and rate of incidents and deaths at grade crossings have declined significantly over time .