in addition , p.l . section 9 of p.l . the house substituted h.r . 366 for the senate version of s. 250 and passed s. 250 ( house version ) on july 12 , 2006 , without objection . on july 20 , 2006 , the conferees met and agreed to file the conference report . the conference report ( h.rept . 109-597 ) was filed on july 25 , 2006 . the senate agreed to the conference report by unanimous consent on july 26 , 2006 . the house , by a vote of 399 to 1 , agreed to the conference report on july 29 , 2006 . the president signed the bill on august 12 , 2006 , p.l . this report analyzes selected changes that p.l . 109-270 made to perkins iii . it begins with a detailed analysis of changes to funding formulas — both state allotments and within state allocations . following this discussion , the report analyzes changes in accountability requirements , including changes to the core indicators of performance and data reporting , and related sanctions . changes to state and local plans and uses of funds are then considered . the next section of the report examines changes made to the tech - prep program . the report concludes with changes made to the general provisions of the bill , most notably with respect to the equitable participation of private school students in career and technical education programs . table 1 provides a general comparison of some of the key changes made by perkins iv . each of these changes is discussed in detail in a subsequent section of this report . it should be noted that the act provides funding to eligible agencies and eligible recipients . an eligible agency is the state board that functions as the sole state agency responsible for the administration or supervision of career and technical education in a specific state . an eligible recipient receives funding from the eligible agency and includes , for example , local educational agencies and public or nonprofit private institutions of higher education that offer career and technical education courses leading to various outcomes , such as an industry - recognized credential . 109-270 , the carl d. perkins career and technical education improvement act of 2006 , amends and revises the perkins act . it authorizes "such sums as may be necessary" for fy2007-fy2012 for perkins act programs and activities . the act refers to career and technical education ( cte ) rather than vocational and technical education . perkins iv retains the overall purpose of the act , making only technical changes . 109-270 also retains the overall structure of the perkins act . sections 1 through 9 deal with certain overarching provisions , such as purposes of the act ( section 2 ) , definitions that apply throughout the act ( section 3 ) , and authorization of appropriations ( section 9 ) . title i of the act authorizes and specifies the central provisions of the act dealing with assistance to states for career and technical education . title i - a deals with allotments and allocations . title i - b specifies state provisions . title i - c details local provisions .