this is an elderly family. even if developments designed for elderly residents do allow children , however , they might not be equipped to serve families with both elderly members and young children . for example , most units in elderly housing developments are either efficiencies or have only one bedroom , and may not have the space to accommodate family members . in addition , elderly developments might lack common spaces where children might play , or the after - school programs that are sometimes a part of hud - subsidized complexes for families . in order to address the growing number of grandparents raising grandchildren , congress enacted the living equitably — grandparents aiding children and youth ( legacy ) act in 2003 as part of the american dream downpayment act ( p.l . the legacy act provided for the funding of housing units in the section 202 program for elderly residents raising grandchildren or other relatives age 19 or younger . congress did not fund the legacy act until fy2006 , when it appropriated $3.96 million for an intergenerational families demonstration project . in december 2008 , hud announced two awardees , both of which received capital grants and rental assistance: one project consisting of 10 units in chicago and the other consisting of 9 units in smithville , tn . the legacy act also called for hud , together with the census bureau , to produce a study of the affordable housing needs of grandparents raising grandchildren . one of the ways this can be done is through refinancing . owners pay off their old section 202 loan and use the property's equity to make needed improvements . however , prior to 2011 , owners of older section 202 buildings had to obtain hud approval to prepay their loans ( in most cases ) , and refinance into a loan with "a lower interest rate on the principal of the loan for the project and in reductions in debt service" ( i.e. , reduced principal and interest payments ) . for owners of section 202 properties that were financed prior to 1974 , when interest rates were set at about 3% , it was difficult , if not impossible , to meet the requirement of a lower interest rate and reduced debt service . the section 202 supportive housing for the elderly act ( p.l . 111-372 ) changed the law to allow owners with interest rates at or below 6% to refinance as long as they use proceeds from the new loan to address the physical needs of the property ( notwithstanding the reduced interest rate and lower debt service requirement ) . in addition , the law gave hud the authority to subordinate existing section 202 debt when owners obtain new financing for the project . in the case of a refinancing , section 202 owners must use the proceeds from the new loan either in a manner that is advantageous to the tenants or to provide affordable rental housing and social services for elderly persons living in another hud - assisted property owned by the same entity .