circuit . on may 22 , 2009 , the court of appeals issued its decision largely upholding the district court's finding of liability against the nine cigarette manufacturers . the appeals court also upheld the district court's remedial order that had imposed the numerous affirmative and negative duties on the defendants while denying the government's proposed remedy of a counter - marketing campaign , smoking cessation program , youth smoking reduction program , and monitoring scheme . furthermore , the appeals court rejected the government's request to seize billions of dollars in corporate profit from companies that include altria group , r.j. reynolds , and brown & williamson . the court of appeals also partly vacated the district court's remedial order and remanded for further proceedings on four discrete issues . these included vacating the remedial order with respect to the prohibition on health messages or descriptors and ordering the district court "to reformulate [its] injunction so as to exempt foreign activities that have no substantial , direct , and foreseeable domestic effects. it remains to be seen how this order will affect the district court's earlier march 2007 decision that the provisions in the remedial order that prohibit defendants from using express or implied health messages apply to the defendants' actions taken outside the united states . prior to 1992 , tobacco lawsuits were typically individual product liability and negligence suits brought by smokers or their relatives seeking damages for smoking - related illnesses . the tobacco industry generally prevailed in these cases by arguing that the federal cigarette labeling and advertising act ( fclaa ) , which requires warning labels , preempted plaintiffs' claims that the tobacco companies had a duty to warn consumers . in some cases , however , tobacco manufacturers prevailed by arguing that smokers assumed the risks of smoking . then , in 1992 , in cipollone v. liggett group , inc. , the u.s. supreme court made it more feasible for smokers to recover . although the court held that federal laws requiring warning labels precluded states from imposing additional requirements or prohibitions on cigarette advertising and labeling , and therefore precluded lawsuits alleging that the federally required warning labels were inadequate , the court stated that federal law did not preclude "state - law damages actions. examples of state - law damages actions include failure - to - warn lawsuits based on tobacco companies' "testing or research practices or other actions unrelated to advertising or promotion," or claims of breach of express warranty , fraudulent representation , and conspiracy . this section now examines selected suits brought by private parties after cipollone . in addition to the class action and individual suits discussed below , tobacco companies have been sued by their own shareholders for decreased stock prices due to deceptive practices , and by insurance companies for medical expenses resulting from fraud , conspiracy , racketeering , misrepresentation , and antitrust violations . cigarette manufacturers have also been sued under legal theories that include negligence , strict liability , defective design , public nuisance , antitrust laws , and unfair trade practices .