the oed evaluation is subjective . unclear methods lead to evaluation disconnects .. . it has to be asked how the largely positive findings of the evaluations can be reconciled with the poor development outcomes observed over the same period ( 1985-1995 ) . another testified that , "independence" at the bank is purely cosmetic , for a temporary change of desk and a new nameplate do not alter the signature on the paycheck nor the rewards of the bank's personnel system . the independent evaluation group is a department of the bank like any other , save the ceremony of reporting to an executive board that is passive at best . for everyone save the titular director general , a revolving door leads back to standard line jobs and advancement at the bank . because results are published , there is strong pressure to display success . outside verification is precluded because there is no public access to the underlying data . this hardly fosters disinterested and rigorous judgments , even though the bank boasts that staff cannot review projects that they themselves designed . in response to these concerns , experts at the hearings proposed creating an outside independent evaluation group that would be able to perform rigorous and independent impact evaluation of what does and what does not work in world bank programs . members of congress have expressed significant interest in this proposal , directing the executive branch to pursue further reforms of the world bank evaluation system in the fy2006 appropriations measure ( pl 109-102 ) . congress required the secretary of the treasury to seek at the world bank ( and the other mdbs ) a "functionally independent investigations office , auditor general office and evaluation office that are free from interference in determining the scope of investigations ( including forensic audits ) , internal auditing ( including assessments of management controls for meeting operational objectives and complying with bank policies ) , performing work and communicating results , and that regularly report to such bank's board of directors," as well as other transparency and effectiveness related reforms . over the life of the bank , the united states has contributed the largest amount of resources ( $26.49 billion total committed , 16.84% of total committed shares ) . as the largest contributor , the united states enjoys a single seat on the world bank's board of executive directors and carries 16.38% of the total votes in world bank decision making . congressional authorization is required by law before the united states may agree to participate in any world bank funding agreements , such as the tri - annual ida replenishment agreements . while congress does not have a representative at the negotiations , the executive branch is required to consult with members of congress , before and during the replenishment process . the u.s. executive director ( ed ) is the primary u.s. representative to the bank and sits on the executive board , which is comprised of 24 members representing all of the bank's 185 members . the ed handles the day - to - day operations of the fund . the majority of bank decisions require a 50% majority vote . ida assistance is highly discounted and is increasingly provided as grants .