amendments in p.l . 105-185 extended the period of snap / ssi / medicaid ( but not tanf ) eligibility for refugees and asylees from five to seven years . in addition , the victims of trafficking protection act of 2000 ( p.l . 106-386 ) created a new visa category , the t visa , for noncitizen victims of severe forms of trafficking . the act made these trafficking victims eligible for public assistance , resettlement assistance , entitlement programs , and other benefits available to refugees admitted under section 207 of the ina . during the 107 th congress , p.l . 107-171 , the "farm bill," contained substantial changes to food stamp eligibility rules for noncitizens , expanding food stamp eligibility to include the following groups: all lpr children , regardless of date of entry ( it also ended requirements to deem sponsors' income and resources to these children ) ; lprs receiving government disability payments , so long as they pass any noncitizen eligibility test established by the disability program ( eg , ssi recipients would have to meet ssi noncitizen requirements in order to get food stamps / snap ) ; and all individuals who have resided in the united states for five or more years as "qualified aliens" — that is , lprs , refugees / asylees , and other non - temporary legal residents ( such as cuban / haitian entrants ) . the changes to rules for the disabled became effective october 1 , 2002 ; new rules for children were effective october 1 , 2003 ; and the five - year residence rule went into effect april 1 , 2003 . subsequent laws have resulted in additional revisions , as follows: in 2007 , section 525 of the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 ( p.l . 110-161 ) permitted iraqi and afghan aliens who had been granted special immigrant status under section 101 ( a ) ( 27 ) of the ina eligible for resettlement assistance , entitlement programs , and other benefits available to refugees admitted under section 207 of the ina for a period not to exceed six months . also , section 409 of the consolidated appropriations act prohibited funds from being used to provide homeowners assistance to foreign nationals who are neither aliens lawfully admitted for permanent residence , nor authorized to be employed in the united states . 110-328 extended to nine years ( during fy2009 through fy2011 ) the period of eligibility of certain refugees , asylees , and aliens in other specified humanitarian categories for ssi benefits , provided that the alien has a pending naturalization application or makes a declaration that he or she has made a good faith effort to pursue u.s. citizenship . it also made victims of trafficking among the eligible population . as a result of this provision , the specified lpr must additionally fit within one of several categories , which include being an lpr for less than six years , applying for lpr status within four years of beginning to receive ssi , being at least age 70 , or being under age 18 . the children's health insurance program reauthorization act of 2009 ( chipra 2009 , p.l .