these models will be highlighted below . some perceptions of hsint among leaders in the ic and observers of the intelligence process are illustrative . leaders within the intelligence and homeland security communities often speak openly about the responsibilities , priorities , accomplishments , and challenges their agencies face . the nation's first dni , ambassador john negroponte , stated that the intelligence community has tasked itself with "bolstering intelligence support for homeland security as enterprise objective number one. according to the dni's national intelligence strategy of the united states of america: transformation through integration and innovation , one of the basic objectives is to "build an integrated intelligence capability to address threats to the homeland , consistent with u.s. laws and the protection of privacy and civil liberties. the strategy stipulates that the nature of the transnational threats to the united states "force us to rethink the way we conduct intelligence collection at home and its relationship with traditional intelligence methods abroad. moreover , the strategy states that u.s. intelligence elements must focus their capabilities to ensure that ( 1 ) intelligence elements in the departments of justice and homeland security are properly resourced and closely integrated within the larger intelligence community , ( 2 ) all intelligence community components assist in facilitating the integration of collection and analysis against terrorists , weapons of mass destruction , and other threats to the homeland , and ( 3 ) state , local , and tribal entities and the private sector are connected to our homeland security and intelligence efforts . any national strategy , one could argue , by definition focuses on and provides direction to only those agencies that the federal government controls . a broader reach and / or direction to entities beyond this purview might run the risk of presupposing that the affected community ( ies ) agree with the national strategy and / or have the resources to implement such direction . therefore , it may be appropriate that the national intelligence strategy , while recognizing a homeland security intelligence role for state , local , and tribal entities , as well as the private sector , does so only in a general manner that does not stipulate the activities these communities will implement as part of the broader community of entities working to protect u.s. national security . it could also be argued , that while the national intelligence strategy calls for state , local , and tribal entities to be "connected to our homeland security and intelligence efforts," it nevertheless envisions homeland security intelligence as being driven , in large part , by the federal entities most associated with the domestic intelligence mission — that is , the activities undertaken by the intelligence elements of the departments of justice and homeland security . how the term "connected" is defined becomes of critical importance , as it implies communication and the sharing of information among federal , state , and local intelligence officials . the national strategy for homeland security published in october 2007 , is more explicit about the role of state , local , tribal , and even private sector elements . it stresses that homeland security is a shared responsibility .