the critical factor is the commercialization of the technology . economic benefits accrue only when a technology or technique is brought to the marketplace where it can be sold to generate income or applied to increase productivity . yet , while the united states has a strong basic research enterprise , foreign firms appear equally , if not more , adept at taking the results of these scientific efforts and making commercially viable products . to achieve these goals , the president called for doubling over the next 10 years the amount of federal funding for basic research , particularly in the national science foundation , the office of science in the department of energy , and in the core programs of the national institute of standards and technology , department of commerce . the approach initially recommended and subsequently followed by the clinton administration provided a wide range of options while for the most part reflecting then current trends in congressional efforts to facilitate industrial advancement . this policy , backed by congressional legislation , increased federal coordination and augmented direct government spending for technological development . while many past activities focused primarily on research , the new initiatives shifted the emphasis toward development of new products , processes , and services by the private sector for the commercial marketplace . in addition , a significant number of the proposals aimed to increase both government and private sector support for r&d leading to the commercialization of technology . such a technology policy could generate greater consistency in government activities . because technological development involves numerous risks , efforts to minimize uncertainty regarding federal programs and policies may help alleviate some of the disincentives perceived by industry . it can expand the range of services that can be offered as well as extend the geographic distribution of these services . the development and use of technology also plays a major role in determining patterns of international trade by affecting the comparative advantages of industrial sectors . since technological progress is not necessarily determined by economic conditions — it also can be influenced by advances in science , the organization and management of firms , government activity , or serendipity — it can have effects on trade independent of shifts in macroeconomic factors . new technologies also can help compensate for possible disadvantages in the cost of capital and labor faced by firms . consideration of what constitutes government policy ( both in terms of the industrial policy and technology policy ) covers a broad range of ideas from laissez - faire to special government incentives to target specific high - technology , high - growth industries . american companies have faced increased competitive pressures in the international marketplace from firms based in countries where governments actively promote commercial technological development and application . in the united states , the generation of technology for the commercial marketplace is primarily a private sector activity . the federal government traditionally becomes involved only for certain limited purposes . typically these are activities which have been determined to be necessary for the "national good" but which cannot , or will not , be supported by industry .