most programs will start off in a subset of counties . some programs will allow beneficiaries to "opt out" of the new medicaid benefit plans and enroll in employer - sponsored or private health insurance subject to capped payments ( eg , florida , kentucky ) or remain in traditional medicaid ( eg , idaho ) . incentives such as access to additional benefits or credits for purchasing other goods and services may be offered to encourage healthy behaviors ( all four states ) . access to enhanced benefits may be subject to certain conditions such as signing a member agreement to fully comply with recommended medical treatment and wellness behaviors ( eg , west virginia ) . all four states expect to use managed care delivery systems in these new programs . the expenditure growth is even more striking . program spending increased by more than 49% between 2000 and 2005 , exceeding growth in general and medical inflation , and the rates of growth in spending for both medicare and social security over the same period . medicaid spending has grown partly because medical care keeps getting more expensive , and because over time , federal law has been expanded significantly to cover more people and more benefits . certain state financing mechanisms have also played a role in increased spending under medicaid . as medicaid entered the 1980s and 1990s , more attention — and blame — for steadily rising medicaid costs was attributed to the economic incentive to provide more care under the fee - for - service ( ffs ) delivery system , in which payments are made for each unit of service delivered . under this system , medicaid budgets were somewhat unpredictable , and outlays were significantly affected by the quantity and types of care provided . it was also unclear whether state medicaid programs were getting good value for their ever increasing medicaid dollars . following the lead in the private sector among large employers , many states began to turn to managed care for their medicaid programs . the goal , then and today , is both to rein in medicaid costs by making payments on a predetermined , per - person - per - month basis , rather than for each unit of service delivered , and to provide a better , coordinated system of care for beneficiaries , with an emphasis on preventive and primary care services . but medicaid managed care has not fully achieved either goal yet . data from fy2003 ( most recent available ) indicate that while about two - thirds of medicaid beneficiaries nationwide participate in some form of managed care , the majority of expenditures still occur in the ffs setting , mainly because expensive long - term care services are rarely offered through managed care . in addition , while there are some data suggesting improvements in the quality of care delivered in medicaid managed care , commercial ( employer - based ) and medicare managed care plans continue to do better on some measures of effectiveness . before getting into the specifics of how care is delivered under medicaid , it is important to understand who is eligible for the program and the range of benefits that may be covered .