so why not the chinese ? he said that "under the provisions of the atomic energy act , the people's republic , as a nuclear weapons state , is exempted from the iaea safeguards requirement . however , contrary to the agreement's erroneous implication , china is not altogether exempted from safeguards requirements. prejudice : representative markey objected to the lack of a guarantee of u.s. prior approval for any reprocessing or enrichment of nuclear materials by china , along with language to consider the activities "favorably. legislative options for congress included requesting the president to re - submit the agreement ; passing a resolution to disapprove the proposed agreement ; passing a resolution to approve it ; or passing a resolution to approve it with conditions . on september 20 , 1985 , representative markey introduced h.res . 269 to request the president to re - submit the proposed agreement with exemptions from sections 123a ( 1 ) and 123a ( 7 ) of the atomic energy act . on october 9 , 1985 , representative edward feighan introduced h.r . 3537 to ensure adequate verification of peaceful uses of nuclear exports to the prc ( modeled on iaea safeguards ) . the administration opposed the bill . also on october 9 , 1985 , senator john glenn introduced s. 1754 to ensure adequate verification of peaceful uses of nuclear exports to the prc ( modeled on iaea safeguards ) . the administration also opposed this bill . senator dave durenberger , chairman of the committee on intelligence , supported the bill . in a floor speech on october 21 , 1985 , senator alan cranston reported questions about china's assistance for iran's nuclear program . senators richard lugar and jesse helms reportedly supported the administration . on october 1 , 1985 , representative fascell introduced by request h.j.res . 404 , a joint resolution to approve the proposed agreement . on november 13 , 1985 , the house foreign affairs committee met to mark up the resolution . representative don bonker offered an amendment , favoring the agreement with conditions . the language added requirements for a presidential certification before the issuance of export licenses or approval of retransfers and a waiting period of 30 days of continuous session of congress . the president was to certify that ( 1 ) the verification was designed effectively to ensure the peaceful use of u.s. exports ; ( 2 ) china provided additional details about its nuclear nonproliferation policies and all information was in conformity with section 129 of the atomic energy act ( prohibiting nuclear exports to any country that engaged in nuclear proliferation ) ; and ( 3 ) the obligation to consider activities favorably shall not prejudice u.s. decisionmaking . the amendment also declared that each proposed export would be subject to u.s. laws and regulations in effect at the time of each export . the language also called for a presidential report detailing in unclassified form the prc's past and current nonproliferation policies as well as practices . finally , the amendment stated that the agreement with china would not provide a precedent for negotiating other agreements . representative howard wolpe objected to the language as a unilateral attempt to address the agreement's "deficiencies" with u.s. interpretations .