under the additional authorities authorized in p.l . no more than 30 million barrels may be sold over a maximum period of 60 days , and this limited authority may not be exercised at all if the level of the spr is below 500 million barrels . this was the authority behind the bush administration's offer of 30 million barrels of spr oil on september 2 , 2005 , which was part of the coordinated drawdown called for by the international energy agency . the same authority may have been the model for a swap ordered by president clinton on september 22 , 2000 . the history of the spr traces differences of opinion over what could be deemed a "severe energy supply interruption. opponents of establishing a regional reserve suspected that it might be tapped at times that some consider inappropriate , and that the potential availability of the reserve could be a disincentive for the private sector to maintain inventories as aggressively as it would if there were no reserve . as has been noted , the original intention of the spr was to create a reserve of crude oil stocks that could be tapped in the event of an interruption in crude supply . however , in the last few years , there have been increases in the price of products independent of crude prices , as well as increases in crude prices that correlate to "tight" markets , but not to measurable shortages in crude supply . 101-383 , a drawdown may be initiated in the event of a circumstance that "constitutes , or is likely to become , a domestic or international energy supply shortage of significant scope or duration" and where "action taken ... would assist directly and significantly in preventing or reducing the adverse impact of such shortage. this authority allows for a limited use of the spr . legislation introduced in the 111 th congress to amend the authorities for drawdown of both the spr and the northeast heating oil reserve ( s. 967 , s. 283 ) would allow a drawdown under such a set of circumstances , which would have been seen as anomalous in the past . authorizing a drawdown of the spr and the nhor in the event of a "severe energy supply disruption," both bills have language that includes a price component in the definition of what constitutes such a "disruption" — either an observed price increase , or the likelihood of one . a debate during the 1980s over when , and for what purpose , to initiate a drawdown of spr oil reflected the significant shifts that were taking place in the operation of oil markets after the experiences of the 1970s , and deregulation of oil price and supply . sales of spr oil authorized by the 104 th congress — and in committee in the 105 th — renewed the debate for a time . the rise in oil prices from 2005-2008 renewed interest in the debate over the appropriate time to call upon the spr . the spr drawdown plan , submitted by the reagan administration in late 1982 , provided for price - competitive sale of spr oil .