the organizational authorities are also addressed . certain entities shared with the senate , like the legislative support agencies , are included in this report , although it focuses whenever possible on their service to the house . offices with responsibilities in more than one area are addressed in successive sections . more detailed information on select offices is available in additional congressional research service products identified throughout . members of the u.s. house of representatives and their staff have numerous avenues for assistance in legislative matters . support offices are available to participate in all stages of the legislative process , from background research on public policy issues , to the drafting of potential bills , through the submission , consideration , and evaluation of proposed legislation . the three legislative branch agencies , the congressional research service ( crs ) , congressional budget office ( cbo ) , and the government accountability office ( gao ) , serve both chambers . other legislative support offices are dedicated mainly to serving the house of representatives . with four house office buildings , approximately 10,000 employees , and visits from dignitaries and tourists alike , the u.s. house of representatives has over time developed a means of ensuring the institution's smooth operation . the administrative support offices address various needs of members and staff , ensure the proper maintenance of the house facilities , and facilitate the exchange of information both within the capitol and beyond . three support offices , including the inspector general , the office of compliance , and the office of general counsel , work to ensure that the house of representatives maintains proper oversight over its internal activities and complies with legal requirements regarding employment and other practices . a number of offices share responsibility for maintaining the ceremonial traditions of the u.s. house of representatives and the preservation of its institutional memory . the capitol police , under the direction of the capitol police board , has been delegated primary responsibility for security on capitol hill . the office is led by a medical officer from the u.s. navy , a tradition begun in 1928 . expenses are provided for as a joint expense of the house and senate in the annual legislative branch appropriations acts . the fy2010 consolidated appropriations act provided an allowance for the attending physician , a senior medical officer , three medical officers , and 13 additional assistants . while these personnel remain on the payroll of the navy , the legislative branch bills include a "reimbursement to the department of the navy for expenses incurred for staff and equipment assigned to the office of the attending physician," to be credited to the applicable appropriation . the house and senate appropriations committees provide oversight of funding , administration , operations , and policies , with the committee on house administration and the speaker providing additional oversight on matters pertaining to the house . two other offices , including the house sergeant at arms and the office of the attending physician , work with the police to ensure the safety and comfort of members , their staff , and visitors .