production represents a draw from the reserve base . in the u.s. , the reserve base , measured by the reserve to production ratio , has been growing , increasing from 8.8 years in 1997 to 10.4 years in 2004 . storage is an important component of natural gas supply because while production tends to be relatively constant throughout the year , consumption tends to peak during the winter heating season ( november through march ) as home heating use rises and tends to moderate in the other seasons . for this reason , the industry injects gas into storage facilities to prepare for winter heating season demand peaks . in recent years , the industry has established a target of over 3 trillion cubic feet ( tcf ) of gas in storage for this purpose . while price is an important determinant of consumption and production in the market at the aggregate level , the weather is perhaps even more important in consumption decisions by residential consumers . the primary use of natural gas by residential consumers , home heating , tends to be quite price inelastic ; consequently , the onset of cold temperatures causes demand peaks largely independent of the level of prices . analyses in this report are consistent with the eia base case in the stewfo , that consumers might expect to see lower natural gas prices and heating costs during the winter 2006-2007 heating season . however , the eia's projection is dependent on conditions which may , or may not , materialize . this section of the report analyzes risk factors in the 2006-2007 market outlook . the eia stewfo's conclusion that residential consumers might expect to see reduced natural gas heating costs during the winter of 2006-2007 sees consumption rising , but price falling by a greater proportion . indeed , some analysts see the price of natural gas already having peaked for the winter season . the market fundamentals of consumption , production and storage reserves are likely to be consistent with a weakening market price . however , a contributor to the overall reduced consumption in the market is falling industrial consumption . because the natural gas price has been so volatile in recent years there is a chance that the stewfo has over or underestimated the natural gas price for the winter heating season . this anticipated decline in consumer costs is related to market conditions in 2006 that have been quite different from those observed a year ago . this report analyzes the key factors affecting prices in the u.s. natural gas market , including consumption , production , reserves , and storage levels . the current environment of declining prices is compared to last year , as well as near - term future projections that continue to show a tight market and high prices . the u.s. natural gas market is a regional market , drawing supplies from domestic sources as well as imports , via pipeline , from canada . in addition , a small part of domestic supply is imported in the form of liquefied natural gas ( lng ) which is part of a small , but growing , world market .