sec . 301 ( a ) ( 3 ) promotes the use of direct recording electronic ( dre ) voting machines . they are widely recognized as the most accessible kind of voting system . however , they have been criticized as being insufficiently secure in comparison to paper - based systems , and several bills would have required that they produce paper ballots . provisional voting . sec . 302 ( a ) requires that any person be permitted to fill out and submit a provisional ballot at a polling place , if the person claims to be a registered , eligible voter in the jurisdiction but is not so considered by election officials at the polling place . it went into effect in 2004 . while some concerns have been raised about difficulty of implementation , the major controversy with respect to this provision has been with respect to the criteria for counting provisional ballots — in particular , whether a ballot should be counted if cast in a polling place other than that at which the voter is registered . several bills were introduced that would have addressed this controversy . among other issues that arose in conjunction with recent federal elections and which were addressed by proposed legislation were concerns about political activity and conflict of interest among voting system vendors and among election officials , the use of deceptive practices relating to voting by political operatives or others , enforcement of hava requirements , access to polling places by observers , the provisioning of voting machines to polling places , the level of training given to pollworkers , voting rights of convicted persons , various aspects of voting - system security , voter identification , and voter - registration requirements . other issues addressed by one or more bills included absentee and early voting , alternative language requirements , authorization of and budget submission by the election assistance commission ( eac ) , election crimes , the date on which elections are held and whether or not election day should be a holiday , the gathering and reporting of statistics relating to elections , the workings of the electoral college , extension of voting rights to residents in areas other than the 50 states , extension of hava deadlines , hava payments to states , proportional representation and instant - runoff voting , redistricting procedures , state laws on election administration , voter error , voter information , and voting leave for employees on election day . unless otherwise indicated , provisions of bills discussed in this report refer only to federal elections . unless otherwise indicated , bills introduced in the house were referred to the house committee on house administration and those in the senate to the senate committee on rules and administration . similar bills that had been introduced by the same first sponsor in the 108 th congress are also noted . 73 ( mccrery ) . supporting the goals and ideals of national high school seniors voter registration day . introduced february 17 , 2005 ; passed house december 5 , 2006 . 247 ( lewis ) .