are they still needed ? what value are the secondary uses of the nccs ? the nccs represents a national asset built up over decades . can the taxpayer get added value byemploying these capabilities for ancillary functions ? if so , should the procurement andoperation of these systems be transferred to civilian agencies ? as homeland security missions and domesticdisaster response receive greater government attention , some platforms that already provide supportin these areas have the potential for even greater utility . the role of theweapons will shape the command and control system to support them . what is the appropriate architecture for thenccs ? is the current , centralized , linear system developed during the cold warstill the right approach to ensuring presidential positive control and minimizing command andcontrol confusion ? revisions to the nccs architecture may need to incorporate the additional 2001npr - driven command and control requirements for non - nuclear offensive responses and activemissile defense . a debate and possibly legislation regarding release authorities may need to precedesuch architectural decisions . perhaps a more dispersed approach , such as usstratcom nowproposes , may be a better fit for the current threat environment . that approach might also conveymanpower and budget economies in the long run . however , applying a distributed , network styleapproach to nuclear command and control has not yet been tested or proven . what level of investment in modernization or new procurementis needed or justified ? the continued implementationof the 2001 npr and the findings of the 2006 qdr may adjust or add to those requirements . theretirement of the e - 4b naoc and mccc may offer some opportunities for short term savings . asall of the services look to recapitalize equipment after the wear and tear from duty in iraq , the nccswill be competing against immediate day - to - day services' needs . are the existing nccs platformsadequate to requirements ? do those functions justify continuedinvestment if their primary mission requirements are superseded ? what is the role of nuclear weapons in u.s. strategy and howmight that role affect command and control ? questions congress may confront include: what is the nature of the threat ? some schoolsof thought contend that china is rising to be the us's next military peer competitor , while otherscontend that china is growing to be a partner in the world community . the extent of the threat fromnorth korea , iran , or terrorist organizations , whether from a nuclear strike or from an emp attackare also subject to debate . the capabilities posed by these potential threats may present a "worstcase" against which to configure the nuclear command and control system . there is competition between thosewho believe the role of nuclear weapons should be reduced to give non - proliferation effortscredibility , and those who want to increase their utility to confront proliferators . all of the nccs modernization or procurement initiativesdiscussed above are projected to continue for years into the future . these equities will need to be reconciled with the recommendationsfrom the 2006 qdr to retire some of these cold war platforms . despite its strategic and budgetary implications , the nccs is often not well understood andreceives little attention from outside the military establishment .