current law . under price - anderson,the owners of commercial reactors must assume all liability for nuclear damagesawarded to the public by the court system , and they must waive most of their legaldefenses following a severe radioactive release ( "extraordinary nuclear occurrence" ) . to pay any such damages , each licensed reactor must carry financial protection in theamount of the maximum liability insurance available , which was increased by theinsurance industry from $200 million to $300 million on january 1 , 2003 . anydamages exceeding that amount are to be assessed equally against all coveredcommercial reactors , up to $95.8 million per reactor ( most recently adjusted forinflation on august 20 , 2003 ) . those assessments - - called "retrospectivepremiums" - - would be paid at an annual rate of no more than $10 million perreactor , to limit the potential financial burden on reactor owners following a majoraccident . according to the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) , 103 commercialreactors are currently covered by the price - anderson retrospective premiumrequirement . funding for public compensation following a major nuclear incident,therefore , would include the $300 million in insurance coverage carried by thereactor that suffered the incident , plus the $95.8 million in retrospective premiumsfrom each of the 103 currently covered reactors , totaling $10.2 billion . on top ofthose payments , a 5% surcharge may also be imposed , raising the total per - reactorretrospective premium to $100.6 million and the total potential compensation foreach incident to about $10.7 billion . under price - anderson , the nuclear industry'sliability for an incident is capped at that amount , which varies depending on thenumber of covered reactors , the amount of available insurance , and an inflationadjustment that is made every five years . payment of any damages above thatliability limit would require congressional approval under special procedures in theact . the price - anderson act also covers contractors who operate hazardous doenuclear facilities . the liability limit for doe contractors is the same as forcommercial reactors , excluding the 5% surcharge , except when the limit forcommercial reactors drops because of a decline in the number of covered reactors . because two closed reactors had been covered until recently ( for a total of 105 ) , theliability limit for commercial reactors , minus the surcharge , had been $10.4 billion,which remains the liability limit for doe contractors . price - anderson authorizesdoe to indemnify its contractors for the entire amount , so any damage payments fornuclear incidents at doe facilities would ultimately come from the u.s. treasury . however , the law also allows doe to fine its contractors for safety violations , andcontractor employees and directors can face criminal penalties for "knowingly andwillfully" violating nuclear safety rules . however , section 234a of the atomicenergy act specifically exempts seven non - profit doe contractors and theirsubcontractors . under the same section , doe automatically remits any civilpenalties imposed on non - profit educational institutions serving as doe contractors . policy context . the price - andersonact's limits on liability were crucial in establishing the commercial nuclear powerindustry in the 1950s . neither of those provisions is in the housebill . provisions are also included in both bills to increase access by energy developers to federallands .