how would it be funded ? why does the department need , and use , such broad legislative authority to administer section 32 programs , particularly "bonus" surplus removals ? why is usda not requesting its reauthorization ? does the administration have a position on expanding the lending authority of the farm credit system ( fcs ) , a policy fcs supports but commercial bankers oppose ? three agencies established by the agricultural reorganization act of 1994 ( p.l . 103-354 ) are responsible for usda's rural development mission area: the rural housing service ( rhs ) , the rural business - cooperative service ( rbs ) , and the rural utilities service ( rus ) . an office of community development provides community development support through rural development's field offices . the organization of this report parallels that of the usda report . the usda report presumes a new five - year farm bill covering the 2008-2012 time frame . however , consistent with u.s. government annual baseline budgeting , the spending authority and spending outlay estimates of the administration's farm bill are projected for 10 years . the 2002 farm bill mandated support for a group of commodities ( grains , oilseeds , cotton , sugar , and milk ) that long have received support , and it added six more commodities ( dry peas , lentils , small chick peas , wool , mohair , and honey ) to the list . the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) pays the costs of commodity support under a $30 billion line of credit from the u.s. treasury . congress annually appropriates funds to the ccc that are used to pay down its loans from the treasury . commodity support expenditures are estimated to have averaged about $12.6 billion per year over the six - year life of the current farm bill ( fy2002-fy2007 ) . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) forecasts that future spending for commodity support under current law would amount to about $7 billion per year over the next five years ( fy2008-fy2012 ) . the decline from past spending levels is due to current and anticipated high market prices for supported crops well into the future . usda ' s proposed 2007 farm bill outlines modifications to the commodity programs that are claimed to save $4.494 billion from the office of management and budget ( omb ) 10-year current services baseline of $74.566 billion for commodity support . in addition to the financial savings , the modifications to current law , according to the secretary of agriculture , are designed to make the programs "more market - oriented , more predictable , less market distorting and better able to withstand challenge" in the world trade organization . before the 1985 farm bill , few conservation programs existed and only two , the agricultural conservation program and watershed and flood prevention operations , would be considered large by today's standards . 107-171 ) represented the first - ever energy title in a farm bill and included nine provisions addressing agriculture - based renewable energy systems . the report and related usda materials are available on the department's website at http: / / www.usda.gov / wps / portal / ! ut / p / _s.7_0_a / 7_0_1ob ?