however , others are concerned that h.r . ocean policy in the 1970s: status and issues . since 1980 , with concerns about limiting federal expenditures and streamlining government , there have been fewer ocean initiatives , and a number of ocean programs , particularly those of noaa , have been consolidated and reduced . however , the programs begun in the 1970s generally have been reauthorized and have matured . by the late 1980s , there appeared to be a broad consensus among those conversant in ocean affairs that a need existed to redefine or , at the very least , better define national ocean policy . two stimuli for this renewed interest were the 1983 proclamation by president reagan establishing a 200-nautical - mile u.s . the marine resources and engineering development act of 1966 ( p.l . 89-454 ) established a national council on marine resources and engineering development in the white house and initiated work by a presidential bipartisan commission on marine science , engineering , and resources . dr. julius stratton , then recently retired president of the massachusetts institute of technology and , at the time , chairman of the board of the ford foundation , was appointed commission chairman by president lyndon johnson . the commission , composed of 15 members , was often referred to as the stratton commission . in 1969 , the commission completed its final report , our nation and the sea: a plan for national action , and its more than 120 formal recommendations provided what many considered to be the most comprehensive statement of federal policy for exploration and development of ocean resources . the study was instrumental in defining the structure , if not all the substance , of what a national ocean policy could or should look like . furthermore , new ocean - oriented programs were initiated and existing ones were strengthened in the years following the commission's report , through a number of laws enacted by congress . recommendations of the stratton commission led directly , within the following decade , to forming the national sea grant college program , to creating the national advisory committee on oceans and atmosphere ( nacoa ) , and to reorganizing federal ocean programs under the newly established national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) . they would rather see greater focus on funding and implementation of current laws , such as the msfcma . subsequent legislation on estuarine reserves , national marine sanctuaries , marine mammal protection , coastal zone management , fishery conservation and management , ocean pollution , and seabed mining also reflected commission recommendations . on november 4 , 2009 , the senate commerce , science , and transportation committee's subcommittee on oceans , atmosphere , fisheries , and coast guard held a hearing concerning the future of ocean governance that focused on ioptf activities . in addition to comprehensive ocean approaches , over 70 bills related to ocean and great lakes management , climate change , fisheries , coastal conservation , marine animals , marine sanctuaries , research , education , and transportation have been introduced .