trade capacity building has some synonyms . it is also referred to as aid for trade or trade - related technical assistance ( trta ) , especially within the context of the wto . some distinctions can be made between these terms , but since there is no agreement on them they are treated as interchangeable within this report . trade capacity building is based on the premise that trade liberalization leads to economic growth for both developed and developing countries , but developing countries do not have the capacity to achieve trade - led economic growth without assistance . on a more basic level , tcb assumes that donors can have an impact on trade capacity in developing countries . tcb is often cited as an important complement to market access , which is believed to be necessary but insufficient for developing countries to increase participation in trade . other reasons given for tcb are to offset preference erosion and the adjustment costs of trade liberalization . the development community was skeptical about using trade as a vehicle for economic growth and development in the 1960s and 1970s . at the time , import substitution industrialization ( isi ) , where developing countries limited imports of manufactured products to foster a domestic manufacturing sector , was the prevailing theory in trade and development . aid was used to support industrialization , and not to foster trade . in the 1980s , after the apparent failure of isi policies , there was a shift in mainstream development thinking to the view that removing barriers to trade and other market distortions would foster growth . as the expected gains from trade and economic reforms did not materialize , another shift in development thought took place in the late 1990s . the development agenda changed its focus to strengthening institutions that support markets and trade - led growth . development experts recognized that liberalized trade was necessary but not sufficient for increased growth and poverty reduction . at the same time , capacity development became a popular term during the 1990s , reflecting the need for demand - driven assistance as opposed to assistance imposed from outside and based primarily on what donors were willing and able to provide . tcb grew from these ideas about trade and development . since the beginning of u.s. development assistance in the 1950s , u.s. development programs have had elements of what we now refer to as tcb assistance . the types of tcb assistance provided , from agricultural development to transportation infrastructure , have changed based on the evolving focus of overall u.s. development assistance . the composition and focus of such assistance over the last 60 years have been determined mainly by changes in u.s. foreign policy , prevailing theories of development , and domestic administrative realities . tcb emerged as a concept in u.s. development assistance parlance around 1999 , even though many of the programs included in tcb had been ongoing for years . before tcb , the terms used for similar assistance were generally technical assistance or technical cooperation . the development of tcb as a concept brought some changes to the planning and implementation of tcb programs .