role . if the volumeof imports declines , however , prices for manufactured products in the united states may increase,giving u.s. producers some relief . u.s. consumers would likely need to spend a larger portion oftheir income in this case to purchase the goods which were previously produced abroad . how strong are the reformers ? what key choices do chineseofficials believe they face as regards the economy and value of the yuan ? how do they think chinaand other countries can best determine what the true international value of the yuan might be ? whatcriteria do they believe are relevant for determining currency value and their timetable for change ? given their most recent statements , other g - 7 countries will likely support the united statesif it continues to press china for more rapid action . however , they may also back away and leavethe united states on its own if they believe u.s. efforts are potentially counterproductive . instead of pressing china publicly for reform , the united states might decide on a policy ofrestraint . this is not an option in favor of the status quo . rather , it accepts the premise that chineseofficials want to proceed with their reform program as rapidly as economic conditions and the policyconsensus in china permits . this option assumes that overt foreign pressure may becounterproductive if it slows the process and strengthens the hand of those in china who opposereform . arguably , the treasury department has shown restraint of this sort when it said , in itsrecent reports , that china was not manipulating the value of its currency . some might argue that the united states should view the trade and currency dispute withinthe context of its overall relationship with china . while economic issues are important , this viewwould suggest , it is also important not to raise tensions to the point where china becomes reluctantto cooperate with the united states on other issues , such as north korea's policies on nuclearweapons . pressing the yuan - dollar exchange rate issue to the exclusion of other important u.s.interests might be seen , from this perspective , as counterproductive . others might respond,however , that china will cooperate with the united states in other areas when it believes that thisserves its interests . china may have strong reasons for wanting change in its foreign exchange system . as notedbefore , china faces the prospect of serious inflation if it does not slow or stop the growth in itsforeign exchange reserves . an increase in the value of its currency would be a key way ofaccomplishing that goal . ironically , some kind of external encouragement may still be needed to help chinaaccomplish its plans . even if chinese authorities want to move forward with their reform program,they may need some external pressure - - if only in the form of agreed deadlines and benchmarks - - to help them overcome inertia when they encounter difficult choices as they put their currency reformpolicies into effect . instead of exerting public and mostly verbal pressure , the united states could adoptlegislation restricting china's access to the u.s. market until it raises the value of its currency . thereare several ways this could be done . the english bill ( h.r .