the federalist , no . 10 ( madison ) . in a somewhat similar vein , the supreme court upheld a minnesota statute which prohibits , as do the laws of many other states , a candidate from appearing on the ballot as the candidate of more than one political party , often referred to as "fusion" candidacies . as such , the court found that the state's interests "to reduce election - and campaign - related disorder," and the interests put forward by the state of "avoiding voter confusion , promoting candidate competition ( by reserving limited ballot space for opposing candidates ) , preventing electoral distortions and ballot manipulations , and discouraging party splintering and 'unrestrained factionalism,'" were sufficient state interests promoted by this ban . certain states have statutory provisions that have become known as "sore loser" laws . [citations omitted] .. . regulations imposing severe burdens on plaintiffs rights must be narrowly tailored and advance a compelling state interest . lesser burdens , however , trigger less exacting review , and a state's "important regulatory interests," will usually be enough to justify "reasonable nondiscriminatory restrictions. additionally , reasonable "ballot access" procedures , including filing requirements , filing deadlines , a show of qualifying support by new or minor party or independent candidates , "sore loser" laws and other restrictions on cross - filing and multiple candidacies , have been found generally to be within the state's purview to "regulate[ ] election procedures " to serve the state interest of "protecting the integrity and regularity of the election process....," and when found to be within the state's administrative authority over election procedures , were not deemed to be impermissible "additional qualifications" for federal office , even though they may create certain procedural hurdles or requirements which a candidate must overcome to be placed on the ballot . the distinction between permissible , procedural "ballot access" regulations by the states , such as the "sore loser" laws and the requirements for independents or new party candidates to demonstrate some level of support ( such as a certain number of signatures on a petition ) to appear on a ballot , as opposed to prohibited "additional qualification" requirements added by the states was explained by the supreme court in u.s . term limits , inc.: the provisions at issue in storer and our other elections clause cases were thus constitutional because they regulated election procedures and did not even arguably impose any substantive qualification rendering a class of potential candidates ineligible for ballot position . they served the state interest in protecting the integrity and regularity of the election process , an interest independent of any attempt to evade the constitutional prohibition against the imposition of additional qualifications for service in congress . and they did not involve measures that exclude candidates from the ballot without reference to the candidate's support in the electoral process .