currently , there is no pandemic flu . one of the patent holders , medimmune , inc. , has waived compensation for production of prototype pandemic flu vaccines and clinical trials , saying that it had: notified the world health organization in december 2003 that it would grant free access to its intellectual property to government organizations and companies developing pandemic influenza vaccines gratis for public health purposes . in addition , medimmune , inc. , has given similar notification to nih and ( other officials ) in the united states , and the national institute for biological standards and control ( nibsc ) in the united kingdom . for corporate manufacturers considering the commercial sale of pandemic influenza vaccines produced by reverse genetics , medimmune , inc. , has sent out letters to all such manufacturers offering licenses to its intellectual property under reasonable terms . in the united states , the federal government may use patented processes without consent , as long as the patent holder is appropriately compensated . the situation is more complicated in other countries with vaccine plants ( mainly in europe ) , and would require that certain agreements among rg patent holders and governments be ironed out before mass production could begin . the sudden shortage of seasonal flu vaccine in the united states for the 2004-2005 season offered an unplanned exercise for pandemic preparedness , highlighting the implications of limited production capacity for vaccines and antiviral drugs , and the absence of a coordinated national system for their distribution . in december 2006 , congress passed p.l . 109-417 , the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act . the act authorizes the secretary of hhs , with the voluntary cooperation of manufacturers , wholesalers , and distributors , to track the initial distribution of federally purchased flu vaccine during a pandemic . the act also requires the secretary to improve the effective distribution of seasonal flu vaccine , by promoting communication between state , local , and tribal public health officials and those manufacturers , wholesalers , and distributors who agree to participate in the tracking program . vaccine distribution information submitted to the secretary shall remain confidential in accordance with the exception to the freedom of information act ( foia ) governing trade secrets and commercial or financial information , and be subject to the privacy regulations promulgated under the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( p.l . since pandemic flu vaccine would be unavailable in the early stages of a pandemic , governments and private parties have been interested in drugs that could treat or prevent serious illness from flu . because influenza is a virus , antibiotics , which treat bacterial infections , are not effective in treating the direct effects of flu . two types of antiviral drugs have been developed to treat flu: adamantanes and neuraminidase inhibitors ( nis ) . though both types are used to treat serious infections of seasonal influenza , the h5n1 flu strain has been shown to be resistant to adamantanes . hence , planning efforts for a possible h5n1 pandemic have focused on nis . two nis are available , and both are licensed by the fda: oseltamivir ( tamiflu® ) and zanamivir ( relenza® ) .