sec . short title . this title may be cited asthe "electric reliability act of 2005. . effect of electrical contaminants unreliability of energyproduction systems ( sec . within 180 days after enactment , the secretaryof energy will enter into a contract with the national academy of sciences ( academy ) , under whichthe academy will determine the effect that electrical contaminants may have on the reliability ofenergy production systems , including nuclear energy . final action on refunds for excessive charges ( sec.1824 ) . ferc is directed to complete its investigation into the unjust andunreasonable charges incurred by california during the 2000-2001 electricity crisis . a report tocongress will be submitted by december 31 , 2005 , that describes ferc's actions and a timetablefor further actions . this was submitted to congress on december 27 , 2005 . ( 14 ) study the benefits of economic dispatch ( sec.1832 ) . the secretary of energy , in consultation with the states , must studyeconomic dispatch and issue an annual report to congress and the states . transmission system monitoring ( sec . within six months after enactment , the secretary of energy and ferc will study and report tocongress on what would be involved in providing all transmission system owners and regionaltransmission organizations with real - time transmission line operating status . economic dispatch isdefined as "the operation of generation facilities to produce energy at the lowest cost to reliably serveconsumers , recognizing any operational limits of generation and transmission facilities. this report describes the electricityprovisions . the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-58 ) , signed by president bush on august 8 , 2005,was the first omnibus energy legislation enacted in more than a decade . major provisions include taxincentives for domestic energy production and energy efficiency , a mandate to double the nation'suse of biofuels , faster procedures for energy production on federal lands , and authorization ofnumerous federal energy research and development programs .