but which ones ? definitive guidance is unavailable . the constitution enumerates many of the broad functions that are to be carried out by the federal government . however , the constitution does not enumerate which of the tasks required to carry out these broad functions must be performed by governmental employees and which may be performed by private persons . for example , the constitution states that "the congress shall have power ... to establish post offices and post roads. ( article i , sec . 8 , cl . 7 ) however , it does not declare whether the federal government must use government employees to build these roads or whether it may hire private contractors . furthermore , the constitution is of limited utility because the federal government's activities extend far beyond those listed in the constitution . federal statutory law provides some guidance . fair requires "government personnel" to perform "inherently governmental activities. fair defines "inherently governmental activities" as those "so intimately related to the public interest as to mandate performance by government personnel. it further defines the term to include activities that require either the exercise of discretion in applying federal government authority or the making of value judgments in making decisions for the federal government , including judgments relating to monetary transactions and entitlements . an inherently governmental function involves , among other things , the interpretation and execution of the laws of the united states so as — ( i ) to bind the united states to take or not to take some action by contract , policy , regulation , authorization , order , or otherwise ; ( ii ) to determine , protect , and advance united states economic , political , territorial , property , or other interests by military or diplomatic action , civil or criminal judicial proceedings , contract management , or otherwise ; ( iii ) to significantly affect the life , liberty , or property of private persons ; ( iv ) to commission , appoint , direct , or control officers or employees of the united states ; or ( v ) to exert ultimate control over the acquisition , use , or disposition of the property , real or personal , tangible or intangible , of the united states , including the collection , control , or disbursement of appropriated and other federal funds . ( 112 stat . 2382 ( b ) ) additionally , fair explicitly excludes some activities from this category . the term does not normally include — ( i ) gathering information for or providing advice , opinions , recommendations , or ideas to federal government officials ; or ( ii ) any function that is primarily ministerial and internal in nature ( such as building security , mail operations , operation of cafeterias , housekeeping , facilities operations and maintenance , warehouse operations , motor vehicle fleet management operations , or other routine electrical or mechanical services ) . ( 112 stat . 2382 ( c ) ) yet , this statutory guidance leaves much unclear . debates have and will erupt over the application of these terms to specific activities .