3624 ( e ) . there are several exceptions to the general rule . for example , the heads of executive agencies may contract for services that begin in one fiscal year and end in the next . they may also enter into multi - year contracts . and with sufficient security , they may make advance payments on contract obligations to be fulfilled at a later date . in the judicial branch , the administrative office of the united states courts enjoys similar authority . section 501 temporarily grants the sentencing commission comparable authority , 28 u.s.c . 995 ( f ) ( expiring on september , 30 , 2010 ) . since the defendant must be released upon service of his sentence , the language suggested he might avoid supervised release simply by refusing to accept an installment schedule . section 505 amends the prior language to compel the bureau of prisons to notify prisoners upon their release of their obligation to follow an installment payment schedule in order to satisfy any outstanding fine obligations , 18 u.s.c . section 506 instructs the attorney general to study whether public access to state and local public records imperils the safety of federal judges . the presidential threat protection act authorized the marshals service to direct and coordinate permanent fugitive apprehension task forces composed of federal , state and local law enforcement officers in order to capture fugitives from justice . the act authorized appropriations of $30 million for the purpose for fy2001 and $5 million per year for each of the two fiscal years thereafter . section 507 authorizes appropriations of $10 million for each of the fiscal years from 2008 through 2012 for the fugitive apprehension task forces . moreover , senior judges of the northern mariana islands retire under section 373 rather than 371 as stated in the amendment . in the case of federal judges , section 508 allows the states to substitute the address of the court where the federal judge has his or her chambers . section 509 increases the number of judgeships on the ninth circuit court of appeals from 28 to 29 and reduces the number on the district of columbia circuit court of appeals from 12 to 11 . the statement in the report of the section's sponsor , senator feinstein , indicates the amendment is intended to reflect the relative workloads of the two circuits and the need to address the growing backlog of cases in the ninth circuit , id . federal courts that sentence an offender to prison may also include a term of supervised release to be served upon completion of the defendant's term of imprisonment , 18 u.s.c . they may at the same time impose a fine upon the defendant of up to $250,000 for most felonies and lesser amounts for misdemeanors , 18 u.s.c . prior law stated that a defendant was not to be released on supervised release unless he agreed to follow an installment schedule for any remaining fine obligations , 18 u.s.c . 3624 ( e ) ( 2000 ed. )