90-247 , as amended ) . authorization for the hea programs is extended through june 30 , 2007 , under the third higher education extension act of 2006 ( p.l . authorization for wia programs expired on september 30 , 2003 , although annual appropriations have continued funding for wia through fy2007 . at the same time , the data in table 2 show that certain groups in the population still have a way to go . hispanic immigrants have , by far , the lowest rates of high school completion , but hispanic , non - immigrants and black , non - hispanics also have rates significantly lower than whites and asians . few of the programs described above are targeted to serve students by race / ethnicity . it is not clear that existing programs are optimally targeted to at - risk individuals in these groups . some argue that our level of knowledge about the risk factors associated with dropping out could provide for a much more precise targeting of the federal effort . should the federal effort to encourage high school completion and prevent dropouts be divided between those at risk of dropping out and those who have already dropped out ? some argue that dol programs should focus on those who have already left school and the ed programs should focus on retaining at - risk students who haven't dropped out yet . while this may seem to be a logical programmatic organization , others argue that this view of the dropout problem fails to recognize that youth do not cleanly move from being students to being dropouts . further , inconsistent reporting and missing data require nces to undertake substantial data manipulation to estimate the afgr . in its suggestions for reauthorizing the nclba , ed argues that "states must demonstrate real progress in accurately reporting and improving high school graduation rates . several other groups have also advocated for more accurate reporting and better data quality . ed and the aspen commission joined the national governors association in calling for data reporting on high school outcomes to be disaggregated by student subgroups similar to the ayp requirements . since the strength of the esea accountability system depends on accurate data reporting , congress may consider strengthening the requirements around reporting of high school outcomes . are current programs well targeted in light of their objectives ? the data presented in this report indicate that , for white non - hispanics , high school attainment has become nearly universal in the last two decades . these data further suggest that perhaps the educational system is reaching something like a "ceiling effect" — making further progress toward 100% high school completion increasingly difficult . an underlying issue pertains to whether one believes dropouts are more indicative of problems with the educational system or family and economic hardships . the latter may be more difficult to address with discrete dropout programs . do nclba assessments and accountability provisions encourage students to drop out of school ? some argue that more frequent and early testing of students may cause some to avoid the shame and discouragement associated with poor performance .