most did , but some islamic radicals remained behind . it is estimated that about 700 to 1,000 former fighters stayed behind in bosnia after the war and became bosnian citizens by marrying bosnian women . others received citizenship through bribing bosnian officials . the powerful influence exercised by international officials in bosnia and kosovo gives the united states more freedom to arrest and deport terrorists than in many european countries , which might object on civil liberties or other grounds . sfor withdrew from bosnia in late 2004 , and was replaced by an eu - led force . the changeover resulted in the departure almost all of the u.s. troops in bosnia . the european union - led successor force to sfor has counterterrorism as part of its mandate . in kosovo , kfor has 16,000 troops , including about 1,600 u.s. troops , which are expected to remain in kosovo after the province's status is resolved . kfor may eventually be replaced by an eu - led force , although u.s. and european officials stress that kfor will remain in kosovo for some time after status is determined . in 1998 and 1999 , ethnic albanian guerrillas in serbia's kosovo province , angry at serbian repression , fought an increasingly violent conflict with serbian troops in the province . the united states and its nato allies , outraged by serb atrocities against ethnic albanian civilians and fearing that the conflict could drag in other countries and destabilize the region , engaged in a nato bombing campaign against serbia from march to june 1999 . yugoslav leader slobodan milosevic agreed to withdraw his forces from the province in june 1999 , clearing the way for the deployment of u.s. and other nato peacekeepers . since the departure of serbian troops from kosovo in 1999 , kosovo has been administered by the united nations mission in kosovo ( unmik ) , as called for by un security council resolution 1244 . serbian and russian intelligence sources have repeatedly asserted the existence of a strong al qaeda presence in kosovo , allegedly including training camps . however , observers have warned that caution is needed in assessing these claims , given that both countries have an interest in discrediting kosovar albanians , particularly their claims to independence from serbia . there have been few reports from western sources of terrorists operating from kosovo . radical islamic organizations , some with links to terrorism , have attempted to recruit followers among kosovo albanian muslims but these attempts have met with limited success . ethnic albanian nationalists have committed terrorist attacks on serbian civilians in kosovo , but there is little evidence so far that they are working with al qaeda or other radical islamic groups . some observers have expressed concern that powerful ethnic albanian organized criminal groups from kosovo , albania and macedonia ( which play key roles in organized crime in europe and the united states ) could form an alliance with terrorist groups , but so far no such links have been detected , according to u.s. officials .