section 8003 . section 8003 compensates leas for enrolling "federally connected" children . these are children who reside with a parent who is a member of the armed forces living on or off federal property ; reside with a parent who is an accredited foreign military officer living on or off federal property ; reside on indian lands ; reside in low - rent public housing ; or reside with a parent who is a civilian working and / or living on federal land . two payments are made under section 8003 . section 8003 ( b ) authorizes "basic support payments" for federally connected children . basic support payments are allocated directly to leas by ed based on a formula that uses weights assigned to different categories of federally connected children and cost factors to determine maximum payment amounts . section 8003 ( d ) authorizes additional payments to leas based on the number of certain children with disabilities who are eligible to receive services under the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) . payments are limited to certain idea - eligible children , most notably those whose parents are members of the armed forces ( residing on or off military bases ) , and those residing on indian lands . section 8003 payments account for more than 90% of total impact aid appropriations . section 8007 . section 8007 provides funds for construction and facilities upgrading to certain leas with high percentages of children living on indian lands or children of military parents . these funds are used to make formula and competitive grants . section 8008 . section 8008 provides funds for emergency repairs and comprehensive capital improvements to 24 schools that ed currently owns but leas use to serve federally connected children . two of the schools are located on closed military bases and operated by ed , and the remaining facilities are operated by leas . statutory language requires ed to transfer ownership of these facilities to leas or other entities . part a provides definitions of a variety of terms used frequently throughout the esea , such as "local educational agency," "state educational agency," "highly qualified teacher," "limited english proficient," "professional development," "scientifically based research," and "state. part b authorizes seas and leas to consolidate and jointly use funds available for administration under multiple esea programs . in order to qualify for this flexibility , seas must demonstrate that a majority of their resources are provided from nonfederal sources . part c authorizes seas and leas to prepare single , consolidated plans and reports for all "covered" esea programs ( in general , these are the formula grant programs administered via seas ) . under this provision , the secretary of education is authorized to waive most requirements associated with any program authorized by the esea , if specifically requested by seas , leas , indian tribes or schools ( via their leas ) . each of these types of payments is discussed briefly below . section 8002 . section 8002 compensates leas for the federal ownership of certain property .