some beneficiaries who qualified for premium subsidies did not apply for them . to qualify for subsidies , beneficiaries must have limited income and assets . thus , the number of people held harmless can vary widely from year to year , depending on annual inflation rates and projected part b costs . in some cases , a beneficiary may be held harmless one year but not the next . high - income individuals , who pay income - related part b premiums instead of the standard premium , are not protected by the hold harmless provision and may see reduced social security checks from one year to the next as a result of an increase in the part b premium . low - income beneficiaries are not held harmless , but because they also do not pay the part b premium — medicaid pays the premiums for them — the costs of low - income beneficiaries' rising part b premiums will generally be borne by state governments instead of by the beneficiaries themselves . whether a beneficiary is held harmless depends on the amount of the standard part b premium increase relative to the amount of his or her social security cola in a given year ; this determination is made by ssa . as described earlier , an individual's social security cola is determined by multiplying his or her benefit amount by the inflation rate ( i.e. some beneficiaries will be protected from rising medicare premiums: medicaid covers premiums for some persons who meet income and asset tests , and the hold harmless provision protects most social security beneficiaries against part b increases ( although not part d increases ) that exceed the annual social security cola . many beneficiaries could struggle to cover their health care expenses , however , including new enrollees who are not covered by the hold harmless provision . out - of - pocket costs for parts b and d are projected to grow at the same rates as premiums , contributing to the growing health care expenses of beneficiaries . most beneficiaries are likely to have some income apart from their social security benefits . however , many of tomorrow's beneficiaries , like today's , are likely to rely mostly on social security , especially as traditional pension coverage declines and many americans save little or nothing for retirement . finally , it is important to remember that social security beneficiaries gain from their participation in the medicare program . medicare provides health care coverage to the vast majority of americans aged 65 and older and to most disability beneficiaries . together , medicare and medicaid cover a majority of participating social security beneficiaries' health care expenses . although social security beneficiaries are affected by rising health care costs , the benefits of participating in medicare are substantially greater than the costs . , the cpi - w ) . part b premiums are determined by projected part b program costs . in other cases , a beneficiary will be held harmless in a current year because his or her part b premium was reduced in an earlier year . the cumulative effect of the hold harmless provision can produce substantial savings for individuals with low benefits .