( id . at ยง 2903 ) in aid of this policy , the statute further provides that "[t]he right of native americans to express themselves through the use of native american languages shall not be restricted in any public proceeding , including publicly supported education programs. ( id . at ยง 2904 ) federal departments and agencies are to evaluate their policies and procedures , and laws within their administrative jurisdiction , for compliance with the stated policy , but no procedure for governmental enforcement of the linguistic "right" created by the law is provided . immigration: interpreters must be provided during physical and mental examinations of alien immigrants seeking entry into the united states ( 8 u.s.c . ยง 1222 ( b ) ) . judicial proceedings: the director of the administrative office of the u.s. courts is to establish a program for the use of foreign language interpreters in federal civil and criminal proceedings instituted by the united states ( 28 u.s.c . ยง 1827 ) ; courts may appoint interpreter to be paid by the government in federal criminal proceedings ( rule 28 , fed . r. crim . as noted , 30 states have adopted official english laws in various forms . agriculture: department of agriculture funds may be used for translation of publications into foreign languages ( 7 u.s.c . some enactments make a simple declaration of english as the official state language , without more . others arm state legislatures with power to enforce linguistic uniformity , or otherwise to preserve and enhance the official role of the english language . more specific measures expressly prohibit or restrict , in one fashion or another , foreign language usage by state agencies or employees in the conduct of official business . specific exceptions to english - only requirements are frequently included , however , particularly where necessary to comply with federal law . meanwhile , a plethora of other laws have also been enacted by various state legislatures to facilitate communication with persons of limited english proficiency in the provision of needed public and private services . for example , most states require the use of interpreters in courtroom and other law enforcement settings , while many states require similar services for lep individuals appearing before administrative agencies or seeking health care . similar requirements regarding interpretation and translation also appear in state laws pertaining to professional licensing , business and employment , state and local elections , and military justice . this effort culminated in 1996 with house passage of h.r . 123 , declaring english the official language of the united states government and restricting other linguistic usage in the conduct of "official" governmental business . the "language in government act" passed the house in the 104 th congress but died in the senate . substantially amended versions of this earlier measure , however , have appeared in subsequent legislative sessions . for example , during the 109 th congress , the senate adopted the inhofe amendment as part of its comprehensive immigration reform package ( s. 2611 ) , declaring english to be our "national language" and calling for a governmental role in "preserving and enhancing" the role of english .