for some , nato has the ability to help secure the energy infrastructure of such countries . nowhere has transatlantic integration manifested itself more than in the economic sphere . the u.s - eu economic partnership has been described by many as the single most important influence on global economic growth , prosperity and trade . within the deepening transatlantic economic relationship , energy security policy is becoming a higher priority for both the united states and the eu . together , the united states and the european union represent the world's largest energy market . the united states and the eu produce approximately 23% of the world's energy but combine for almost 40% of global energy consumption . combined , the united states and the eu account for almost 40% of the world's total carbon emissions . at the 2006 and 2007 u.s. - eu summits , the parties agreed to increase cooperation on energy security , climate change , and sustainable development issues . three institutional mechanisms to facilitate this cooperation were established: an annual strategic review of u.s. - eu energy cooperation ; a u.s. - eu high level dialogue on climate change , clean energy and sustainable development ; and a u.s. - eu energy ceo forum . none of these forums has convened more than twice , however , and at the april 2007 u.s. - eu summit in washington , d.c. , the united states administration reportedly rejected european calls for a commitment to pursue binding international global emissions and energy efficiency targets . specifically , european officials have urged u.s. support for an international treaty regulating greenhouse gas emissions after 2012 , when the u.n. kyoto protocol is set to expire , and for an international market - based carbon emissions credit trading system . european officials appear encouraged by what they perceive as an increasing u.s. willingness to acknowledge climate change as a problem with serious global ramifications , and to link energy and climate change policy . european leaders are expected to agree on a solution during the first half of 2008 . although european leaders increasingly pay lip - service to the need for enhanced energy cooperation , the success of an eu energy strategy will likely depend on the ability of member states to overcome differences in addressing three fundamental challenges . first , how to develop strong partnerships with energy producing and transit regions ; second , how to use and further develop indigenous and alternative energy sources while seeking to curb overall consumption ; and third , how to establish an internal system to provide dependable and secure energy supplies to all of europe . over the past 55 years , relations between the united states and the eu have steadily broadened and deepened so that the two are inextricably linked . however , they are reportedly frustrated by u.s. reluctance to commit to binding international emissions and energy efficiency targets . the united states is not party to the kyoto protocol , and the administration reportedly views global regulation to address climate change skeptically ; instead , u.s. officials advocate transatlantic and international cooperation to develop alternative and renewable energy sources and liberalize international energy markets .