usgs has additional efforts . data management , analysis and applied sciences . within nasa's earth science account , applied sciences and education and outreach are supposed to provide a bridge between nasa's missions and potential users — particularly in the federal agencies — in order to ensure that societal benefits accrue from nasa investments . nasa reports that its fy2009 budget would support evaluation and assessment of potential policy - , market - , and technology - based approaches to adapting to or mitigating the impacts of climate change , as well as the impact of climate change on infectious diseases . while funds for the satellite - based observations have declined in recent years , the funding for other observations , and for research and analysis have declined faster . the nrc study that assessed balance among nasa science programs recommended , in particular , that "nasa should move immediately to correct the problems caused by reductions in the base of research and analysis programs.... " despite that 2006 recommendation , the nrc decadal survey that recommended enhanced space missions also noted that cutting research and analysis of observations from missions already launched reduces the "return on investment" from the high front - end expenditures to acquire satellite - based data . a recent nrc study also commented that users of nasa require better access to the data , rather than new modeling or data analysis tools . in the fy2009 budget justifications , however , it is neither clear whether the level of effort is proposed to change , nor how such applied research in nasa would be coordinated with program agencies' needs for their missions related to adapting to or mitigating climate change . national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) noaa funding constitutes about 14% of total ccsp funding . noaa is the second largest of agencies participating in the ccsp . noaa's assistant secretary of commerce for oceans and atmosphere directs the interagency climate change science program . noaa has the lead among agencies on the court - ordered capstone synthesis and assessment product of the ccsp , due in 2009 . the fy2009 proposal would have increased noaa's budget for climate change science by $20 million ( 8.3% ) over the fy2008 enacted level of $240 million , and $76 million ( 41.3% ) over the fy2007 budget authority of $184 million . although the analytical perspectives for the fy2009 request states that the fy2009 proposal for the ccsp overall adds emphasis to impacts of climate change and the science of adaptation , such added emphasis is not apparent in the fy2009 proposal for noaa . almost all the increases proposed are for observational capacities , not applied research , assessment or planning . the proposal would have redistributed funding within noaa: several decreases would have partially offset an increase of $74 million to develop key satellite climate sensors . the continuing resolution until march 6 , 2009 , puts such redistributions on hold .