if not , that individual files as a single . the eic introduces disparities . the effect of assignment of a child is demonstrated in table 3 and table 4 , but other features matter . only when a married couple has only earned income , no dependent children , and no itemized deductions or other special characteristics , and only if it is assumed that their behavior would not have been different if their marital status had been different , can one actually measure the size of the marriage penalty or bonus . there is no way to know who would have custody of the children and therefore which of the partners might be eligible for head - of - household status and for the accompanying personal exemptions and child credits . there is reason to expect that unmarried individuals are penalized in the aggregate . prior to the 2001 tax cut , which increased bonuses and reduced penalties , using an allocation that reflects typical behavior of married couples with respect to child custody , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated that 37% of married couples had penalties ( $24 billion ) , 3% were unaffected , and 60% had bonuses ( $73 billion ) . ( itemized deductions and earned income were assigned in proportion to earnings. ) the net bonus was $49 billion . however , in most of its analysis , the cbo study relied on a measure of marriage penalties and bonuses that assumed child custody would be based on a tax - minimizing strategy . for example , if parents of two children had similar individual earnings , each would be assumed to have custody of one of the children so that both would be eligible for head - of - household status . even using that standard , net bonuses occurred: 43% of married couples had penalties amounting to $32 billion , and 52% had bonuses of $43 billion , for a net bonus of $11 billion . nevertheless , a significant proportion of married taxpayers — between 37% and 43% — paid marriage penalties . a study using treasury data and other assumptions produced different measures of the marriage bonus or penalty . using an assumption that divorced parents occupied the same residence , and thus only one could qualify for head - of - household status , the authors found that 48% had a penalty ( $28.3 billion ) and 41% had a bonus ( $26.7 billion ) , for a net penalty of $1.6 billion . this study also provided several other ways of measuring penalties and bonuses , including estimating $30.2 billion in singles penalties because these individuals could not use joint return rate schedules . some of the penalty applied to families with children because of the benefits of head - of - household status . without head - of - household status , the treasury found that 46% of couples had bonuses ( $36.6 billion ) while 43% had penalties ( $20.8 billion ) , and the net effect was a bonus of $15.8 billion . treasury researchers did a subsequent study using the standard assumption for the effects of the 2001 tax cut and for 2004 income levels .