thisis outrageous. the sentiment was echoed by several other members in attendance . however , twonongovernmental experts appearing before the house panel approved of such sales as importantsymbolic gestures that would likely result in much - needed improvement in u.s. - pakistanrelations . ( 12 ) several critics have contended that renewed f - 16 sales may strengthen nondemocratic forcesin islamabad . though the bush administration has made spreading democracy a cornerstone of itsforeign policy , pakistan continues to be governed by an army general who came to power througha military coup , and the state department has noted that pakistan's democratic institutions remainweak . ( 13 ) in h.rept.109-486 ( june 2006 ) , the house appropriations committee expressed concern about pakistan's "lackof progress on improving democratic governance and rule of law. furthermore , some pakistanicommentators wonder why islamabad plans to spend billions of dollars on weapons of allegedlyquestionable utility while the country's social services and infrastructure are in dire need ofimprovements . ( 14 ) thisperspective gained additional traction in the wake of pakistan's catastrophic october 2005earthquake , when islamabad chose to postpone and eventually scale down the number of f - 16s itwould seek to purchase . as noted above , congressional concerns about pakistan's nuclear proliferation activities arelongstanding . some opponents of resumed f - 16 sales argue that the united states should notprovide sophisticated weapons to a country that has been a source of significant horizontal nuclearweapons proliferation . legislation introduced which reflects this concern in the 109th congressincludes h.r . 1553 and s. 12 ( sec . 232 ) , which prohibit aid or militaryequipment to pakistan unless the president certifies that pakistan is cooperating with u.s. nuclearnon - proliferation efforts . in 2004 , pakistani metallurgist abdul qadeer khan , known as the founderof pakistan's nuclear weapons program and a national hero , confessed to involvement in an illicitnuclear smuggling network that sold crucial nuclear weapons technology and uranium - enrichmentmaterials to north korea , libya , and iran . to date , pakistan refuses to allow any direct access tokhan by non - pakistani investigators and , in may 2006 , the islamabad government declared the khaninvestigation "closed. some in congress remain skeptical , however , and a house panelsubsequently held a hearing to further discuss the issue . at that hearing , non - governmental expertsurged that u.s. and international investigators be given direct access to khan , in particular to learnmore about assistance given to iran's controversial nuclear program . the importance of the proposed transfer of new f - 16s and the upgrade of pakistan's legacyf - 16s can be viewed in the context of pakistan's conventional military confrontation with india , itsnuclear confrontation with that country , and its struggle with terrorists and insurgents . india dominated the air when it last clashed with pakistan in 1971 . according to someaccounts , pakistani air strikes were largely ineffective , and air support of ground forces was"non - existent. ( 16 ) indiacurrently enjoys a significant quantitative advantage over pakistan's air force . it has 21 more fightersquadrons than pakistan and a larger number ( 124 ) of modern aircraft . india operates an aircraftcarrier with short - take off and vertical landing fighters .