senators . it is possible that this interest will result in congressional consideration of whether the act should be repealed or retained . stat. burke v. monumental division , no . 52 was a case charging a union member with betraying the interests of his union at the time of negotiation between the union and a railroad during a labor dispute . the court compared the union's reaction toward the act of its member with congress's feelings at the time of enactment of the logan act . [t]he plaintiff's conduct is characterized as "traitorous," and it is said that he has committed "moral perjury. this is strong language ; but there is no reason to question that it is really meant , and that those responsible for its use believe it to be fully justified . the truth doubtless is that to them the brotherhood and the roads appear to be almost distinct sovereignties . at a time when it is at grip with the companies , for a member to let one of the latter sue in his name , for the purpose of preventing the use by it of one of its most efficient means of warfare , does to them seem treasonable . within the limits of their power , they are determined to punish any such proceeding . they feel about it as did congress when in 1799 it enacted the so - called logan act ... making it a crime for any citizen to have intercourse with a foreign government with intent to defeat the measures of his own . united states v. bryan refers to 18 u.s.c . ยง 5 , which is the predecessor of 18 u.s.c . ยง 953: that the subject of un - american and subversive activities is within the investigating power of the congress is obvious . conceivably , information in this field may aid the congress in legislating concerning any one of many matters , such as correspondence with foreign governments.... united states v. peace information center held that congress had the power to enact the foreign agents registration act of 1938 under its inherent power to regulate external affairs as well as under its constitutional power to legislate concerning national defense and that the act is not subject to any constitutional infirmity . the court mentioned similarities between the logan act and the foreign agents registration act , and the language used appears to indicate that the court believed that the logan act , like the foreign agents registration act , is constitutional . citizens of the united states are forbidden to carry on correspondence or intercourse with any foreign government with an intent to influence its measures or conduct in relation to any disputes or controversies with the united states . the act under scrutiny in this case represents the converse of the last mentioned statute . the former deals with citizens of the united states who attempt to conduct correspondence with foreign governments . the latter affects agents of foreign principals who carry on certain specified activities in the united states . both matters are equally within the field of external affairs of this country , and , therefore , within the inherent regulatory power of the congress .