this information was provided to crs by the army corps of engineers . table a - 1 does not include project funding by non - federal project sponsors which are responsible for 30% of construction expenses and 100% of maintenance costs . the initial work allowance column represents the final enacted amount ; this amount differs from the amount shown for the lake pontchartrain line item in appropriations conference reports due to rescissions and other reductions made by congress . the corps has some authority to reprogram funds across construction projects during the fiscal year ; the year end work allowance represents the initial work allowance and any reprogrammings that occurred , which are shown in the transferred funds column . a negative in the transferred funds column indicates funds were reprogrammed away from the lake pontchartrain project during the fiscal year . beginning with the fiscal year 1994 budget justification , the corps stopped scheduling the orleans avenue and london avenue components of the lake pontchartrain  project as part of its annual budget request . as shown in table a - 1 , congress provided more than requested for the lake pontchartrain project by the administration . some of these funds may have been used to construct parallel protection for orleans avenue and london avenue canals ; however , crs was not able to determine the federal funding level for the orleans avenue and london avenue parallel protection based on currently available information . a question central to many of the investigations into katrina - related damage and of concern in rebuilding efforts is: were the levees and floodwalls breached because their design was exceeded , or did they fail due to faulty design , construction , or maintenance ? to answer these questions , evidence has and continues to be collected on numerous fronts , including evidence of the height of the storm surge in various locations , and how the levees and floodwalls performed . technical experts from universities , professional engineering organizations , and the corps are using this evidence to model and explain the performance of new orleans' hurricane protection system . the failure of these floodwalls to reliably perform has many stakeholders' speculating about the causes of the failures . the findings are likely to shape not only the future design of the hurricane protection system but also plans for rebuilding sections of the city and perspectives on the federal role and responsibility in the city's rebuilding efforts . moreover , the findings may improve understanding and change perceptions of the level of flood protection and risk in other u.s. cities . understanding why new orleans' hurricane protection system failed is essential for moving beyond simply making repairs to damaged levees and floodwalls . knowing why the floodwalls failed is central to assessing the city's vulnerability to storm surge flooding and deciding on how to most effectively combine approaches for managing flood risk during rebuilding efforts ( eg , investing in coastal wetlands loss and hurricane protection infrastructure , requiring flood - proofing in certain areas , and mapping areas for the federal flood insurance program ) .