references: none . crs poc: richard best at [phone number scrubbed] . the house bill was h.r . 5122 and was approved by the house on may 11 , 2006 ; on june 22 , 2006 , the senate struck all after the enacting clause of h.r . 5122 and substituted the language of its defense authorization bill , s. 2766 . background: under the uniformed services' former spouse protection act ( usfspa ) , courts are authorized to divided military retired pay as part of a divorce proceeding . such a division is usually stated as a percentage of disposable retired pay or as a dollar amount . if stated as a dollar amount , the former spouse's portion would not increase as a result of cost of living adjustments to retired pay . discussion: such a change allows courts to state the division of retired pay in dollars and to express that such amounts be subject to cost of living adjustments . this language does not make cost of living adjustments automatic . changes made by this language apply would only to court orders that become effective after a 90-day period following the enactment of this language . reference ( s ) : crs report rl31663 , military benefits for former spouses: legislation and policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] . crs poc: [author name scrubbed] at [phone number scrubbed] . background: under law , the military is required to report to the service member when the secretary concerned receives effective service of a court order concerning military retired pay . discussion: this language would allow the member to waive notification . if enacted , members may request a copy of the court order . this language would become effective with regard to court orders received 90 or more days after enactment . reference ( s ) : crs report rl31663 , military benefits for former spouses: legislation and policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] . crs poc: [author name scrubbed] at [phone number scrubbed] . background: prior to 1999 , military retirees who were eligible to receive disability payments from the department of veterans affairs ( va ) had their retired pay reduced on a dollar - for - dollar basis by the va disability benefits . since that time , language has been introduced , and in some cases enacted , that would afford these retirees additional compensation by allowing them to receive both the va and dod benefits ( also known as concurrent receipt ) . the fy2005 ndaa language on concurrent receipt did not address what the department of veterans affairs defines as "individual unemployability," also known as "100% unemployables. instead , the law focused on military retirees with service - connected or combat - related va disability ratings . the fy2006 ndaa contained a partial step toward inclusion of 100% unemployables . it authorized full concurrent receipt for 100% unemployables beginning october 1 , 2009 , over four years earlier than the january 1 , 2014 date in prior law ( the date of full concurrent receipt for all retirees , regardless of disability rating ) .