medicare part d was designed to take advantage of market competition . in accordance with market competition principles , the drug plans that administer the drug benefit are private and public ( i.e. , non - government ) corporations who may rely on price negotiating , rebate negotiation , and price - volume discounts as a way to affect prices . a provision in the mma , termed the "noninterference" provision , prevents the federal government from being a third party in drug price negotiations between the part d drug plans and pharmaceutical manufacturers . both the incoming speaker of the house and incoming senate majority leader have reportedly expressed their support for repealing this "noninterference" provision , and regard it as a priority for consideration in the 110 th congress . according to one poll , the overwhelming majority ( 85% ) of americans also seem to support repealing the provision and allowing the government to negotiate prices . should the "noninterference" provision be repealed , congress may wish to provide guidance on how the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) would negotiate prices . a debate could occur about the options and mechanisms of a new drug pricing policy for the medicare drug plan . the federal cost of part d benefits is estimated to be $44.7 billion in 2007 . in order to clarify and inform the debate , this report provides an overview of the policies used in other nations . this report first provides a brief background of the way pharmaceutical prices are currently determined for medicare . the report then discusses the types of policies used by the canadian , australian , and european governments to determine the price of drugs: reference pricing , price ceilings , parallel trade , profit sharing , and value - based pricing . it should be noted that this paper focuses on policies used for brand - name ( non - generic ) pharmaceuticals , as these policies are more pertinent to the current debate than those used for generic pharmaceuticals . generics are less expensive and have more price competition than brand - name pharmaceuticals , and thus have not been the focus of debates in the u.s . under current law , prescription drugs for medicare beneficiaries are provided through prescription drug plans ( pdps ) and medicare advantage prescription drug ( ma - pd ) plans . unlike ma - pds , which cover the costs of the entire set of medicare benefits ( parts a , b , and d ) , the pdps only cover the costs of prescription drugs ( part d ) . the part d plans have contracts with the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) to provide prescription drug coverage to medicare beneficiaries . individually and with a great deal of flexibility , the plans construct benefit packages ( including the formulary , deductible , co - payments , and utilization management tools ) , arrange a network of pharmacies to dispense the drugs , and negotiate rebates and drug prices with the pharmaceutical manufacturers . the success of each individual plan's ability to negotiate lower prices has a direct impact on the amount enrollees pay .