appendix a. u.s . ( see figure 1 . ) figure 1 shows a clear relationship between poverty and the economy . the level of poverty tends to follow the economic cycle quite closely , tending to rise when the economy is faltering and fall when the economy is in sustained growth . the poverty rate increased markedly over the past decade , in part a response to two economic recessions ( periods marked in red ) . a strong economy during most of the 1990s is generally credited with the declines in poverty that occurred over the latter half of that decade , resulting in a record - tying , historic low poverty rate of 11.3% in 2000 ( a rate statistically tied with the previous lowest recorded rate of 11.1% in 1973 ) . the poverty rate increased each year from 2001 through 2004 , a trend generally attributed to economic recession ( march 2001 to november 2001 ) , and failed to recede appreciably before the onset of the december 2007 recession . this most recent recession , which officially ended in june 2009 , was the longest recorded ( 18 months ) in the post - world war ii period . over the course of the most recent recession , the unemployment rate increased from 4.9% ( january 2008 ) to 7.2% ( december 2008 ) , and continued to rise over most of 2009 , peaking at 10.0% in october of that year . even as the economy has been recovering , poverty has remained well above pre - recessionary levels . although the unemployment rate has generally been falling since late 2009 , it has not been until this past year that we have seen a marked ( statistically significant ) decline in the official poverty rate . if the same basic methodology developed in the early 1960s was applied today , the poverty thresholds would be over three times higher than the current thresholds . persons are considered poor , for statistical purposes , if their family's countable money income is below its corresponding poverty threshold . annual poverty estimates are based on a census bureau household survey ( annual social and economic supplement to the current population survey , cps / asec , conducted february through april ) . the official definition of poverty counts most sources of money income received by families during the prior year ( eg , earnings , social security , pensions , cash public assistance , interest and dividends , alimony , and child support , among others ) . for purposes of officially counting the poor , noncash benefits ( such as the value of medicare and medicaid , public housing , or employer provided health care ) and "near cash" benefits ( eg , food stamps , renamed supplemental assistance nutrition ( snap ) benefits beginning in fy2009 ) are not counted as income , nor are tax payments subtracted from income , nor are tax credits added ( eg , earned income tax credit ( eitc ) ) . many believe that these and other benefits should be included in a poverty measure so as to better reflect the effects of government programs on poverty .