in addition , p.l . in practice , states that require any of these three methods for receipt of regular uc benefits and do not allow for exceptions to those requirements do not need to establish that the worker meets the 20 weeks of full - time insured employment . 97-35 , among other items , amended the euca to require that claimants work at least 20 weeks of full - time insured employment or equivalent in insured wages during their base period . the analogous rules apply for deactivating an eb period . if an eb period is deactivated based upon the state failing to meet iur based trigger requirements ( triggers "off" ) , the eb period is immediately ended . ( many states require high quarterly earnings of under $2,000 , which works out to less than $4 / hour under full - time assumptions . the effect of collecting more taxes than are spent dampens demand in the economy . this also creates a surplus of funds or a "cushion" of available funds for the uc program to draw upon during a recession . in a recession , uc tax revenue falls and uc program spending rises as more workers lose their jobs and receive uc benefits . the increased amount of uc payments to unemployed workers dampens the economic effect of earnings losses by injecting additional funds into the economy . the eb program was established by the federal - state extended unemployment compensation act of 1970 ( euca ) , p.l . 3304 , note ) . euca may extend receipt of unemployment benefits ( extended benefits ) at the state level if certain economic situations exist within the state . the eb program is triggered when a state's insured unemployment rate ( iur ) or total unemployment rate ( tur ) reaches certain levels . all states must pay up to 13 weeks of eb if the iur for the previous 13 weeks is at least 5% and is 120% of the average of the rates for the same 13-week period in each of the two previous years . there are two other optional thresholds that states may choose . ( states may choose one , two , or none. ) if the state has chosen a given option , they would provide the following: option 1: an additional 13 weeks of benefits if the state's iur is at least 6% , regardless of previous years' averages . option 2: an additional 13 weeks of benefits if the state's tur is at least 6.5% and is at least 110% of the state's average tur for the same 13 weeks in either of the previous two years ; an additional 20 weeks of benefits if the tur is at least 8% and is at least 110% of the state's average tur for the same 13 weeks in either of the previous two years . each state's iur and tur are determined by the state of residence ( agent state ) of the unemployed worker rather than by the state of employment ( liable state ) . eb benefits are not "grandfathered" when a state triggers "off" the program .