eac . the federal election assistance commission , a four - member , bipartisan commission,established by hava , that replaced the former office of election administration in thefederal election commission . fec . voter - verified paper audit trail , a printed record of all of a voter's ballot choicesthat the voter can review before the ballot is cast . this term is usually used to refer to an idvmethod used with dres , rather than standard paper - based ballot systems such as optical scan . vvsg . the federal voluntary voting system guidelines , developed by the eac withassistance from nist , as required by hava . wan . sec . 222of hava effectively renamed the vss as the voluntary voting system guidelines ( vvsg ) , ( 2 ) to be developed by the eacpursuant to recommendations by the tgdc and with support from nist . thus , hava provideda statutory basis for the vss . hava does not direct the eac to include any specific issues in theguidelines . however , in the debate on the house floor before passage of the hava conferenceagreement on october 10 , 2002 , a colloquy ( congressional record , daily ed. , 148: h7842 ) stipulatedan interpretation that the guidelines specifically address the usability , accuracy , security,accessibility , and integrity of voting systems . also , sec . 221 ( e ) requires nist to provide supportto the tgdc for development of guidelines relating to security , voter privacy , human factors , remotevoting , and fraud detection and prevention . the current vss will serve as the guidelines until new ones are completed . work ondevelopment of the first version of the vvsg , a partial revision of the vss , began in 2004 with theappointment of the tgdc . that committee transmitted its recommendations , in the form of aproposed version 1 of the vvsg , to the eac on may 12 , 2005 . after reviewing the recommendedguidelines and making some revisions , mostly but not entirely of an organizational nature , ( 3 ) the eac released the draft vvsg on june 27 , 2005 , for a 90-day public comment period , with adoption initially anticipated inoctober 2005 . ( 4 ) they willgo into effect two years after being adopted . ( 5 ) hava also requires the eac to provide for testing and certification of voting systems ( â§231 ) by laboratories it has accredited , with support from nist , thereby transferring that responsibilityfrom nased . the act stipulates that the current system of nased certification will continue untilthe eac adopts its replacement . hava does not specify whether the guidelines it establishes areto be used as the standard against which voting systems are tested and certified , but that is how the vss have been used , and it is how the eac intends to use the vvsg . ( 6 ) nist began the process of soliciting applications for accreditation in june 2005 , under itsnational voluntary laboratory accreditation program ( nvlap ) . ( 7 ) it will make recommendationsthrough this program on accreditation of individual laboratories .