rather , it is both a state and federal organization . though many sources have predicted the possibility or probability of a hurricane with katrina's effect on this region ( and on new orleans in particular ) , repeated warnings followed by "near misses" over the years may have contributed to a less proactive response to warnings about katrina's predicted effect on this occasion . there has been considerable discussion of louisiana governor blanco's refusal to permit dod's jtf - katrina to assume control of the evacuation efforts and to assume command of the national guard personnel in louisiana . with regard to dod particularly , the fundamental principle that it is almost always a supporting agency and the resource of last resort may serve to encourage a reactive rather than proactive mode of operation . this principle exists because , for dod , disaster relief is secondary to its primary mission of national defense , and there has been a traditional concern that any greater emphasis on essentially civilian or non - military operations would detract from its preparedness for its primary mission . nevertheless , absent the development of greater civilian capabilities in disaster response , the expectation will remain that dod will provide substantial , if not massive , assistance in instances of catastrophic disasters . current doctrine requires that state , local , and other federal agencies be "overwhelmed" before dod resources are requested . the question then arises , whether the agencies and authorities that have been overwhelmed are indeed capable of making the incident assessments and informed resource requests necessary to obtain dod assistance . in assessing the response to katrina , one of the more difficult tasks is determining what are reasonable expectations in the face of a disaster of unprecedented scale . what shortcomings in relief efforts could have been avoided with better planning and execution , and what were simply unavoidable given , for instance , the regional destruction of communication and transportation infrastructure ? another consideration is the question of predictability . this controversy has highlighted the possible political element in the conduct of relief operations . if state authorities wish to retain control of the national guard , which may be the largest resource at their command , at what point can or should presidential authority be invoked to override state authority ? both president bush and senate armed services committee chairman warner have indicated a desire to explore expanding the authority of the department of defense in disaster response . a part of this may be a review of the so - called posse comitatus statute and subsequent dod directives which limit the situations in which federal military personnel may conduct law enforcement activities ( eg , search and seizures , arrests ) . it is not clear if the use of active duty federal troops would or could have mitigated the incidence of violence in katrina's aftermath , given the earlier availability of national guard troops in the region with law enforcement authority . it also appears that early estimates of violent crime in the region may have been overstated . what is not clear to date is exactly what effect retention of state control of national guard personnel had upon the conduct of relief operations .