yes . dod policy is that live animals will not be used for training and education except where , after exhaustive analysis , no alternatives are available . currently approved uses include pre - deployment training for medical personnel and include infant intubation ( ferrets ) ; microsurgery ( rodents ) ; and combat trauma training ( goats and swine ) . these plans are described below . above , some increases to pharmacy copayments were provided for in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2013 . the president's 2014 budget also proposed new fee increases , however , none of these were adopted in the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2014 . in general , the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) does not directly affect tricare administration , health care benefits , eligibility , or cost to beneficiaries . section 3110 of the aca did open a special medicare part b enrollment window to enable certain individuals to gain coverage under the tricare for life program . the aca also waived the medicare part b late enrollment penalty during the 12-month special enrollment period ( sep ) for military retirees , their spouses ( including widows / widowers ) , and dependent children who are otherwise eligible for tricare and are entitled to medicare part a based on disability or end - stage renal disease , but have declined part b . the aca required that the secretary of defense to identify and notify individuals of their eligibility for the sep ; the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) and the commissioner for social security support these efforts administratively . section 3110 of the aca was amended by the medicare and medicaid extenders act of 2010 to clarify that section 3110 applies to medicare part b elections made on or after the date of enactment of the ppaca , which was on march 23 , 2010 . by law ( p.l . 102-396 ) and federal regulation ( 32 cfr 199.14 ) , health care providers treating tricare patients cannot bill for more than 115% of charges authorized by a dod fee schedule . in some geographic areas , providers have been unwilling to accept tricare patients because of the limits on fees that can be charged . dod has authority to grant exceptions . statutes ( 10 u.s.c . 1079 ( h ) and ( j ) ) also require that payment levels for health care services provided under tricare be aligned with medicare's fee schedule "to the extent practicable. over 90% of tricare payment levels are now equivalent to those authorized by medicare , about 10% are higher , and steps are being taken to adjust some to medicare levels . for institutional providers of outpatient services , tricare published a final regulation that became effective on may 1 , 2009 , implementing the tricare outpatient prospective payment system ( opps ) . 1079 ( j ) ( 2 ) , dod is required to use medicare's reimbursement payment system for hospital outpatient services to the extent practicable .