sec . 206 of s. 3886 , sec . under sec . 207 of s. 3886 , sec . 7 of s. 2453 , new sec . 705 of fisa addresses congressional oversight . the attorney general is directed to submit a classified report at least every 180 days to the house permanent select committee on intelligence and the senate select committee on intelligence ( the "congressional intelligence committees" as defined in new sec . 701 ( 2 ) of fisa ) on the activities during the previous 180 day period under any electronic surveillance program authorized under new title vii of fisa . sec . 208 ( a ) of s. 3886 , sec . 9 ( f ) of s. 2453 , would also modify subsection 105 ( i ) dealing with limitations in liability for those who provide information , facilities , or technical assistance with respect to execution of a fisa electronic surveillance or physical search . as amended , no cause of action would lie against any provider of electronic communication service , landlord , custodian , or other person ( including any officer , employee , agent , or other specified person thereof ) that furnishes any such aid in accordance with a court order or a request for emergency assistance under this title for electronic surveillance or physical search , or in response to a certification by the attorney general or his designee seeking information , facilities , or technical assistance from such person that does not constitute electronic surveillance as defined in sec . 101 ( f ) of fisa . sec . 106 of fisa limits the use by federal , state , or local governments of information regarding unconsenting u.s. persons acquired or derived from electronic surveillance under fisa . it also includes notification requirements and provides an opportunity for an aggrieved person against whom such information is proffered in an official proceeding to move to suppress such information if it was unlawfully acquired or if the surveillance was not made in conformity with an order of authorization or approval . under sec . 209 ( g ) of s. 3886 , sec . 9 ( g ) of s. 2453 , sec . 106 ( i ) of fisa , 50 u.s.c . ยง 1806 ( i ) , which deals with destruction of unintentionally acquired information , would be modified to provide that , where any communication is unintentionally acquired by an electronic , mechanical , or other surveillance device , in circumstances in which a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy and a warrant would be required for law enforcement purposes , and if both the sender and all intended recipients are located in the united states , such contents shall be destroyed upon recognition , unless the attorney general determines that the contents indicate a threat of death or serious bodily harm to any person . current subsection 106 ( i ) includes parallel provisions , but applies only to unintentionally acquired radio communications . ( emphasis added. ) the import of a second amendment to subsection 106 ( i ) of fisa , 50 u.s.c . ยง 1806 ( i ) , in sec .