these will be discussed below . indebtedness is measured by the world bank primarily using two debt service ratios: theratio of the present value of total debt service to gross national income ( pvgni ) and the ratio of thepresent value of total debt service to exports of goods and service ( pv / xgs ) . according to thebank , these ratios reflect two of most important aspect of a country's ability to service its debts:gross national income , since this is the broadest measure of a country's total income , and exports,since these are the revenue generating mechanism for debt service ( exports provide foreign reserveswhich are needed to service debt ) . if any of the 136 countries that the world bank collects debt data on exceeds a critical value: 80% for the debt service to gni ratio , or 220% for the debt service to exports ratio , the country isclassified as severely indebted . a country is classified as moderately indebted if both of its debtratios are three - fifths or more of the critical value ( 48% for the debt service to gni ratio and 132%for the debt service to exports ratio ) and less indebted if its debt ratios are below the three - fifthsthresholds . the world bank also breaks out countries based on their level of income . countries areclassified as low income if their 2003 gni per capita is $765 or less . middle income countries area much larger grouping including countries with gni per capita between $766 and $9,385 . bycombining these two sets of indicators , the poorest and most indebted countries can be identified . table 4 . world bank debt categories source: world bank , 2005 global development finance . table 5 . world bank debt ratings ( hipc countries are highlighted ) source: world bank , 2005 global development finance . ( in u.s. $ millions ) source: the department of the treasury and the office of management and budget , u.s. government foreign credit exposure as of december 31,2004 . ( 2003 , in u.s. $ millions ) source: world bank , 2005 global development finance . ( 2003 , in u.s. $ millions ) source: world bank , 2005 global development finance . conservation of tropical forests . the tropical forest conservation actof 1998 ( tfca ) ( p.l . 105-214 , which added part v to the foreign assistance act of 1961 ; 22 usc2431 et seq. ) authorizes the president to request debt relief for low and middle - income countries withtropical forests to support conservation of endangered forests . ( 26 ) debt swaps under the seed act . the support for east europeandemocracy ( seed ) act of 1989 ( p.l . 101-170 , usc 5401 et seq. ) authorized debt relief to supporteastern european countries as they progressed towards democracies with free - marketeconomies . special debt reduction programs . the u.s. government has reduced thedebts of egypt , poland , jordan , and pakistan for various national security reasons . each of thesedebt relief activities was provided pursuant to special legislation .