definitions of illegal logging can be specific or broad . indirectly addresses illegal logging by authorizing debt - for - nature transactions with developing countries that provide funds for conserving tropical forests . eligible activities under this act include establishing , maintaining , and restoring parks , protected reserves , and natural areas , and training programs to increase the capacity of personnel to manage parks , among other things . several countries have used funds generated from transactions authorized under this act to monitor logging activities and train enforcement personnel to address illegal logging activities in protected areas . expenditures to address illegal logging are also provided in programs authorized by the foreign assistance act ( p.l . a portion of funds given to countries is used for activities to prevent illegal logging and enforce illegal logging laws . some activities funded under this act are a part of the administration's initiative against illegal logging . ( see " foreign policy on illegal logging " section , below. ) some argue that the united states should enact legislation prohibiting the import of illegally logged wood and wood products , and amend the lacey act ( 16 u.s.c . §§3371-3378 ) to include foreign plant species . the lacey act includes enforcement mechanisms for the illegal trade of wildlife within the united states . specifically , the lacey act makes it illegal to engage in the trade of fish , wildlife , or plants taken in violation of any u.s. or indian tribal law , treaty , or regulation , as well as the trade of any of wildlife acquired through violations of foreign law or treaties ( including cites ) . the lacey act does not address plants that are traded in violation of any foreign law or treaties . a plant is not covered under the lacey act unless it is indigenous to a state . amending the lacey act to include plants traded in violation of foreign laws would establish legal structures to prosecute parties who import and trade wood found in violation of other countries' forest laws . the 2008 farm bill ( p.l . 110-234 ) amends the lacey act to include plants harvested or taken illegally in areas outside the united states . this law applies to illegally harvested timber species imported into the united states . in 2003 , the united states developed an initiative to help developing countries stop illegal logging . this initiative adopted several approaches to address illegal logging: addressing legal and institutional barriers that prevent on - the - ground law enforcement of illegal logging ; using technology to monitor logging ; encouraging good business practices , legal trade , and transparency in logging ; and creating incentives to promote local communities to abolish illegal logging practices . the initiative focuses on five regions: the congo basin , the amazon basin , central america , south asia , and southeast asia . the initiative states that it will provide $15 million to address illegal logging . in the congo basin , the u.s. government has developed the congo basin forest partnership . this partnership is aimed at improving forest management and governance to reduce forest degradation and reduce illegal logging in the region .