several of these issues are summarized below . there are differing opinions as to the optimal level of lwcf appropriations . the lwcf has broad support from resource protection advocates , many of whom seek stable and predictable funding through consistent levels of appropriations . most of these advocates seek higher appropriations in general . for instance , for several years the obama administration proposed appropriations of $900 million for lwcf . some advocates have specific priorities , such as higher acquisition funding for one of the four federal agencies , the state grant program , or a particular site or area . advocates of higher federal land acquisition funding promote a strong federal role in acquiring and managing sensitive areas and natural resources . in contrast , there is broad opposition to the lwcf based on varied concerns , with opponents generally seeking reduced levels of funds for lwcf . some opponents seek to reduce the size of the federal estate and minimize further federal acquisition of land either generally or at specific sites , especially in the west , where federal ownership is already concentrated . other concerns involve preferences for private land ownership or state and local ownership and management of resources , potential impacts of federal land ownership on uses of private lands , and reduced local tax revenues that result from public ownership . for instance , the house committee on the budget has supported reducing the federal estate and giving state and local governments more control of resources within their boundaries . others have sought lwcf reductions as part of a broader focus on reducing the federal deficit . under the lwcf act , the authority for the lwcf to receive $900 million in revenues annually is scheduled to expire on september 30 , 2018 . congress is debating whether to extend this authority , and if so whether to authorize a short , long , or permanent extension . many lwcf advocates favor relatively long or permanent extension , on the assertion that the program has been successful across the nation for more than 50 years in protecting valuable lands and resources and providing lands and infrastructure needed for public health , recreation , and tourism . they contend that continuity and stability of the land protection and recreational opportunities that lwcf supports are important national goals , and ones that will help communities to attract businesses , new residents , and tourists . they note the sufficiency of lwcf's dedicated funding stream for supporting the program . some proponents of a short - term extension or of expiration assert that the lwcf currently has sufficient funds to meet the nation's land acquisition and recreation needs for many years to come . they point to the relatively large balance of unappropriated monies in the lwcf that congress could appropriate , as well as to the substantial levels of mandatory funding that are anticipated under gomesa for the stateside program . for others , structural reforms of the program would be needed before a long - term extension might be viable , such as to direct funding away from federal land acquisition and to other activities , such as maintenance of federal lands and facilities or programs that support states .