all are discussed in more detail below . table 1 on the following pages provides easy reference to types of provisions in each of the bills listed in this report . an "x" denotes features in a given bill . the nature of these categories is described in the introduction to the next section . as explained previously , campaign finance bills introduced in the 109 th congress covered a wide range of topics . although many of the bills at first appear to have had little in common , all the bills focused on major campaign finance issues . this section of the report is organized into 14 subsections , encompassing the 13 major areas of proposed changes in campaign finance regulation found in 109 th congress bills ; the 14 th subsection , "miscellaneous," includes provisions outside that framework . these are the same categories listed in table 1 . each subsection contains a brief introductory statement about proposed changes , followed by a listing of bills containing those proposed changes . ( later in this report , bills are listed by number , followed by detailed summaries of all major provisions contained in each bill and any action taken on them. ) in this section , bills are listed according to what appears to have been the primary nature and goal of a particular provision . many provisions , however , had multiple purposes . for example , a bill that would have raised the limit on an individual's contributions to political parties would have empowered both the individual and the political party . such a provision would be listed here under "individual," because it would have most directly affected what an individual might do , although the parties would have benefitted as well . categorization and ordering of bills in this report is solely for the purpose of organization and does not reflect any judgement by crs as to the relative importance or merit of the bills themselves . the first six categories can be examined in the context of hard money , since they pertain to types of activity that are fully regulated under federal election law , which specifies prohibited sources , sets limits on permitted contributions , and requires disclosure . the six hard money categories are shown on the checklist in table 1 under a larger heading "hard money," with the first four — individuals , pacs , parties , and candidates — further grouped to reflect the principal sources of campaign receipts . the fifth category deals with in - state or in - district requirements for campaign receipts , while the sixth addresses independent expenditures . the eighth and ninth categories cover provisions that dealt with soft money , those activities largely or fully outside the framework of federal election law , which have been a major focus of reform efforts in recent years . the eighth category contains provisions relating to party soft money , which was largely addressed in bcra but where some issues remain .