global aids coordinator . in february 2004 , the state department issued a report http: / / www.state.gov / s / gac / rl / or / c11652.htm which provided details on how pepfar would be implemented , and proposed to use initial pepfar funds to support several "public - private partnership" treatment programs . pepfar aims to prevent 7 million new infections globally , provide arv drugs for 2 million infected people , and provide care for 10 million infected people , including orphans . pepfar was authorized by p.l . 108 - 25 , the united states leadership against global hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria act of 2003 , signed into law by president bush on may 27 , 2003 . its implementation has resulted in major spending increases for hiv / aids prevention , care , and treatment in 15 "focus countries," 12 in africa ( botswana , cote d'ivoire , ethiopia , kenya , mozambique , namibia , nigeria , rwanda , south africa , tanzania , uganda , and zambia ) . pepfar funds are provided through the global hiv / aids initiative ( ghai ) , headquartered at the state department . the ghai is headed by a u.s . global aids coordinator , who coordinates ghai programs in focus countries and other international aids programs implemented by usaid and other agencies . the office of the global aids coordinator ( ogac ) at the state department administers the bulk of u.s. aids assistance to africa . pepfar was enacted , in part , to simplify the international aids budget , enhance transparency , and stress the president's interest in fighting aids and his backing for what the state department reports is "the largest commitment ever by a single nation for an international health initiative. prior to pepfar , the principal channels for hiv / aids assistance to africa were usaid and the global aids program ( gap ) of the centers for disease control ( cdc ) in the health and human services department . most usaid spending on aids in africa is through the child survival and health programs fund . limited amounts are provided through other accounts , such as multi - functional economic support fund , peace corps , and migration and refugee assistance . the department of defense ( dod ) has undertaken an hiv / aids prevention program , primarily with african armed forces and administered by the naval health research center in san diego . it also focuses on education and creation of policy responses . as in other recent years , the administration did not request funding for the program in fy2007 . in fy2006 , congress continued to support it by appropriating $5.5 million ( of which $3.2 million went to africa ) . foreign military financing ( fmf ) funds are also used to support this initiative . a department of labor ( dol ) program in the past supported aids education in the workplace in several african countries , but was not funded in fy2006 . funds for these dol efforts were not requested in fy2007 .