these are all donors meeting this threshold , and not just those who contributed for political activities . it ends with a discussion of the irc reporting and disclosure requirements . while this report discusses the political activity limitations in the irc , it is important to realize that organizations must also comply with applicable election and lobbying laws . for analysis of the intersection between tax and campaign finance laws , see crs report r40141 , 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations and campaign activity: analysis under tax and campaign finance laws , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl34447 , churches and campaign activity: analysis under tax and campaign finance laws , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r40183 , 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) organizations and campaign activity: analysis under tax and campaign finance laws , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report rs22895 , 527 groups and campaign activity: analysis under campaign finance and tax laws , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . for discussion of the applicability of federal lobbying law to tax - exempt organizations , see crs report 96-809 , lobbying regulations on non - profit organizations , by [author name scrubbed] . while the majority of § 501 ( c ) organizations fall into one of the types discussed above , the irc describes numerous other types of organizations . the limitations the irc places on the ability of these organizations to participate in political activity is often less clear , and there is minimal irs guidance on the topic . this may be because the need for guidance has not arisen due to the fact that there are not as many of these organizations and they do not appear to participate in political activities to the same extent as the organizations discussed above . the other types of § 501 ( c ) organizations appear to fall into two categories . the first are those that seem to be prohibited from participating in most , if not all , types of political activity . this category would likely include the § 501 ( c ) trusts whose funds must be dedicated to their exempt purpose ( eg , § 501 ( c ) ( 17 ) supplemental unemployment benefit trusts , § 501 ( c ) ( 21 ) black lung benefit trusts , and § 501 ( c ) ( 22 ) multi - employer pension plan trusts ) . it also appears to include the organizations that the irs has indicated in unofficial guidance may not participate in political activities "because the subparagraph in which they are described limits them to an exclusive purpose ( for example , irc 501 ( c ) ( 2 ) title holding companies , irc 501 ( c ) ( 20 ) group legal services plans ) . this rationale could also prohibit § 501 ( c ) ( 10 ) domestic fraternal societies , for example , from participating in political activities because their net earnings must be devoted exclusively to certain purposes .