violence in the home is not a new phenomenon . jeffrey l. edleson , a researcher who hasstudied domestic violence extensively , dates it back to the roman empire , and reports that theincidence of family violence has not changed over the years as much as its visibility . consortia may consist of campus personnel , studentgroups , campus administrators , security personnel , and regional crisis centers allied with theinstitutions . the attorney general must award three - year competitive grants and contracts , through thevawo director , in amounts of not more than $500,000 for individual higher education institutions,and not more than $1 million for consortia of such institutions . the attorney general must makeevery effort to guarantee equitable participation of public and private higher education institutionsin grant activities ; ensure fair geographic grant distribution among the various regions of the nation ; and ensure unbiased grant distribution to tribal colleges and universities and traditionally blackcolleges and universities . vawa 2005 authorizes $12 million for fy2007 , and $15 million for each of fiscal years2008 through 2011 for this effort . grantees may use funds for personnel , training , technical assistance , data collection , andother equipment ; training of campus administrators , security personnel , and staff who serve oncampus disciplinary or judicial boards that develop and put into practice procedures and services tomore efficiently identify and respond to domestic and dating violence , sexual assault , and stalkingcrimes ; implementing and operating violence education programs to prevent domestic and datingviolence , sexual assault , and stalking ; developing , augmenting , and strengthening victim servicesprograms on campuses ; establishing and distributing or otherwise providing assistance andinformation about options for victims to take punitive or other legal action ; developing , installing,or enlarging data collection and communication systems related to domestic and dating violence,sexual assault , and stalking crimes on campus ; making capital improvements on campus to addresssuch crimes ; and improving coordination among campus administrators , security personnel , andlocal law enforcement . each grantee must submit a biennial performance report to the attorney general , or fundingwill be suspended . furthermore , when the grant period is completed , the institution must file aperformance report with the attorney general and the secretary of education about the activitiesundertaken and an assessment of the effectiveness of those activities in achieving the purposes listedabove . in addition , the attorney general must submit a report to congress no later than six monthsafter the end of the fiscal year for which grants were awarded . the report must summarizeinformation about the number of grants and amounts awarded , and provide an evaluation of theprogress made under the grants , a statistical summary of the people served , and an assessment of theeffectiveness of programs funded . the attorney general is authorized , through the vawo director and in consultation withthe secretary of hhs , to make two - year competitive grants to eligible entities for alleviating theimpact of domestic and dating violence , sexual assault , and stalking on children exposed to suchviolence , and for reducing the risk of becoming future victims of such violence . vawa 2005authorizes $20 million for each of fiscal years 2007 through 2011 for this effort .