we will consider two alternative means . one alternative might be to make use of the separate domain name voluntary . the question with respect to this alternative would be whether there would be an incentive for sexually explicit websites to use a separate domain name voluntarily—an incentive sufficient to induce enough of them to use a separate domain name so as to make the proposal as effective as it would be if it compelled them to use a separate domain name . an incentive , arguably , is that , just as the proposal would make it easier to block websites that use a separate domain name , it might make it easier to locate websites that use a separate domain name . in addition , one might argue , a statute could effectively make use of a separate domain name mandatory only for websites based in the united states , as the u.s. government does not generally have authority over foreign websites . therefore , a statute that mandated use of a separate domain name would not cover all websites with sexually explicit material , and this would appear to strengthen the case that voluntary use of a separate domain name would be as effective as mandatory use . a second alternative to the proposal might be one that already exists: the dot kids implementation and efficiency act of 2002 , mentioned at the beginning of this report . but are there less restrictive means by which to accomplish the ".xxx" proposal's goal ? this statute may enable parents who wish to do so to block out all websites not under the "dot kids" domain name . if parents used a filter to prevent their children from gaining access to any website that does not use the "dot kids" domain , then they would be denying their children access to much material on the internet that is not sexually explicit . if one deems a purpose of both the "dot kids" statute and the ".xxx" proposal to be not only to deny children access to sexually explicit material , but not to deny them access to non - sexually explicit material , then the "dot kids" act might be viewed as less effective than the ".xxx" proposal , and therefore as not an adequate alternative to the latter . but , in another respect , the "dot kids" statute could be more effective because it could enable parents to block foreign as well as domestic websites ; in that respect it might be viewed as an adequate alternative to the ".xxx" proposal . if a court were to find the ".xxx" proposal to be analogous to the zoning of "adult" theaters that the supreme court has upheld , then it would ask whether the proposal is designed to serve a substantial governmental interest and allows for reasonable alternative avenues of communication . and , because the proposal would not prevent anyone from posting protected speech , but would merely require them to post some speech under a separate domain name , it apparently could not even be said to reduce their avenues of communication except insofar as internet users chose to block websites that used the separate domain name .