structure of the report . thisreport begins with a discussion of fema's disaster declaration process and itsapplication to hurricane katrina . it then presents crs estimates of the population,living within 14 of the 88 counties designated as eligible for disaster assistance , whowere most affected and most likely displaced by the storm , in total and in each of thethree affected states: louisiana , mississippi , and alabama . these estimates arebroken down by whether people were living in areas that experienced flooding and / or structural damage ( and further , by the level of structural damage ) . thebalance of the report presents a social - demographic profile of this acutely affectedpopulation , looking at such characteristics as poverty and race / ethnicity status,homeownership and housing status . separate discussions are also provided of theaged , children , and working - age adults . although this report does not explicitlydiscuss policy implications , its findings are relevant to numerous aspects of thepost - katrina debate on how to address the immediate and ongoing needs of theaffected populations , both in their home counties as well as the many other parts ofthe country to which some have relocated . figure 2 . hurricane katrina: overview of areas affected by flooding and / or structural damage ( based on fema flood and damage assessments ) . hurricane katrina likely made one of the poorest areas of the country evenpoorer . among those displaced by the storm , many lost their homes , materialpossessions , and jobs . some had insurance to replace their material property losses,received help from fema or small business loans to get by on an emergency basisor replace property , or received unemployment insurance or disaster unemploymentinsurance to replace lost wages . however , some who lived in the areas mostimpacted by the storm may now be destitute ; while having financially gotten bybefore the storm , in the storm's aftermath they may have joined the ranks of the poor . further , the socio - economic profile of the areas hardest hit by katrina indicates thatthese newly poor would join a population that was already disproportionately poorand disadvantaged . before the storm , the 700,000 people acutely affected by katrina were more likely than americans overall to be poor ; minority ( most oftenafrican - american ) ; less likely to be connected to the workforce ; and more likely tobe educationally disadvantaged ( i.e. , not having completed a high school education ) . both those who were poor before the storm , and those who have become poorfollowing the storm , are likely to face a particularly difficult time in reestablishingtheir lives , having few if any financial resources upon which to draw . this report's analysis is based on the merger of fema flood and damageassessments ( data of september 21 , 2005 ) with census 2000 data . the fema floodand damage assessments are derived from interpretations of satellite and aircraftoverflight imagery of the impacted area , combined with analysts' assessments on thescene . the fema flood and damage assessments were primarily derived frominterpretations of aerial imagery , which may be limited by the range of the flightsas well as subject to errors in categorizing areas .