of $1,314 billion . in other words , japan's private investors sent $1,314 billion more abroad than foreigners invested in japan . the remaining $763 billion outflow ( $2,077 billion minus $1,314 billion ) of dollars was primarily from official currency intervention that added to japan's foreign exchange reserves . this net buying of $763 billion in dollars — over the 1977-2004 period provided more than a third ( 37% ) of the total capital outflow from japan to offset the country's surplus in trade . if japan had not intervened to this extent , the yen likely would have appreciated more than it did . taking the estimate by takatoshi ito that $250 billion in intervention moved the exchange rate by about 1% or ¥1 , the net effect of the direct intervention that ended in 2004 would have been around ¥3 or ¥4 per dollar . taking the estimates by preeg and general motors , the upper bound on the effect of the intervention would be around 20% or about ¥20 per dollar . japan currency manipulation act . would address the exchange - rate misalignment of the japanese yen with respect to the united states dollar . s. 1607 ( baucus ) . currency exchange rate oversight reform act of 2007 . would require the treasury department to identify currencies that are fundamentally misaligned and would require action to correct the misalignment . such action would include factoring currency undervaluation in u.s. anti - dumping cases , banning federal procurement of products or services from the designated country , and filing a case against in the wto . s. 1677 ( dodd ) . currency reform and financial markets access act of 2007 . 2886 ( knollenberg ) / s. 1021 ( stabenow ) . would require the treasury department to identify countries that manipulate their currencies regardless of their intent and to submit an action plan for ending the manipulation , and would give treasury the authority to file a case in the wto . the range , therefore , for the effect of exchange rate undervaluation because of japanese intervention would be from ¥3 to ¥20 per dollar with the statistical likelihood more toward the lower end of the range . setting aside the question of the efficacy of japan's intervention into exchange markets to weaken the yen , a second question is whether changes in the yen - dollar exchange rate actually affect imports and exports . in theory , japan's intervention by buying dollars and selling yen induces a cheaper yen which then assists japan's exporters by allowing them either to lower their export price or to maintain their export price while increasing profits . it also makes imports relatively more expensive in japan . lowered export prices and higher import prices will tend to increase japan's trade surplus which then contributes to a higher growth rate . the bank of japan may or may not sterilize the currency operation by selling japanese bonds locally to keep the domestic money supply constant . in an economic sense , if the intervention is not sterilized , buying dollars is equivalent to increasing the japanese money supply , since the finance ministry purchases the dollars from japanese exporters with yen which then enters the japanese money supply .