the negotiations on services in the dda have two fundamental objectives . it is not unusual for negotiations to lag as participants wait to place their best negotiating positions on the table until just before crucial deadlines are reached . several factors will determine if and when the services negotiations will be completed . one is the division between developed countries that have advanced services sectors employing highly skilled labor and the developing countries with less - developed services industries . the former group seeks market opportunities for its services providers and is more willing to open its markets to competition . such is the case also with many other economically advanced countries . for many years , many in congress and successive administrations have been pressing to make trade liberalization in services a priority in multilateral trade negotiations and a priority in the current round . in so doing , the united states has sought trade opportunities especially in developing countries for a competitive sector of the u.s. economy . the u.s. business community considers the dda negotiations in services critical to providing predictability in global markets for services . a third reason could be the complexity of the agenda of the services negotiations and the number of players involved . "services" includes a broad range of economic activities many with few characteristics in common except that they are not goods . the trade barriers exporters face differ across services sectors making the formulation of trade rules a significant challenge . furthermore , services negotiations include many participants . in addition to trade ministers , they include representatives of regulatory agencies many of whom do not consider trade liberalization a primary part of their mission . the prospects for the negotiations are difficult to evaluate at this point . one factor is the political will the wto members can muster to overcome the obstacles that plague the negotiations . another factor is the extent the various participants are willing to compromise on goals in order to reach agreements . and a third factor is how quickly the issues in agriculture and non - agriculture market access are resolved ; the sooner they are resolved the sooner negotiators can devote their full attention to the services negotiations . from december 13-18 , 2005 , wto trade ministers held the sixth wto ministerial in hong kong . the trade ministers were expected to emerge from meeting with modalities that would accelerate the dda negotiations to their conclusion by the end of 2006 . for example , hotel and restaurant services require a presence in the country of the consumer . providers of legal , accounting , and construction services prefer a direct presence because they need access to expert knowledge of the laws and regulations of the country in which they are doing business and they require proximity to clients . thus , cross - border services trade data do not capture all of the trade in services . data on sales of services by foreign affiliates of u.s. - owned companies and by u.s. affiliates of foreign - owned firms help to provide a more accurate , albeit still incomplete , measurement of trade in services .