global change research program . in the u.s. west , decreasing trends in mountain snowpack and earlier snowmelt have altered the timing of stream flows . what is the appropriate balance between research , acting on current knowledge , adapting to anticipated change , and informing decision - makers ( public and private ) of choices and implications ? there are a number of bills before the 110 th congress proposing a diversity of approaches to address climate change and greenhouse gas reductions . there also likely will be more hearings , both legislative and oversight . thus , assuring that the best scientific underpinning is available for policy - related deliberations will remain a priority . the earth's climate is variable , and scientists understand , to varying degrees , the forces that have driven climate changes of the past . many factors contribute to changes in climate , regionally and globally , and no single factor acts alone . the principal natural factors determining climate through geologic time include the earth's orbit around the sun , solar activity , ocean variability , volcanoes , release of methane clathrates from the ocean bed , and chaotic variability . human activities have grown to a scale especially over the past century that it is almost certain that these human activities have contributed to the climate change observed in recent decades . this appendix provides brief information on the principal identified natural drivers of climate . the human activities affecting climate — the principal reason demanding current policy attention — are described in the " human activities that influence climate change " section above . earth's orbit around the sun the shape of the earth's orbit around the sun is not perfectly round . the earth's axis is tilted , and wobbles as it turns . these and other orbital behaviors are fairly well understood and predictable in the ways they influence the earth's climate . generally , when the earth is closer to the sun , the earth receives more incoming radiation and warms . solar activity several aspects of solar activity have been suggested as contributors to climate change , although they remain disputed: total solar irradiance , the ultraviolet component of irradiance , cosmic rays , and earth / solar magnetism . although the validity and magnitude of these remain in dispute , cosmic rays and earth / solar magnetism remain particularly complex and poorly understood . the variability of the sun's total irradiance , or how much solar energy the sun emits toward the earth , influences the earth's climate , although its significance is disputed . on long time scales , solar variability could have a large influence , as on the cold temperatures of the little ice age , but quantification of the solar role in climate variability over periods of centuries to millenia is poor . for example , while some scientists have found evidence that the sun's activity may have been relatively high during the medieval warm period , other scientists have found no evidence that estimated variability of sun's total irradiance has been sufficient to drive climate variations over the past 1,000 years .