a california law ( a.b . 1633 ) requires the state to consider the feasibility and cost - effectiveness of reserving an amount up to $2,000 to assist youth as they "age out" of foster care . the law requires that counties serving as representative payees establish a no - cost , interest - bearing maintenance account , with the county maintaining an itemized current account of all income and expense items . the counties must establish procedures for dispensing money from the account to pay for expenditures that are used by , and for the benefit of , the child , and for purposes determined by the county to be in the child's best interests . procedures must also be established for disbursing any balance when the youth is released from care . it then describes the role of representative payees and their responsibilities . the report provides data on the use of social security benefits to reimburse states for child welfare , and includes a discussion of the keffeler decision . finally , the report concludes with proposals supported by some advocates to change the current practice of using ssi and other social security benefits to fund foster care . children in foster care are children for whom a state ( or tribe ) has been given formal responsibility for a child's care and placement by a court or by a voluntary placement agreement between the state and a child's parent or legal guardian . foster care is the round - the - clock care of a child outside the child's home and is typically necessary because of neglect or physical abuse of the child by his or her parents or , less commonly , due to child behavioral issues that make the home unsafe for the child . children who are removed from their homes may be placed in foster family homes , institutions , or group homes by the state child welfare agency . this section discusses how state child welfare agencies use federal and state dollars to pay for children in care , and how child welfare agencies provide assistance to children likely to emancipate or "age - out" of foster care . titles ii and xvi of the social security act provide two types of benefits for children , including those in foster care , who meet certain qualifications . social security benefits ( formally called old - age , survivors , and disability insurance benefits ) are authorized under title ii of the act . social security benefits may be paid to the children of workers who have retired , become disabled , or died . these benefits are paid out of the social security trust funds . ssi benefits are authorized under title xvi of the social security act and are available for certain children with disabilities if their families have low incomes and minimal assets . ssi benefits are paid out of general revenues . most states supplement the monthly ssi benefit with state or territorial funds . table 1 shows the number of children who receive ssi and other social security benefits , as well as the total amount of monthly federal and state supplementary benefits paid to these children .