violent extremism . the obama administration uses the term "violent extremism" to refer to ideologies , secular or religious , that support or encourage ideologically motivated - violence to further political goals . according to the u.s . coordinator for counterterrorism , daniel benjamin , such "countering violent extremism" measures ( or cve , as often termed by u.s. officials ) seek to "stop those most at risk of radicalization from becoming terrorists" through social programs , counter - ideology initiatives , and working with civil society to de - legitimize the al qaeda narrative . the united states has sought to partner with other countries , including many in europe , to share information and discuss "best practices" aimed at preventing radicalization and countering violent extremism . in 2010 , the united states and the european union ( eu ) convened an expert - level dialogue for the first time on preventing violent extremism . previous congresses have held hearings on islamist extremism in europe . congressional interest in how european countries are managing their muslim populations has been motivated , in part , by concerns that violent islamist extremists with european citizenship may enter the united states under the u.s. visa waiver program ( vwp ) . the vwp allows for short - term , visa - free travel to the united states for citizens of participating countries , many of which are in europe . u.s. officials note that zacarias moussaoui , the "20 th " september 11 hijacker , and richard reid , the airplane "shoe bomber," travelled to the united states on the vwp . although successive u.s. administrations and many members of congress continue to support the vwp as a means to facilitate legitimate transatlantic travel , tourism , and commerce , the 110 th congress instituted changes to the vwp that , among other measures , seek to strengthen its security components . this report examines policies aimed at promoting integration , combating terrorism , and countering violent extremism in five european countries with significant muslim populations: france , germany , the netherlands , spain , and the united kingdom . all of these countries are key u.s. allies in the fight against global terrorism . all five countries are also members of the european union . although responsibility for shaping laws and policies related to integration and countering radicalization largely rests with the national governments of the eu's 27 member states , the eu's role is far from negligible . eu member states have come to believe that the eu can and should play a role in encouraging good integration practices . also notable since 2001 are eu efforts to boost its collective ability to counter terrorism and combat violent extremism . as such , the report includes a section on eu policies that may significantly affect muslim populations . given the wide breadth of potential economic , social , and security policies that could be employed to promote integration and counter extremism , the various policies and programs discussed in each country section should be considered illustrative and not exhaustive . moreover , the report focuses mostly on european domestic policies to promote integration , prevent radicalization , and combat terrorism .