carriers. as a result of these changing global economic demands , "u.s. air carriers seeking to enter the market should similarly be able to obtain the financial capital necessary to launch their businesses . we tentatively do not believe that 'actual control' should be interpreted in a way that needlessly restricts the commercial opportunities of u.s. air carriers and their ability to compete. legally , it appears that the dot recognizes that congress has established objective statutory requirements that an air carrier must satisfy to be considered a u.s. citizen ; however , they assert that nothing in this nprm would alter or in any way circumvent those statutory requirements . given dot's assertion that this new interpretation of the actual control requirement is a legitimate exercise of its legal authority , it would appear that should a challenge be brought against this proposal becoming a final rule , a reviewing court would likely address the issue pursuant to the standards delineated by the supreme court in chevron u.s.a. inc. v. natural resources defense council ( chevron ) . in chevron , the supreme court established a two - part test for judicial review of agency statutory interpretations . the dot has proposed that the "actual control" requirement be interpreted in two ways . the hallmark aviation principle recognized by the paris convention is that every nation has absolute and exclusive sovereignty over the airspace above its defined territory . this principle was reaffirmed in 1944 at the chicago international civil aviation conference , which produced the chicago convention . the chicago convention resulted in an international framework based largely on national interests , favoring bilateral air transport agreements over multilateral accords with respect to issues such as routes , frequency and capacity . the chicago convention's accomplishments included an agreement by the signatories to grant each other two of the so - called "five freedoms" of air transport , specifically , the right to fly across other states without landing and the right to land for nontraffic purposes . in addition , the chicago convention established the international civil aviation organization ( icao ) to regulate the safety , communications , and technological aspects of international civil aviation . since the chicago convention , international civil aviation rights have developed primarily through a series of bilateral agreements between the united states and foreign countries . most of these agreements have been "executive agreements" rather than treaties , thereby avoiding the advice and consent requirement of the constitution , and typically have contained language favorable to the united states . for example , prior agreements permitted the united states to designate both an unlimited number of gateway cities and an unlimited numbers of carriers . in addition , the agreements provided the air carriers the right to determine capacity with only the vaguest of guidelines . as the united states began to deregulate its domestic airline industry , administrations began to seek more liberal , free - market - based international agreements as well . domestically , however , even as the united states began to adopt more liberal regulations for its aviation industry , several existing laws continue to have a strong impact on international civil aviation .