circuit challenging the new 2006 naaqs . briefs from petitioners , epa , and supporters were filed with the court by march 7 , 2008 , but the date for oral argument had not yet been scheduled as of the updating of this report . among other changes , the casac would no longer have a role in approving the policy staff paper with its recommendations to the administrator . casac would be relegated to commenting on the policy paper after it appears in the federal register , during a public comment period . a stricter standard means increased costs for the transportation and industrial sectors most likely to be affected by particulate matter controls , including utilities , refineries , and the trucking industry . in terms of public health , a stricter standard is estimated to result in fewer adverse health effects for the general population and particularly sensitive populations , such as children , asthmatics , and the elderly . because of health and cost implications , naaqs decisions have been the source of significant concern to some in congress for quite some time . the evolution and development of the particulates naaqs , in particular , have been the subject of extensive oversight . when the 1997 particulates naaqs were promulgated , congress held 28 days of hearings on the epa rule . congress enacted legislation specifying deadlines for implementation of the 1997 pm 2.5 naaqs , funding for monitoring and research of potential health effects , and the coordination of the particulates ( and ozone ) standard with other air quality regulations . in december 2006 , several states and industry , agriculture , business , environmental , and public health groups petitioned the court of appeals for the d.c . circuit to review the new 2006 particulates naaqs . the epa's previous review and establishment of particulates naaqs were the subject of litigation and challenges , including a supreme court decision in 2001 . the epa's 1997 promulgation of standards for both coarse and fine particulate matter prompted critics to charge the epa with overregulation and spurred environmental groups to claim that the epa had not gone far enough . more than 100 plaintiffs petitioned the court to overturn the standard . several elements of the epa's most recent action , including the level of stringency of the new 2006 particulates naaqs , the objections of the casac , the agency's decision not to modify the particle size indicator for coarse particulates , and not excluding rural sources from the coarse standard as proposed have already generated debate and controversy . thus , the final form of the current efforts to revise pm naaqs may not be known for some time . the epa's most recent review found that the scientific evidence since 1997 reinforced the associations between exposure to particulates and numerous cardiovascular and respiratory health problems , including aggravated asthma , chronic bronchitis , reduced lung function , irregular heartbeat , nonfatal heart attacks , and premature death . the casac found that the numerous epidemiological studies epa reviewed "have shown statistically significant associations between the concentrations of ambient air pm 2.5 and pm 10 ( including levels that are lower than the 1997 particulates naaqs ) and excess mortality and morbidity.