which committees should be involved ? can the u.s. military improve the effectiveness of its intelligence operations without at some point enlisting the support of foreign nationals in such a way that such activity could be viewed as "non - routine support" to traditional military activities , that is , a covert action ? is it appropriate to view u.s. counterterrorism efforts in the context of a global battlefield and to view the military as having the authority to "prepare" that battlefield , and can "anticipated" military action precede the onset of hostilities by months or years ? is it appropriate to view the military as being involved in "a war" against terrorists , and thus its activities as constituting "traditional military activities" as it wages that war ? by asserting that its activities do not constitute covert actions , is the pentagon trying to avoid the statutory requirements governing covert action , including a signed presidential finding , congressional notification , and oversight by the congressional intelligence committees ? the house did not vote on the measure . still concerned by the fall - out from the iran - contra affair , congress in 1990 attempted to tighten its oversight of covert action . the senate intelligence committee approved a new set of statutory reporting requirements , citing the ambiguous , confusing and incomplete congressional mandate governing covert actions under the then - current law . after the bill was modified in conference , congress approved the changes . president george h. w. bush pocket - vetoed the 1990 legislation , citing several concerns , including conference report language indicating congressional intent that the intelligence committees be notified "within a few days" when prior notice of a covert action was not provided , and that prior notice could only be withheld in "exigent circumstances. the legislation also contained language stipulating that a u.s. government request of a foreign government or a private citizen to conduct covert action would constitute a covert action . in 1991 , after asserting in new conference language its intent as to the meaning of "timely fashion" and eliminating any reference to third - party covert action requests , congress approved and the president signed into law the new measures . president bush noted in his signing statement his satisfaction that the revised provision concerning "timely" notice to congress of covert actions incorporates without substantive change the requirement found in existing law , and that any reference to third - party requests had been eliminated . those covert action provisions remain in effect today . since the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , concerns have surfaced with regard to the pentagon's expanded intelligence counterterrorism efforts . some lawmakers reportedly have expressed concern that the pentagon is creating a parallel intelligence capability independent from the cia or other american authorities , and one that encroaches on the cia's realm . it has been suggested that the pentagon has adopted a broad definition of its current authority to conduct "traditional military activities" and "prepare the battlefield.