according to s.rept . 110-147 , "the initiative is intended to help veterans and their families to make informed health care choices. s. 1233 , as reported in the senate , would require the va to annually — by august 1 — to publish a notice in the federal register of which categories of veterans are eligible to be enrolled in va health care in the upcoming fiscal year . furthermore , in any year in which the va proposes to stop enrollment , the va secretary would be required to provide to the house and senate va committees an estimate of the cost of enrolling all eligible veterans . after the notice is published , the va would be required to wait 45 days before implementing any change in enrollment . according to the committee report , "this notice - and - wait requirement would provide congress with an opportunity to oversee the enrollment of veterans in the veterans health administration , and to respond to any proposed limitation on enrollment. furthermore , it is the view of the committee that when resources are provided by congress to enable the va to keep pace with demand for services , the va health care system should be open to all veterans who seek care . s. 1233 would require the va to establish a grant program to provide transportation options to veterans in rural areas . under this grant program , va would provide grants for rural veterans' service organizations and community - based organizations to provide transportation to veterans in remote rural areas . for each of fy2008 through fy2012 , $6 million would be authorized to be appropriated for this grant program . the grants would be awarded to state veterans' service agencies , veterans service organizations , and qualified community transportation organizations . among other things , s. 1233 would require va to establish demonstration projects on alternatives for expanding care for veterans in rural areas . under the committee - reported measure , two demonstration projects would be required to be carried out in geographically dispersed areas . it would require va to partner with the department of health and human services ( hhs ) and the indian health service ( ihs ) to expand care for native american veterans . furthermore , s. 1233 would exempt veterans in priority group 4 ( veterans who have been determined by the va to be catastrophically disabled ) from paying copayments for nonservice - connected hospital care or nursing home care . under current law , these veterans are required to pay copayments for all nonservice - connected care they receive from the va. s. 1233 , as reported in the senate , would increase reimbursement rates for travel to va medical facilities . the house passed h.r . 1470 on may 23 , 2007 . on november 14 , 2007 , the senate veterans' affairs committee ordered the following bills reported without amendment: s. 2004 ( to amend title 38 u.s.c .