thisreport reviews these issues in turn . in combination , patents and marketing exclusivities provide the fundamental framework ofintellectual property incentives for pharmaceutical innovation in the united states . due to thetrips agreement's obligation of technological neutrality with respect to the patent system , ( 127 ) marketing exclusivitiesprovide congress with a more flexible option for stimulating specific sorts of desirable privateactivity than do patents . as such , marketing exclusivities have been , and likely will continue to be,the most viable option for encouraging the development of discrete classes of products regulated bythe fda . the potential for expanded use of marketing exclusivities in turn raises a number ofinnovation policy issues . in the united states , marketing exclusivities are viewed primarily assupplementing patent protection , in that they provide more limited protections for inventions thatdo not meet patent act requirements , or effectively delay the onset of patent litigation for inventionsthat do . ( 128 ) expanding the availability of marketing exclusivities , in addition to lengthening their term toeuropean levels , increases the possibility that marketing exclusivities will trump patents as theprimary form of intellectual property protection for certain fda - regulated products . the decisionto supplant the primacy of the current regime of uspto - procured and judicially enforced patentrights with a system of automatic , fda - administered marketing exclusivities presents a number oftrade - offs that policy makers may wish to consider . among them are the impact of the contemplatedexclusivity periods upon both the incentives for pharmaceutical innovation and the availability ofmedications to consumers ; the desirability of individualized determinations about the technicalmerits of the pharmaceutical invention ; and whether the uspto or fda is the better institution forawarding proprietary rights to pharmaceutical innovators . international harmonization provides another significant issue with respect to marketingexclusivities . even as some commentators have expressed concerns over the use of ftas toencourage trading partners to establish marketing exclusivities at domestic levels , others observe thateuropean levels of protection are substantially longer than their hatch - waxman analogues . futuredialogue may concern setting global marketing exclusivity standards in view of national goals andpriorities . finally , policy makers may appreciate that general patent reform legislation has been thesubject of significant discussion during the 109th congress . ( 129 ) current legislativeproposals do not appear to impact the fundamental landscape of patents and marketing exclusivitieswithin the pharmaceutical industry . because legislative reform efforts are still underway , however,congressional attention to the impact of broadly oriented patent reforms upon the pharmaceuticalindustry may be appropriate . this showing requires a sponsor to conduct both preclinical and clinical investigationsof drugs that have not been previously tested . ( 34 ) in deciding whether to issue marketing approval or not , the fdaevaluates the test data that the sponsor submits in a so - called new drug application ( nda ) . the fda maintains the test data incorporated into a nda in confidence . ( 35 ) in addition , because therequired test data is ordinarily quite costly to generate , sponsors of new pharmaceuticals ordinarilydo not disclose them to the public . otherwise the sponsor's competitors could file their own ndasusing that test data , and thereby avoid the expenses of developing the information themselves .