it was because of ineptitude. to what extent the release of the key judgments of the nie changed the "story line" of u.s. policy remains uncertain . observers suggest that intelligence analysis with all its inevitable uncertainties and ambiguities seldom yields a water - tight argument for a new policy . policy builds upon the factual base that intelligence analysis provides , but it is also built upon assessments of our own national interests that are beyond the mandate of the intelligence community . recognizing that any iranian success in testing a nuclear weapon in the near future would seriously undermine confidence in its core capabilities , the intelligence community has presented important evidence about current iranian nuclear efforts . these facts do not change u.s. interests , but only how they are pursued and how they are explained to the public . although the "story line" may have to be adjusted , the realities of u.s. interests and the failure of the iranian regime to abide by its treaty commitments remain . congress is and will continue to be an important consumer of national intelligence , but there are concerns that mandating nies may not support the legislative process to the extent that some have anticipated . nies can provide the intelligence community's best evidence and analysis on major issues of national security and can highlight areas where information is lacking , but they usually require lengthy preparation and coordination before they can be disseminated . the history of the nie on iraqi wmd suggests that compressing the production schedule can be counterproductive . moreover , conclusions of nies may not be informed by knowledge of initiatives planned or underway by others in the executive or legislative branches . a more public role for nies in debates on national security policy issues could obscure their inherent limitations and distort the discussion of the policy issues . in some cases , congress may find intelligence assessments or briefings prepared in a less structured way and within tighter time constraints better serve its legislative needs than do formal nies . the creation of the office of the dni provides a focal point from which the analytical capabilities of all intelligence agencies can be brought to bear on given issues , even ones that are narrowly focused . it is considered likely that a combination of nies on some topics , supplemented by more limited assessments supported by an ongoing dialogue with intelligence analysts , may provide the most effective support to the legislative process . there appears to be some indication that congress may be growing more inclined to seek reports from the dni rather than nies . the senate - passed version of the fy2010 defense authorization bill ( h.r . 2647 ) would have required an nie ( ยง1071 ) on the nuclear aspirations of non - nuclear weapons states and non - state entities ; the conference version of the same bill deleted the requirement for the nie but asked for biennial reports given that "the conferees recognize that elements of the required report may be included in other reports prepared by the intelligence community.