foiled attacks are not included in the data reported . some would argue , however , that nctc data concerning iraq casualties — which are largely the product of sectarian violence , rampant criminal activity , and home grown insurgency — grossly distort the global terrorism picture and perhaps should not be attributed to terrorist activity . looking at the data outside of iraq , according to the nctc , the total number of incidents with ten or more deaths remained at approximately the 2003-2004 level: 70 per year . this suggests that , excluding iraq , the number of higher casualty terror attacks remains relatively stable . similar authorization was granted for fy2004-fy2006 . previously , such assistance had been restricted to supporting counternarcotics operations in colombia . a february 14 , 2003 national strategy for combating terrorism gave added emphasis to the role of international cooperation , law enforcement and economic development in countering terrorism . in the context of this campaign , the united states has stepped up intelligence - sharing and law enforcement cooperation with other governments to root out terrorist cells . experts believe that terrorist cells are operating not just in places where they are welcomed or tolerated , but in many other areas as well , including western europe and the united states . according to patterns of global terrorism 2003 ( patterns 2003 ) , as of january 2003 an aggressive international law enforcement effort had resulted in detention of approximately 3,000 terrorists and their supporters in more than 100 countries and in the freezing of $124 million in assets in some 600 bank accounts around the world , including $36 million in the united states alone . on june 2 , 2003 , the g - 8 leaders publicized plans , subsequently implemented , to create a counter - terrorism action group to assist nations in enhancing their anti - terrorism capabilities through initiatives including ( 1 ) outreach to countries in the area of counter - terrorism cooperation , and ( 2 ) providing capacity building assistance to nations with insufficient capacity to fight terrorism . an encouraging sign in the anti - terrorism struggle has been the apparent willingness of certain previously recalcitrant states to distance themselves from international terrorism and / or development of weapons of mass destruction . libya renounced its wmd programs on december 21 , 2003 , and has cooperated extensively with the united states and the international community in dismantling those programs . sudan , in cooperation with u.s. law enforcement and intelligence agencies , has arrested al qaeda members and "by and large" shut down al qaeda training camps on its territory . in contrast , iran , according to the department of state , remained the primary state sponsor of terrorism in 2005 and has been actively conducting a longstanding nuclear development program , raising concerns in the international community that iran's nuclear ambitions extend well beyond nuclear research , with direct implications for a host of ongoing terrorist activities .