all congressional offices carry out some type of casework . as part of the process of determining how to carry out their congressional duties , members of congress determine the scope of their constituent service activities . crs in focus if10503 , constituent services: overview and resources congressi onal liaison offices , at http: / / www.crs.gov / resources / liaisonoffices crs video wvb00093 , introduction to congressional casework crs report rl33209 , casework in a congressional office: background , rules , laws , and resources crs report r44696 , casework in congressional offices: frequently asked questions crs report casework , constituent services: casework , webpage , available at http: / / www.crs.gov crs report rl32113 , congressional intervention in the administrative process: legal and ethical considerations crs report rl33213 , congressional nominations to u.s. service academies: an overview and resources for outreach and management crs report rs20500 , medical records privacy: questions and answers on the hipaa rule crs report rs22450 , procedural analysis of private laws enacted: 1986-201 . observers suggest that most caseworkers enjoy working with people and have an interest in public service , but also note that the work can be challenging . caseworkers typically learn the policies and procedures through which agencies operate to provide services or benefits , and work with constituents whose requests are sometimes made with a high level of personal and emotional engagement . matters regarding the management of casework activities are at the discretion of individual congressional offices , subject to the rules of their respective chambers , relevant law , and the priorities of that office . two laws , the privacy act of 1974 and the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hipaa ) , affect casework . the privacy act affects all constituents with casework inquiries that require interaction with a federal agency . hipaa may affect constituents with casework inquiries that involve medical or other health - care information . these laws prevent a federal agency from sharing an individual's personally identifiable information with a congressional office without the individual's express permission . based on the priorities identified in individual congressional offices , many offices compile documentation to clarify policies related to casework . such documentation could specify casework goals , management procedures , and expectations of staff . having a manual or established protocol can help offices ensure consistency in their casework practices . this type of document is not required , and there is no congressional standard regarding its format or contents . all decisions regarding activities and operations in a member's office are within the discretion of the member , subject to chamber rules and relevant statute . procedures are typically developed by modifying standardized outlines and protocols to a particular office , based on the priorities and goals of that office and the preferences and needs of the member's constituents . the outline below suggests questions to help develop an office casework manual addressing those demands . sample documents , which may be used in whole or in part , are also provided .