the create act . the legislation amended section 103 ( c ) of title 25 , united states code , such that certain actions between researchers under a joint research agreement will not preclude patentability . a program of regional centers for the transfer of manufacturing technology ( now part of the hollings olhmanufacturing extension partnership effort ) to facilitate the movement to the private sector of knowledge and technologies developed under the aegis of the national institute of standards and technology was established by the omnibus trade and competitiveness act . should existing cooperative manufacturing programs in certain agencies be expanded or should new efforts in other departments be developed ? should one government agency have the lead in policy determinations ; if so , the question remains in which federal department should the responsibility be vested ? many of the industries interested in cooperative ventures with federal financial support have approached the department of defense and , to a lesser extent , the department of energy's defense programs because these agencies have the greatest amount of available resources and / or funding . they also tend to have the expertise to operate large - scale programs and maintain close ties with certain industrial sectors which could be encouraged to increase cooperation . in addition , both dod and doe have a vested interest in the availability of certain technologies which could be provided by a healthy domestic commercial market . however , questions remain whether sponsorship of certain cooperative ventures by dod and the department of energy's defense - related programs will lead to increased commercialization in the civilian marketplace . critics argue that defense spending is not an effective mechanism to increase industry's ability to innovate and develop new technologies . much of the research and development in the defense arena may be too specialized , overdesigned , and / or too costly to have value for commercial markets . the r&d also tends to concentrate on weapon systems and other defense hardware rather than on process technologies that are often necessary to improve manufacturing productivity . one reason cited for the competitive problems of the machine tool industry was its focus on defense needs rather than on the commercial market which is larger in the aggregate . on the other hand , the u.s. commitment to military r&d has contributed to a favorable balance of trade in the defense and aerospace industries . in the sematech effort , the purpose of dod support was to facilitate the commercial development of technologies with critical defense applications . the companies involved in sematech were experienced semiconductor manufacturers and were knowledgeable about the markets' needs and operations . thus , although the initial work performed by this semiconductor consortium may have been partially funded by the defense advanced research project agency , it was designed to result in new products and processes in the civilian marketplace where both defense and commercial demand can be met . sematech now operates without direct federal financing . the issue of cooperative work between the defense department and the private sector leading to commercial technologies was addressed in the former technology reinvestment project and was part of the more recent dual - use partnership project .