figure 1 . oman's geographic location in the proposed meftasource: map resources . adapted by crs . u.s. interest in oman stems from a number of factors . oman is a small exporter of oil and natural gas that is strategically located at the entrance to the persian gulf , 35 miles directly opposite iran . it is not a member of the organization of the petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) . oman is a moderate islamic country which has sought to maintain good relations with all middle east countries . it also has a 170 year history of political and economic cooperation with the united states , and has supported the u.s. war on terrorism . oman is an important gateway to the persian gulf region . oman has many reasons for wanting to negotiate an fta with the united states . it is a country whose proven oil reserves could be exhausted within 15 or 20 years ; yet , almost 40% of the country's gdp , two - thirds of its export earnings and three - fourth of its government revenues currently come from oil revenues . it is therefore trying to liberalize and diversify its trade regime as it seeks to broaden economic opportunities for a fast - growing workforce . as a result , it is looking to expand its economy beyond oil and gas exports . it sees the united states as an important ally in the venture to prepare itself for a time when its economic and social challenges intersect . oman is a small u.s. trade partner , ranking 88 th among all u.s. trade partners . total u.s. - oman trade at $1 billion in 2005 ( $593 million in u.s. exports and $555 million in u.s. imports ) accounts for 0.04% ( four one - hundredths of one percent ) of all u.s. trade . as a trading partner it is also 11 th among the 20 mefta entities , which together represent 4% of u.s. trade for 2005 . the united states , on the other hand , ranks fourth in importance among oman's trading partners , behind the united arab emirates ( uae ) , japan , and the united kingdom for 2004 ( most recent data ) . in 2005 , the most important u.s. imports from oman ( see table 1 ) were oil and natural gas ( 75% , constituting 1% of all u.s. oil and gas imports from mefta countries ) , and apparel ( 10% ) . the most important u.s. exports to oman were various types of transport equipment and road vehicles ( totaling 56% ) , and various types of machinery ( 24% ) . since 2001 , u.s. exports to oman have almost doubled to $593 million , for various reasons , while u.s. imports from oman , at $555 million , have increased by about a third , primarily because of increases in the price of petroleum imports . as a result , for 2005 , the united states had a small trade surplus with oman . the fta with oman is similar to other recent ftas with mefta countries ( morocco and bahrain ) , with slight variations .