that interest continues today . these complex issues have led to calls for coordination to ensure that the government's evolving needs ( eg , homeland security ) will continue to be met in the most effective manner possible . in the early 1990s , congress recognized that several federal agencies had ongoing high - performance computing programs , but no central coordinating body existed to ensure long - term coordination and planning . to provide such a framework , congress passed the high - performance computing program act of 1991 to improve the interagency coordination , cooperation , and planning of agencies with high - performance computing programs . in conjunction with the passage of the act , ostp released grand challenges: high - performance computing and communications . that document outlined an r&d strategy for high - performance computing and communications and a framework for a multi - agency program , the hpcc program . the nitrd program is part of the larger federal effort to promote fundamental and applied it r&d . the government sponsors such research through a number of channels , including federally funded research and development laboratories , such as lawrence livermore national laboratory ; single - agency programs ; multi - agency programs , including the nitrd program , but also programs focusing on nanotechnology r&d and combating terrorism ; funding grants to academic institutions ; and funding grants to industry . in general , supporters of federal funding of it r&d contend that it has produced positive results . in 2003 , the computer science and telecommunications board ( cstb ) of the national research council released a "synthesis report" based on eight previously released reports that examined "how innovation occurs in it , what the most promising research directions are , and what impacts such innovation might have on society. the cstb's observation was that the unanticipated results of research are often as important as the anticipated results . for example , electronic mail and instant messaging were byproducts of ( government - funded ) research in the 1960s that was aimed at making it possible to share expensive computing resources among multiple simultaneous interactive users . additionally , the report noted that federally funded programs have played a crucial role in supporting long - term research into fundamental aspects of computing . such "fundamentals" provide broad practical benefits but generally take years to realize . furthermore , supporters state that the nature and underlying importance of fundamental research makes it less likely that industry would invest in and conduct more fundamental research on its own . as noted by the cstb , "companies have little incentive to invest significantly in activities whose benefits will spread quickly to their rivals. further , in the board's opinion: government sponsorship of research , especially in universities , helps develop the it talent used by industry , universities , and other parts of the economy . when companies create products using the ideas and workforce that result from federally - sponsored research , they repay the nation in jobs , tax revenues , productivity increases , and world leadership .