no proposal has been issued . congressional oversight of the title v program has been limited to hearings by a house energy and commerce subcommittee and a senate environment and public works subcommittee in mid - 1995 , and a senate environment subcommittee field hearing in 2000 that addressed title v and other caa issues . so far , congress has not considered statutory changes that would affect the title v requirements . clean air act issues have been of considerable interest during the 114 th congress , especially scrutiny of epa's regulation of greenhouse gas emissions . although epa's actions concerning ghgs involve multiple provisions of the act , this congressional attention has not included title v . many but not all of these evaluations are available on epa websites . public participation has improved at various stages of the permitting process . at the same time , there also has been widespread dissatisfaction with the program as it exists , due to program complexity ; confusion and uncertainty about some of its requirements ; and criticism of costs to regulated entities , permit agencies , and even the general public . while many believe that the permit program has clarified requirements and fostered consistency and fairness in regulatory treatment of sources , others argue otherwise , saying that permits suffer from excessive length and increased complexity . benefits are more likely to be observed in states and localities that had no operating permit program prior to title v and are likely to be questioned more vigorously where such a program previously did exist . similarly , over the next one to three years , epa would review existing guidance and issue new guidance as appropriate concerning clarification of the permit revision process and permit reopening , and clarification of certain statements required in draft permits . likewise , views are mixed on whether the title v program has resulted in air quality and health benefits . arguably , this was not an objective , because title v is an administrative program and was not intended to have a direct impact on emissions . permitting agencies , however , say that many major sources have voluntarily restricted their operating conditions or installed pollution controls in order to reduce emissions below the title v regulatory thresholds ( thus becoming what is often referred to as "synthetic minors" ; see discussion on page 10 ) , which is a plus for the environment . critiques of the title v program are reflected in a 2005 report of the epa inspector general and in a 2006 report by a task force on title v implementation experience that was convened by epa's clean air act advisory committee . a key element of the 1990 clean air act ( caa ) amendments ( p.l . §§7661-7661f ) was the comprehensive permit program established in title v of the act . it was added to the caa to enhance compliance by detailing for each covered facility all the emission control requirements to which the facility is subject .