successive u.s . administrations have maintained that u.s. support for privatization and the creation of free markets directly serve u.s. national interests by opening markets for u.s. goods and services and sources of energy and minerals . bilateral trade agreements providing for normal trade relations for products have been signed and entered into force with all three states . bilateral investment treaties providing national treatment guarantees also have entered into force . u.s. investment is highest in azerbaijan's energy sector , but corruption in the three regional states and regional instability have appeared to discourage investors . with u.s. support , in june 2000 georgia became the second eurasian state ( after kyrgyzstan ) to be admitted to the wto . the application of title iv of the trade act of 1974 , including the jackson - vanik amendment , was terminated with respect to georgia in december 2000 , so its products receive permanent nondiscriminatory ( normal trade relations or ntr ) treatment . armenia was admitted into wto in december 2002 . the application of title iv was terminated with respect to armenia in january 2005 . among other u.s. economic links with the region , a u.s. - armenia joint economic task force has held annual meetings since 1992 . at the 22 nd meeting in november 2013 , visiting armenian minister of finance davit sargsyan met with deputy assistant secretary of state eric rubin . the two sides hailed a $180 million purchase by u.s. firm contour global of three hydro - electric power plants and its plans to invest $70 million in modernizing them , the largest u.s. private investment in armenia and the first energy investment . the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) offered partial financing . a u.s. - azerbaijan intergovernmental commission on economic cooperation was founded in early 2007 , and reportedly has held three meetings ( no meeting has been reported since april 2012 ) . an economic , energy , and trade working group meets regularly as part of the u.s. - georgia strategic partnership commission . at a working group meeting in december 2013 , the two sides reportedly discussed how a ustr - led high - level dialogue on trade and investment might make further progress toward a free trade agreement . 317 ( sessions ) expressing the sense of the senate on the continuing relationship between the united states and georgia . introduced on december 11 , 2013 . referred to the committee on foreign relations . declares u.s. support for georgia's territorial integrity and concern over the occupation of abkhazia and south ossetia ; encourages enhanced defense cooperation with georgia ; reaffirms support for georgia's nato membership aspirations ; commends georgia's ongoing support in afghanistan ; commends georgia for holding a peaceful and democratic presidential election ; and encourages georgia to protect the rights of the political opposition and to refrain from politically motivated arrests . 3547 ( lamar ) , consolidated appropriations act , 2014 . introduced on november 20 , 2013 . passed the house on december 2 , 2013 . passed the senate on december 12 , 2013 . house agreed to the senate amendment on january 15 , 2014 . senate concurred in the house amendment on january 16 , 2014 .