, to properly regulate them . a full nmp is not required . while this was a new provision in the rule , epa stated that it was not a new requirement ; rather , it clarified epa's existing interpretation of the agricultural stormwater exemption in cwa section 502 ( 14 ) . while there was no overall agreement among interest groups on the initial 2006 and 2008 supplementary proposals , they did concur on at least one point: epa should provide much more clarity and guidance on such key concepts as criteria or circumstances defining the need for a cafo to seek permit coverage and what terms in a nutrient management plan should be included in a permit . epa offered some examples on these points , but the public comments reflected considerable uncertainty about issues that are fundamental to implementation of the rule . epa estimated that economic impacts of the 2008 rule on cafo operators would be nearly the same as costs of the 2003 rule — $54 million annually . while approximately 25% of cafo operators subject to the 2003 rule would not need permit coverage under the 2008 revisions ( largely due to eliminating the universal "duty to apply" requirement ) , thus saving cafos approximately $14 million in reduced permitting costs , other cafos would face increases in annual administrative burden due to the new nmp requirements and costs to qualify for the agricultural stormwater exemption . state permitting authorities were projected to incur administrative costs of about $17 million annually — slightly higher than estimated in the 2003 rule . the smaller number of permitted facilities was expected to reduce costs , while implementing the new nmp requirements was expected to increase the administrative burden on states . industry groups were generally pleased that there was little change in the final rule from epa's proposals , with the exception of the "duty to apply" provision , as discussed below . questions about implementation of the agricultural stormwater exemption persist , both with states and environmental advocates , and many states continue to believe that epa underestimated the impacts of the rule on permitting authorities . a number of states and farm industry groups argued that , even with epa's extension of compliance to february 27 , 2009 , that date was unattainable . in the 2008 rule , epa declined to modify that date , based on its view that cafos already had the information that they would need to develop nmps and would not need to wait for further epa action before doing so . finally , environmental groups remained concerned about allowing cafos to self - certify that they do not discharge , as well as about epa's failure to require stringent technology for pathogen control . not surprisingly , because of the differing perspectives on epa's action , further legal challenges followed promulgation of the 2008 revised rule . agriculture industry groups ( although generally satisfied with the rule ) filed lawsuits in several federal appellate circuits , and environmental groups also challenged portions of the rule . the various petitions were consolidated in the u.s. court of appeals for the 5 th circuit .