this report will be updated as needed . for more information on aspects of public health and medical preparedness and response in general , and in the context of specific disasters or threats , see the following crs reports: crs report r40159 , public health and medical preparedness and response: issues in the 111th congress ; crs report rl33589 , the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act ( p.l . 109-417 ) : provisions and changes to preexisting law ; crs report rl33927 , selected federal compensation programs for physical injury or death ; crs report rl31719 , an overview of the u.s. public health system in the context of emergency preparedness ; crs report rl33096 , 2005 gulf coast hurricanes: the public health and medical response ; crs report rl33083 , hurricane katrina: medicaid issues ; crs report rl33738 , gulf coast hurricanes: addressing survivors' mental health and substance abuse treatment needs ; crs report rl33145 , pandemic influenza: domestic preparedness efforts ; and crs report rl34190 , pandemic influenza: an analysis of state preparedness and response plans . hurricane katrina was the greatest test of esf - 8 since the establishment of dhs and the publication of the nrp . a variety of public health and medical activities were undertaken in the hurricane response . the costs of these activities were borne by agencies at the federal , state and local levels , not - for - profit groups , businesses , health care providers , insurers , families , and individuals . private insurance covered some of the property damage , health care , and other costs resulting from the disaster . congress provided additional assistance through emergency appropriations to cover expanded federal agency activities and a portion of uninsured health care costs . some other costs , such as those to rebuild the devastated health care infrastructure in new orleans , have not been fully met at this time , either through existing assistance mechanisms or mechanisms developed since the storm . the response to hurricane katrina , and ongoing pandemic flu preparedness efforts , each offer a glimpse of the complexity of the challenge , and the adequacy of existing mechanisms to fund the costs of an esf - 8 response . both the secretaries of homeland security and hhs have statutory authority to provide additional assistance to state and local governments , and others , in response to catastrophes . following hurricane katrina , congress defined in statute the roles of the two secretaries with respect to the public health and medical response to catastrophes . numerous aspects of these relationships are yet to be sorted out , through specific planning , exercises , and other approaches . in carrying out the federal response to public health and medical emergencies and disasters , the secretary of hhs has broad authority and considerable discretion in providing assistance , but lacks a sound funding source to support the response to these unanticipated events . in contrast , the president , acting pursuant to the stafford act , has , in the disaster relief fund ( drf ) , a ready source of funds to support an immediate response to emergencies and disasters .