amtrak interprets 49 u.s.c . 24701 to require it to provide service nationwide , which it takes to mean service that spans the nation , rather than service in different parts of the nation . it required that amtrak operate without federal operating assistance after 2002 ; this was not accomplished . between 2002 and 2008 , reauthorization of amtrak was stalled by disagreement over the future of u.s. passenger rail policy . although numerous bills were introduced and various approaches were advanced , congress was unwilling to decide what kind of passenger rail policy it would be willing to fund . during that period , congress neither provided amtrak with the level of funding that amtrak requested nor required an amtrak restructuring that would be consistent with the level of funding that congress provided . as congress considered reauthorization of amtrak , the range of options for passenger rail included ( 1 ) providing higher levels of funding to support an expanded passenger rail system ; ( 2 ) providing funding for operating and maintaining the current system ; ( 3 ) focusing available resources on providing service only to those corridors that can be justified on economic grounds ; ( 4 ) reducing amtrak funding and eliminating much of the present passenger rail network ; ( 5 ) eliminating funding for amtrak and reorganizing passenger rail service in the united states . the act directs fra and amtrak to jointly develop measurement criteria , and minimum standards , to measure amtrak's performance and service quality ; directs fra to develop objective methodologies for amtrak to use in making decisions regarding adding , altering , or eliminating routes and service levels ; and directs fra to establish a standard methodology for allocating costs between amtrak and states for state - supported routes . the amtrak reform and accountability act of 1997 ( p.l . 105-134 ; 111 stat . 2570 ) authorized amtrak for the period december 1997 through december 2002 . although various combinations of those options were possible , the dot ig stated that the "status quo" option was unsustainable and that federal funding for amtrak of between $1.4 billion and $1.5 billion would be necessary to prevent cuts in service , but would not be enough to restore the system to a state - of - good - repair nor permit investment in new corridor development . in regard to amtrak reauthorization , the dot ig urged congress to consider three points: ( 1 ) without competition , amtrak has few incentives , other than the threat of budget cuts or elimination , for cost control ; ( 2 ) states , rather than amtrak , should decide where and how intercity passenger rail service is provided ; and ( 3 ) the federal government must be willing to provide adequate funding ( but not directly to amtrak ) to bring the infrastructure into a state - of - good - repair . in the 110 th congress , senator frank r. lautenberg and then senator trent lott introduced an amtrak reauthorization bill , the passenger rail investment and improvement act of 2007 ( s. 294 ) , on january 16 , 2007 .