aphis is the lead federal agency . internationally , fao has a joint response plan with the world health organization ( who ) for the current outbreak . for fy2007 , usda generally is operating at fy2006 levels , with various adjustments , under the year - long continuing resolution ( p.l . avian flu can affect the agricultural economy significantly . for 2008 , the usgs will work with other partners to continue sampling birds for hpai and coordinate with other agencies to deal with avian influenza in north america . the administration requested $36.8 million for fy2008 for terrestrial and endangered resources , up $5.3 million over fy2006 . the agency did not provide a separate figure for hpai - related investigations within the sub - activity . the house - passed bill and senate appropriations committee bill approved these increases . in developing countries , poultry farming represents a significant source of income and wealth . poultry also may be an important source of protein , causing nutritional problems if culling is extensive or prolonged . many observers have called for greater assistance to developing countries for compensation programs to encourage early reporting of outbreaks , rapid containment of the disease , and reductions in trade in diseased animals . since the recent outbreak of highly pathogenic h5n1 in asia , congress has had three hearings on avian flu in poultry . the senate agriculture committee held the most recent hearing on avian flu in poultry on may 11 , 2006 . it reviewed avian flu preparedness and the use of appropriated funds . both the house and senate agriculture committees held more general hearings on avian influenza on november 16 and 17 , 2005 , respectively . administration , industry , and academic witnesses reviewed prevention and control efforts . funding for avian flu is scattered in a number of agencies . for poultry , the primary agency is aphis , with some research funds allocated to the agricultural research service ( ars ) and the cooperative state research , education , and extension service ( csrees ) . for wild birds , the primary agencies are aphis , plus the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) and the biological research division in the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) , two interior agencies . for fy2008 , the administration is requesting $82 million for avian flu: about $77 million for aphis and $5 million for agricultural research . these are the same amounts that the administration requested for fy2007 . within aphis , the administration requests $57 million for the hpai monitoring and surveillance program , and $17 million for the lpai disease management program ( each increase is about 50% from respective fy2007 estimates ) . aphis received a $30 million increase ( +3.7% ) for all of its programs , largely because of concerns over avian flu , but the continuing resolution does not specify an avian flu allocation within aphis . usda budget documents suggest about $37 million for a new hpai monitoring and surveillance program , and $11 million for the lpai disease management program .