then there is the question of pattern . a rico prosecution requires the government to establish not only qualified predicate offenses but to prove that they were committed as part of a pattern . the supreme court has explained that a "person cannot be subjected to [rico] sanctions simply for committing two widely separate and isolated criminal offenses . instead , the term 'pattern' itself requires the showing of a relationship between the predicates and of the threat of continuing activity . it is this factor of continuity plus relationship which combines to produce a pattern. "[p]redicate acts are related if they have 'the same or similar purposes , results , participants , victims , or methods of commission , or otherwise are interrelated by distinguishing characteristics and are not isolated events.' rico continuity comes in two forms , a series of predicate offenses that has ended ( closed ended ) and a series of predicate offenses that is continuing or bears the threat of continuation ( open ended ) . the government "can satisfy the continuity prong either by ( 1 ) demonstrating a close - ended series of conduct that existed for such an extended period time that a threat of future harm is implicit , or ( 2 ) an open - ended series of conduct that , while short - lived , shows clear signs of threatening to continue into the future. the report highlights three cases , each arising at least a year apart from the others , and involving three different sets of officers . nevertheless , each is an instance where officers of area 2 under the same commanding officer are alleged to have brutalized detainees in police custody , regularly denied wrongdoing , and offered explanations that the report does not find creditable . of course , the civil rights violations are not the alleged rico predicates . the rico predicates are instead the alleged violations of section 1512 in the form of denials and fabrications to investigators , and in state proceedings and federal depositions . more numerous than the underlying civil rights violations , they benefit and suffer from the same relationship analysis . they are relatively isolated instances involving different officers , but arising out of the same environment , reflecting common means and purpose . even if a court should find the cases sufficiently related for rico purposes , the question of continuity may still prove troubling . the actionable obstructions appear to run from the depositions taken in adkins' civil case in 1987 to the depositions in wilson's civil litigation in 1988 and 1989 , and include statements in pinex's civil litigation in 1991 , testimony in the wilson police board hearing in 1992 , and possibly statements to investigators in the office of professional standards' adkins investigation that ended in december 16 , 1993 . the duration of the activity would seem sufficient , but the comparatively few instances , relatively isolated in time and circumstance , may bring into question whether the events can accurate be seen as the evidence of the continuous existence of a single enterprise . as noted earlier , federal crimes are generally subject to a 5-year statute of limitations , 18 u.s.c .