person. foreign intelligence information encompasses information about foreign nations and foreign entities useful for the conduct of u.s. foreign relations . the group endeavored to create compatibility by shaving off the difference ; it would allow section 215 orders only in conjunction with international terrorism or espionage investigations . section 215 orders are subject to limitations as to how the information they generate may be used , stored , shared , and kept or disposed of ( minimization standards ) . the group considered "the oversight and minimization requirements governing the use of nsls ... much less rigorous than those imposed in the use of [section] 215 orders. consequently , it recommended that nsls be held to section 215 standards . finally , the group made a series of recommendations with an eye to greater oversight and public disclosure . their proposals would apply to nsls , section 215 orders , trap and trace orders , section 702 orders , and orders of the kind that gave rise to the purported nsa bulk meta - data collection . it suggested as a general matter that information concerning these authorities should be available in detail to congress and the public , consistent with the need to protect classified information . more specifically , it recommended that nondisclosure orders ( gag orders ) issued to communications carriers and other recipients should be limited to cases involving human safety , maintaining congenial diplomatic relations , or similar substantial governmental concerns . the group would allow recipients to periodically disclose the number of times they had received nsls , section 215 orders , and the like . it also proposed that the government be required to issue regular public reports on the use of such orders . congress did not adopt the recommendations of the president's review group , but the usa freedom act addresses the judicially perceived nsl shortcomings in other ways . it eliminates the prospect of section 215-like bulk metadata collection under nsl authority . it revises the procedures for the issuance of nsl nondisclosure provisions and for judicial review of their issuance . finally , it augments existing reporting requirements for greater transparency . each of the nsl statutes now includes a requirement that the nsl demand be limited to specifically identified information rather than insisting on delivery of record information for all of a recipient's customers . the usa freedom act handles the judicial review of nondisclosure orders with complementary amendments to the nsl statutes and to section 3511 . nondisclosure orders under the amended nsl statutes are available only if the issuance officials notify recipients of their right to judicial review and certify that disclosure may result in a danger to national security ; in interference with a criminal , counterterrorism , or counterintelligence investigation ; in interference with diplomatic relations ; or in the endangerment of an individual's physical safety . a nondisclosure order notwithstanding , a recipient may disclose to those necessary for execution of the order , to an attorney for related legal advice , and to anyone else approved by the issuance agency . the exception is conditioned upon the recipient's notification of the issuance agency and advising those he tells of the nondisclosure requirements binding each of them .