it will not be updated . although hezbollah's july 12 , 2006 , kidnaping of two israeli soldiers initiated the conflict in southern lebanon , tensions in the region had grown since the hamas electoral victory in palestinian legislative elections in january 2006 . over the course of the next six months , israeli - palestinian relations deteriorated rapidly , culminating in renewed fighting in the gaza strip , only months after israel withdrew entirely from the territory and evacuated its settlements . most observers assert that hezbollah used the clashes between hamas and israel as a pretext and justification for its july 12 attack . the following sections provide background on how the region was transformed over six months from one of relative calm to full - scale war . palestinian elections and the hamas - led pa government on january 25 , 2006 , candidates of the "change and reform" party associated with the islamic resistance movement ( hamas ) won a majority in palestinian legislative council ( plc ) elections , defeating fatah , the prior ruling party of the plc and of palestinian authority president ( pa ) mahmoud abbas . in response , the quartet ( i.e. , the united states , european union , united nations , and russia ) stated that "there is a fundamental contradiction between armed group and militia activities and the building of a democratic state. subsequent quartet statements established clear principles for reviewing further engagement and assistance with the hamas - led palestinian government , namely "that all members of a future palestinian government must be committed to non - violence , recognition of israel , and acceptance of previous agreements and obligations , including the roadmap. president abbas endorsed hamas' platform and cabinet candidates while expressing his demand that hamas comply with the quartet's principles and support his efforts to achieve a two - state solution to the israeli - palestinian conflict . since january 2006 , hamas leaders have largely rejected and refused to discuss the quartet principles , arguing that while president abbas may decide to negotiate with israel , ultimately the palestinian people would decide what to accept . the isolation of hamas and internecine palestinian violence the electoral victory of hamas surprised many outside observers and created a series of policy challenges for the bush administration , which had supported the election process as part of its efforts to reform the palestinian authority and its broader middle east democracy promotion agenda . israel and members of the quartet took steps to limit the provision of non - humanitarian aid and financial resources to the hamas - controlled palestinian authority based on hamas leaders' refusal to accept the quartet principles . israel ceased its monthly transfers of approximately $55 million in taxes and customs revenue collected monthly on behalf of the pa , and two leading israeli banks announced plans to sever their commercial relationships with financial institutions in the west bank and gaza strip . the bush administration suspended u.s. - funded development projects in the palestinian territories and prohibited any and all u.s. persons from engaging in any unauthorized transactions with the palestinian authority because of its control by hamas , a designated terrorist entity .