examples of these topics are outlined below . given the tremendous growth in distance education programs , congress may consider whether accrediting agencies should be required to have specific standards for evaluating the quality and quantity of distance education programs in order to be recognized as an accrediting agency by ed , or whether accrediting organizations should review distance education similarly as they review traditional education programs . in addition , congress may consider adding safeguards to ensure that a student who registers for a distance education course is the same student who completes the coursework and receives the credit . the congress may consider adding a specific definition of a telecommunications course to replace the existing definition of telecommunications included in section 484 ( l ) ( 4 ) . ed has suggested that the definition should "specify that there be regular and substantive interaction between students and the instructor. the current definition does not address this interaction . an increasing number of institutions are offering multiple start dates for courses , shorter courses , and overlapping terms . this makes student aid calculation and disbursement complicated . the congress may consider switching to an alternative model for aid calculation and disbursement based on an individual student's program of instruction , which could potentially alleviate some of this difficulty . each of these changes is discussed in detail in this report . section 484b ( b ) ( 2 ) was amended to limit the amount of a grant overpayment to be repaid by a student to the amount by which the original grant overpayment exceeds 50% of the total title iv grant funds received by the student . thus , in the previous example , instead of multiplying $575 by 50% , the total grant amount of $1,650 would be multiplied by 50% to determine the amount of grant aid that would not have to be repaid . the result of this calculation is $825 . since the amount by which any grant repayment would be reduced ( $825 ) is greater than the amount owed ( $575 ) , the student would not have to repay any of the pell grant . this statutory change provides a greater benefit to the student . in some cases , students who have withdrawn from an ihe may have earned more title iv aid than they actually received . prior to the hera , if a student earned more grant or loan aid than he / she received , an ihe was required to make ( or offer ) a post - withdrawal disbursement to the student within 30 days of the date the ihe determined the student withdrew . the hera added additional requirements that ihes must follow in making this disbursement . prior to making a post - withdrawal disbursement of loan funds to a student who had withdrawn , the ihe must contact the student , explain the repayment obligations associated with accepting the funds , and confirm that the loan funds are still needed by the student . the result of this contact and the final determination regarding the post - withdrawal disbursement must be documented in the student's file .