medicaid and the va provide models for a few of these alternatives . if , for example , congress' primary objective is to lower the overall cost of the program , a set of ceiling prices may be sufficient to achieve such an objective . if , on the other hand , the primary purpose of such actions would be to lower overall costs , while minimizing the number of parties who are negatively affected by policy , then mandated rebates could be appropriate . however , none of those approaches directly impact the premiums drug plans might charge or co - payments that beneficiaries face at the pharmacy ; rather , indirect effects are possible . if congress' primary objective is to impact those amounts , an explicit policy targeted at cost sharing or premiums could ensure those objectives are met . the following section identifies a few alternative approaches that congress may consider . one way in which lower drug prices might translate into lower overall costs is through a medicare ceiling price . ceiling prices could be established to resemble medicaid's federal upper limits , or the federal supply schedule prices . there are however , both administrative , and other complications to establishing such a system . all others are subject to prior authorization . depending on the policy outcome the congress wishes to achieve by establishing the authority for the secretary to negotiate drug prices , there are a number of alternative ways to go about doing so . without combining such a policy with a national medicare formulary — and the threat of excluding high priced drugs from such a formulary — cms may not be able to negotiate adequately favorable ceiling prices . also , a ceiling price policy does not necessarily translate into lower costs at the pharmacy counter for beneficiaries , nor does it translate into lower purchasing prices for pharmacies . other policies could be combined with ceiling prices to ensure lower prices for beneficiaries or pharmacies . finally , ceiling prices that reduce reimbursements significantly could have indirect effects on beneficiary access to future innovative drug products , and even economic impacts on other payers and providers . for example , manufacturers may lose profits , which may adversely affect pharmaceutical research and development , as well as increase costs for non - medicare consumers . pharmaceutical manufacturers have argued that lower profits impede their ability to research and develop new disease treatments . this argument has been both supported and refuted by many academics . the manufacturers may also choose to recoup the lost profits by increasing the drug prices for other consumers . such a policy would need to be carefully crafted to minimize unintended consequences . another way of lowering out - of - pocket payments for beneficiaries might be to mandate larger rebates from manufacturers to part d drug plans . this system could resemble medicaid's rebate system . larger rebates would lower part d drug plans' net costs of drugs for beneficiaries . assuming market competition works in the part d program , lower net costs could be passed onto beneficiaries in the form of lower premiums , and perhaps also lower copayments . alternatively , manufacturers could provide these rebates directly to the cms .