this report will be updated . many of the methods are used together . the federal government has a track record of active involvement in the determination of drug prices through the experience of the department of veterans affairs in obtaining discounts for va beneficiaries and through the medicaid program in obtaining rebates from pharmaceutical manufacturers for states . if the secretary were to engage in activities that affect drug prices on behalf of medicare part d beneficiaries , the implications could be wide - ranging and potentially quite significant . the direct effects on beneficiaries , drug companies , wholesalers , pharmacy benefit managers are potentially great , but the long - term and secondary effects on the overall population and the industry may also be significant and are important to consider . on january 12 , 2007 , the house passed h.r . 4 , the medicare prescription drug price negotiation act of 2007 . this bill would amend the social security act by ( 1 ) striking section 1860d — 11 ( i ) ( relating to noninterference ) , ( 2 ) add language that would require the secretary of hhs to negotiate prescription drug prices , and ( 3 ) maintain the prohibition against the establishment of a formulary by the secretary while ( 4 ) allowing prescription drug plans to obtain discounts or price reductions below those negotiated by the secretary . the bill would also require the secretary to submit a report "on negotiations conducted by the secretary to achieve lower prices for medicare beneficiaries , and the prices and price discounts achieved by the secretary as a result of such negotiations" to the committees on ways and means , energy and commerce , and oversight and government reform of the house of representatives and the committee on finance of the senate beginning no later than june 1 , 2007 , and every six months thereafter . the bill would take effect on the date of enactment and would first apply to negotiations and prices for plan years beginning on january 1 , 2008 . cbo has scored the bill as having "a negligible effect on federal spending. cbo anticipates that "the secretary would be unable to negotiate prices across the broad range of covered part d drugs that are more favorable than those obtained by pdps under current law. specifically , the absence of the authority to establish a formulary would limit the secretary's ability to influence the outcome of negotiations , as bargaining leverage would be limited . cms actuaries have also concluded that h.r . 4 would not produce lower drug prices or any additional savings . on april 11 , 2007 , the senate finance committee passed an amended version of s. 3 that repeals the noninterference provision but does not mandate that the secretary negotiate for lower prescription drug prices . the bill also includes additional provisions to increase transparency in the part d program by making some data available to congressional support agencies and to prioritize comparative effectiveness research on drugs .