congress has addressed the regulations . a provision of the omnibus appropriations bill of 2009 ( h.r . 1105 ) would authorize the secretary of the interior to withdraw or reissue the regulation "without regard to any provision of statute or regulation. this means that no rulemaking steps would be required , such as notice and comment periods . the bill would allow the previous regulations to return to effect . a proposed amendment ( s.amdt . 599 ) would require the secretaries to follow full rulemaking procedures if they withdrew or re - promulgated the regulations , and require a comment period of at least 60 days . the decision to list the species under the endangered species act ( esa ; 16 u.s.c . §§ 1531 et seq. ) highlights the intersection of two significant issues currently before congress — climate change and species protection . listing decisions must rest solely on the best available scientific understanding of the species . for this species , a major threat is loss of its primary habitat on the arctic sea ice , an ecosystem that is changing rapidly . the polar bear , ursus maritimus , is the largest terrestrial carnivore and a top predator , inhabiting circumpolar arctic regions wherever sea ice is present for a substantial part of the year . polar bears are well adapted to the arctic , where ice thickness can increase or decrease rapidly as well as differ significantly from year to year and between regions . nineteen known or identified populations of polar bears are estimated to total 20,000 to 25,000 animals ( figure 1 ) . two of these populations occur within u.s. jurisdiction — the southern beaufort sea population ( shared about equally with canada ) , estimated at 1,526 animals ; and the chukchi / bering seas population ( shared with russia ) , estimated at about 2,000 animals . robust data on polar bear populations are difficult to obtain . globally , less than one - third of the world's 19 polar bear populations are known to be declining , and more than one - third are increasing or stable . in the remaining third , data are insufficient to estimate population trends and their status has not been assessed . in the united states , the polar bear population shared with canada in the southern beaufort sea may be starting to decline . in the chukchi sea population , shared with the russia , over - harvest on the russian side is considered a problem . elsewhere , studies suggest that polar bear numbers are declining in western hudson bay ; a multi - year study , following local reports of more bears being seen in the northern parts of the population range , will determine if the observed decline is the result of a change in distribution or an actual reduction in abundance . simulations suggest that polar bear populations are also declining in baffin bay , kane basin , and norwegian bay . the status of polar bears in the central arctic basin — where there are transient bears that normally reside in other regional populations — is unknown .