like h.r . 3094 , the bill also contains provisions requiring the administration to submit annually a list of proposals for funding , which must be consistent with certain criteria and seven initiatives , and allows the secretary of the interior to accept donations for projects and programs . house and senate committees have held hearings on these legislative proposals . one issue of discussion has been the role of philanthropic , corporate , foundation , and other private donors in raising money for the parks . some observers believe that non - federal funding has been successful in expanding and enhancing a variety of important park programs and is necessary to supplement a shortfall in federal appropriations . other observers are concerned that non - federal funding will lead to commercialization of national parks and excessive private influence over park operations . related issues of debate at the hearings included whether to first seek private contributions and then provide a federal match , whether to provide federal funding without a private matching requirement , and whether to allow non - cash contributions . other issues of discussion were how to finance the centennial fund ; the role of the nps and congress in determining projects eligible for funding ; and which , if any , categories of funding ( eg , natural resource protection ) to specify in legislation . in furtherance of the third component of the administration's initiative , the fy2008 appropriations law ( p.l . 110-161 ) included $24.6 million to match private donations . on april 24 , 2008 , the nps released a list of 110 projects that would be eligible to receive this funding , together with $26.9 million in partnership contributions . the appropriations committees and the administration have expressed that the fy2008 appropriation is interim funding to initiate the program , and an expectation that legislation will be enacted to create a ten year program . the administration has not requested an annual appropriation for this matching program , but rather seeks $100.0 million per year in mandatory funding . the fy2009 budget resolution ( s.con.res . 70 ) contains a deficit - neutral reserve fund for the national park centennial fund . it would allow the chairman of the house committee on the budget to make adjustments to the amounts in the budget resolution to accommodate legislation establishing the centennial fund , so long as that legislation were deficit neutral . ( by [author name scrubbed] ) the nps has maintenance responsibility for buildings , trails , recreation sites , and other infrastructure . there is debate over the levels of funds to maintain this infrastructure , whether to use funds from other programs , and how to balance the maintenance of the existing infrastructure with the acquisition of new assets . congress continues to focus on the agency's deferred maintenance , often called the maintenance backlog — essentially maintenance that was not done when scheduled or planned . doi estimates deferred maintenance for the nps for fy2007 , based on varying assumptions , at between $6.12 billion and $13.11 billion with a mid - range figure of $9.61 billion .