in addition , h.r . 6111 prevents the president's provider tax proposal from being implemented via administrative action and extends expanded tma requirements through june 30 , 2007 . 6111 also addressed medicaid issues that were not part of the president's budget , including technical corrections to the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-171 ) and fy2007 dsh allotments for hawaii and tennessee . these estimates are summarized in table 1 . crs staff contact information by medicaid and schip topic area is provided in table 2 , at the end of the report . on march 9 , 2006 , the senate budget committee reported a budget resolution , s.con.res . 83 , which was subsequently amended and passed by the senate on march 16 . the resolution did not include reconciliation instructions for the senate finance committee , which has jurisdiction over medicaid and schip . it did include a deficit - neutral reserve fund for the uninsured , and a march 8 senate budget committee document indicates that it included funding for four of the president's medicaid and schip proposals: tma extension ( $523 million over five years ) ; vaccines for children proposal allowing health departments to provide vaccines ( $715 million ) ; cover the kids initiative ( $874 million ) ; and schip funding boost in 2007 and 2008 ( $225 million ) . on march 29 , 2006 , the house budget committee reported its own budget resolution , h.con.res . 376 , which was subsequently amended and passed by the house on may 18 . the resolution did not include reconciliation instructions for the house energy and commerce committee , which has jurisdiction over medicaid and schip . the report accompanying the resolution as reported by the house budget committee ( h.rept . 109-402 ) indicates that spending levels for medicaid and schip were based on cbo's baseline projections under current law and policies , and that no reduction in medicaid was assumed . although no agreement was reached by the house and senate on a fy2007 budget resolution , current law spending for medicaid and schip is unaffected . as entitlement programs , their spending levels are based on the underlying benefit and eligibility criteria established in law ( in the case of schip , these criteria include a statutory annual funding cap ) . however , legislation that would increase medicaid or schip spending above current law could encounter procedural roadblocks in the house or senate if funding is not assumed in a budget resolution or in a "deeming resolution. the annual appropriations process also provides an opportunity for congress to place limitations on the availability of federal funds for specified medicaid and schip activities . for example , when the house reported its proposal for fy2007 labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies ( l - hhs - ed ) appropriations on june 20 , 2006 ( h.r . 109-515 ) , it included a provision that would prohibit hhs from using any of the funds in its fy2007 budget to implement the president's proposal to phase down or reduce provider taxes below 6% through administrative action .