no specific amount was authorized . the fy2003 supplemental ( p.l . 108-11 ) contained no specific earmarks for women's programs in afghanistan . the afghan women and children relief act of 2001 ( p.l . 107-81 ) , signed into law on december 12 , 2001 , authorized the provision of educational and health care assistance to the women and children of afghanistan . the afghanistan freedom support act of 2002 ( p.l . 107-327 ) authorized $15 million for the afghan ministry of women's affairs . afghanistan receives the third - highest share of u.s. foreign aid in fy2006 . it was the leading recipient in fy2005 , and ranked fourth in fy2004 . usaid partners have focused particularly on promoting women's participation in the political process at the local and national levels . the state department's bureau of population , refugees , and migration ( prm ) provides support to afghan refugees , internally displaced persons ( idps ) , returnees and other vulnerable members of the population through funds appropriated to the migration and refugee assistance ( mra ) account . its implementing partners include the u.n. high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) , the international committee of the red cross ( icrc ) , the international federation of the red cross and red crescent societies ( ifrc ) , the international organization for migration ( iom ) , other u.n. agencies , and ngos . supporting vulnerable women is one of prm's core goals , and prm funds several programs for afghan women refugees , idps , and returnees , including literacy training , income generation , gender - based violence prevention , and mother - child health care . the majority of prm's assistance funding does not specifically target women , although many women are beneficiaries . since the u.s. - led invasion of iraq in 2003 , the bush administration has stated its interest in ensuring that iraqi women are involved in rebuilding and reconstruction efforts in iraq . for the same reasons mentioned in the preceding section on afghanistan , presenting an exhaustive list of programs and funding for iraqi women is difficult . several programs have been launched specifically focused on women and are detailed below . because of increasing violence in iraq , however , it is difficult to assess the extent to which these programs have been sustained . this section lists congressional funding of iraqi women's programs since 2003 . it should be noted that , while relatively little funding has been dedicated exclusively to iraqi women , the overall level of spending in iraq has been much higher than in afghanistan , and much of this funding implicitly includes women . no specific earmarks for women's programs have been passed in the current congress . the foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations act , 2006 ( h.r . 109-102 ) , provides $28 million each to the international republican institute and the national democratic institute to fund governance and rule of law programs in iraq .