, enforced ) by the state itself . it is , thus , apparent that , since at least 1980 , "regulated by state law" has been a prong of the judicially created state action doctrine in antitrust law , a doctrine which was developing simultaneously with mccarran - ferguson case law . in paul v. virginia ( 75 u.s. ( 8 wall. ) 168 ( 1868 ) ) , the supreme court ruled that "[i]ssuing a policy of insurance is not a transaction of [interstate] commerce. united states v. south - eastern underwriters ass ' n. ( 322 u.s. 533 ( 1944 ) ) held that the federal antitrust laws were applicable to an insurance association's interstate activities in restraint of trade . although the 1944 court did not specifically overrule its prior determination , the case was viewed as a reversal of 75 years of precedent and practice , and created significant apprehension about the continued viability of state insurance regulation and taxation of insurance premiums . congress' response was the 1945 mccarran - ferguson act . in addition to preserving the states' ability to tax insurance premiums , mccarran - ferguson prohibits application of the federal antitrust laws and similar provisions in the federal trade commission act , as well as most other federal statutes , to the "business of insurance" to the extent that such business is regulated by state law — except that the antitrust laws are applicable if it is determined that an insurance practice amounts to a boycott . inasmuch as "[t]he primary purpose of the mccarran - ferguson act was to preserve state regulation of the activities of insurance companies since it was the power of the states to regulate and tax insurance companies that was threatened after ... south - eastern underwriters ...," we first answer the questions , "what is insurance ? ; and , "is it defined pursuant to state or federal law ? then , given that the statute addresses itself to the "business of insurance," this report sets out some judicial opinions about just what does — and does not — constitute the "business of insurance," as well as state regulation of such business , and the scope of mccarran's "boycott" exception . finally , it will note some mccarran - related legislation introduced in the 110 th and 109 th congresses , and discuss , briefly , the possible consequences of the measures , especially in light of the non - statutory state - action doctrine in antitrust law . in response to the securities and exchange commission's insistence that insurers issuing variable annuity contracts register them as securities under the federal securities laws , the insurers asserted that mccarran - ferguson shielded them from federal regulation , but that even if it did not , they qualified for the insurance exemptions from the federal securities laws . the supreme court , reversing lower court decisions , held that neither state regulation of variable annuities nor their issuance by insurers qualified the annuities as "insurance. accordingly , neither insurers nor state regulators could ( 1 ) invoke mccarran - ferguson as a shield against federal regulation of variable annuities or ( 2 ) qualify as beneficiaries of the insurance exclusions in the federal securities laws .