however , the language included in the p.l . 3756 by representative schiff ) . cbo estimated that the changes will shift some costs to the federal foster care program—increasing federal title iv - e foster care spending by $350 million over five years ( fy2006-fy2010 ) and $940 million over 10 years ( fy2006-fy2015 ) . the statutory language appropriates $100 million for these grants , out of which $10 million is available for each of the two new cip grants in each of fy2006-fy2010 . the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-171 ) requires ( as a condition of eligibility for funding under the child welfare services program , title iv - b , subpart 1 of the social security act ) that a state demonstrate "substantial , ongoing , and meaningful collaboration" with state courts in developing and implementing the state plan for child welfare services , the state plan for the promoting safe and stable families program ( title iv - b , subpart 2 of the social security act ) , the state adoption assistance and foster care plan ( under title iv - e of the social security act ) , and any program improvement plan that may be required . this provision was not initially included in either the house or senate versions of the reconciliation legislation , but was proposed by the bipartisan pew commission on children in foster care in its may 2004 report . as initially passed , the house reconciliation bill ( h.r . 4241 ) would have extended ( through fy2010 ) hhs authority to grant child welfare waivers , would have removed the limit on the total number of demonstration programs hhs may approve in any given year ( set at 10 by current law ) and would have made other changes related to the approval of waiver projects and availability of information about the projects . these provisions were not in the senate reconciliation legislation nor the conference agreement , and were thus not a part of the deficit reduction act as enacted ( p.l . 4241 would have authorized the department of education to repay up to $5,000 in student loan debt if an individual has worked full - time for five years in one of several "areas of national need"—defined to include child welfare workers . this provision was not in the senate reconciliation legislation and was not included in the enacted deficit reduction act of 2005 . both the house and senate reconciliation bills ( using slightly different language ) would have amended the higher education act to clarify that youth in foster care ( or formerly in foster care ) on his / her 18 th birthday are included in the definition of "independent student. ( the definition is used for purposes of determining eligibility for federal student financial aid. ) this clarifying change was not included in the deficit reduction act as it was finally enacted . the higher education act authorizes a range of grant programs , collectively called the federal trio programs .