not applicable . awards and settlements of $2,500 or less are paid out of appropriations available to the agency whose employee committed the tort . awards and settlements in excess of $2,500 are paid out of general revenues . in response to catastrophes , the president can provide funding to both state and local governments , and to individuals , to assist them in response and recovery . assistance is provided under the authority of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( the stafford act ) , upon a presidential declaration of an emergency ( providing a lower level of assistance ) or a major disaster ( providing a higher level of assistance ) . pursuant to a stafford act emergency or major disaster declaration , federal assistance may be provided to assist individuals either in a congregate setting through state and local governments , or directly to individuals , in covering the costs of health care for related injuries or illnesses . additionally , if requested specifically by the governor , a counseling program may also be made available under a presidential declaration . stafford act assistance programs are administered by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) in the department of homeland security ( dhs ) . individual eligibility is strictly based on residence in an area subject to a presidential emergency or major disaster declaration , pursuant to the stafford act . no restrictions . pursuant to section 408 of the stafford act , the fema individuals and households program ( ihp ) provides cash assistance for uninsured , disaster - related medical , dental , and funeral expenses . the amount available is the same for an individual or a household , and is capped in statute , with an annual adjustment based on the consumer price index . the current ceiling ( for fy2009 ) is $30,300 . recipients might have to use the funds to meet other needs concurrently , such as rent and other costs of living . fema evaluates individual eligibility , and whether claimed medical , dental and funeral costs are disaster - related , on a case - by - case basis . section 416 of the stafford act authorizes the president , pursuant to a major disaster declaration , to provide financial assistance to state and qualified tribal mental health agencies for professional counseling services , or training of disaster workers , to relieve disaster victims' mental health problems caused or aggravated by the disaster or its aftermath . fema and the substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa , in hhs ) jointly administer the crisis counseling assistance and training program ( ccp ) . pursuant to stafford act sections 403 ( for a major disaster declaration ) and 502 ( for an emergency declaration ) , states may receive federal assistance in providing for victims' health care needs , but such assistance is not provided directly to individuals . not applicable . activities undertaken under authority of the stafford act are funded through appropriations to the disaster relief fund ( drf ) , administered by fema . the drf is a no - year account in which appropriated funds remain available until expended .