bradbury , california 4 . only once has such piece of legislation become law . the postal accountability and enhancement act of 2006 ( p.l . 109-435 ; 120 stat . 3261 ) required usps to assign "a single unified zip code to serve , as nearly as practicable , each of the following communities: 1 . auburn township , ohio 2 . hanahan , south carolina 3 . discovery bay , california" those zip codes are currently active , according to usps . finally , usps advises that a constituent should not substitute the preferred city name before the zip code in an address line , without receiving usps approval to do so . usps mail processing equipment has internal checks that compare the zip code with the proper city name ; if the two do not match , default sequences come into play , and mail very likely will be directed to the wrong delivery post office , certainly causing delay and possibly causing the mail to be returned as undeliverable . the post office department ( now the u.s . postal service ) began dividing large cities into delivery zones in 1943 , inserting two digits between the city and the state in the lower address line . in 1963 , the whole country was divided into five - digit postal delivery codes — termed zip codes by the post office . these codes corresponded to the post offices where final sorting of mail was done and from which letter carriers were dispatched to make deliveries . the term zip code , originally trademarked and always capitalized , was an acronym for "zoning improvement plan. mass mailers were first required to use zip codes in 1967 , and today their use is ubiquitous . almost all mail is sorted by machines , and the basis for this sorting is a zip code . zip codes have expanded through the years to 9 digits ( zip+4 ) in 1983 and to 11 digits in 1991 . most customers know only their five - digit zip codes . the first number in the zip code represents a general geographic area of the nation — moving from a "0" for places in the east to a "9" for locations in the west . the second and third numbers indicate regions of the united states , while the fourth and fifth digits route the mail to specific post offices . for example , the zip code for alturas , the county seat of modoc county in the northeastern corner of california , is 96101 . the 9 directs the mail to the west . the 61 directs mail to the processing facility in reno , nv , which is the distribution point for some california post offices such as alturas , cedarville ( 96104 ) , fort bidwell ( 96112 ) , and likely ( 96116 ) . reno is also the processing facility for zip codes in nevada beginning with 894 , 895 , and 897 . the four final zip code numbers , which were added in 1983 "allow mail to be sorted to a specific group of streets or to a high - rise building.