that is a growing and increasing concern for us. ibm has reported that , during the first half of 2005 , criminal - driven computer security attacks increased by 50 percent , with government agencies and industries in the united states targeted most frequently . cybercrime is now a major criminal activity , and it may become increasingly difficult to separate some forms of cybercrime from suspected terrorist activities . for example , the proliferation and use of commercial products with unbreakable cryptography could seriously undermine the ability of law enforcement to perform critical missions such as protecting against threats posed by terrorists , organized crime , and foreign intelligence agents . the following bills are related to improving national computer security , or the prevention of cybercrime: h.r . should dod collaborate more closely with dhs for new technologies to strengthen the computer security of civilian agencies and infrastructure ? trends for cybercrime indicate that computer attacks could increase in number , speed , and sophistication . will future unknown computer vulnerabilities and sophisticated attacks allow terrorist to launch an effective cyberattack that might overwhelm the ability of civilian agencies to respond effectively ? could a new approach to computer security reduce vulnerabilities ? an example of a new approach to improve computer security for computer systems and the internet might include development and refinement of quantum methods for unbreakable cryptography . however , new approaches to computer security could also lead to the emergence of new threats directed against new vulnerabilities . 1 , "implementing the 9 / 11 commission recommendations act of 2007," was referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs on january 9 , 2007 . the dhs secretary shall evaluate and annually prioritize all pending applications for covered grants based upon the degree to which they would lessen the threat to the critical infrastructure , including , but not limited to , cyber threats . evaluation and prioritization shall be based upon the risk assessment by the office of intelligence analysis and the office of infrastructure protection of the threats of terrorism against the united states . security experts have reportedly stated that , although u.s. military networks are relatively secure , many of those networks remain highly dependent on the civilian communications infrastructure . under this interim rule , government contracting officers must include additional cybersecurity rules in their acquisition planning , which will require vendors to improve computer security for the it products and services they supply to the federal government . experts now believe that terrorist collaborate with organized crime networks in the middle east for international smuggling of arms and illegal drugs . criminal drug traffickers can provide terrorists with access to computer specialists with high - level technical skills . what are the pro's and con's of linking counterterrorism efforts more closely to the efforts of agencies that counter drug trafficking ? should the counterterrorism efforts be linked more closely with international efforts to prevent cybercrime ? what are effective ways to encourage more international cooperation for identifying which activities should be labeled as cybercrime , and for punishing those who operate as cybercriminals ?