rel . brown v. watt , involved a variety of challenges to the 1980-1985 program and established the standard for review for legal challenges to five - year programs . when reviewing "findings of ascertainable fact made by the secretary," the court required the secretary's decisions to be supported by "substantial evidence" as per the language of section 23 ( c ) ( 6 ) of the ocsla . however , the court noted that many of the decisions that inform the five - year program involve policy determinations , and held that such determinations should be subject to a less searching standard . the court summarized this review standard for challenges to five - year programs: when reviewing findings of ascertainable fact made by the secretary , the substantial evidence test guides our inquiry . when reviewing the policy judgments made by the secretary , including those predictive and difficult judgmental calls the secretary is called upon to make , we will subject them to searching scrutiny to ensure that they are neither arbitrary nor irrational — in other words , we must determine whether "the decision is based on a consideration of the relevant factors and whether there has been a clear error of judgment. the court also noted that statutory interpretation by the agency would be subject to stricter scrutiny than either fact or policy judgments because "the interpretation of statutes is a matter which ultimately lies in the province of the judiciary. based on these standards the court vacated a number of the secretary's findings in the 1980-1985 five - year program and remanded to the secretary for revision of the program . although the reference to "arbitrary" administrative decisionmaking is reminiscent of the review standard for challenges to agency action under the administrative procedure act ( apa ) , the court explained in a footnote that the agency's decisions to reject certain state recommendations before promulgating the five - year program were not subject to apa review . the court noted the following: first , the outer continental shelf lands act itself contains provisions requiring the secretary to respond to state comments and to explain and articulate his decision ... we see no reason to engraft other provisions onto those found in this comprehensive statute ... second , the apa itself exempts from its reach "matters relating to agency management or personnel or to public property , loans , grants , benefits , or contracts. since the leasing program related to agency management of the ocs , which is undoubtedly public property ... the apa itself would appear to take the leasing program outside its scope . the standards for review outlined in watt have been upheld in subsequent litigation related to the five - year program . litigation under the ocsla has also challenged actions taken during the leasing phase . as described above , the ocsla authorizes states to submit comments during the notice of lease sale stage and directs the secretary to accept a state's recommendations if they "provide for a reasonable balance between the national interest and the well - being of the citizens of the affected state.