its annual allocation is comparable to that of the arc . for fy2006 , however , the congress appropriated $49.5 million for denali commission activities , which was $17 million less than appropriated for fy2005 . for fy2007 , the administration requested $2.5 million in support of the denali commission . the house approved $7.5 for commission activities , while the senate appropriations committee has recommended a funding level of $50 million . table 10 lists communities by classification as distressed counties . a community may successfully appeal its non - distress designation if it can demonstrate that it meets a set of surrogate standard criteria when a plus / minus 3% formula is applied to the criteria . table 11 lists communities that do not meet the 2006 surrogate standard criteria for distressed communities , but do meet the criteria when a plus / minus 3% formula is applied . to successfully appeal , a community must meet two of the three surrogate standard criteria to be classified as distressed under the plus / minus 3% formula change: criterion 1: average market income from unemployment insurance , covered employment , and fishing is less than $15,318 , rather than $14,872 ( $14,872 x 1.03 = $15,318 ) . criterion 2: more than 67% of residents earn less than $14,872 , rather than more than 70% of residents ( 70% — 3% = 67% ) . it required the secretary of commerce to publish the work plan in the federal register and to allow for a 30-day public comment period . within 30 days after the public comment period , the federal co - chair of the commission may approve , disapprove , or partially approve the work plan . when disapproving or partially approving a work plan , the federal co - chair must specify the reasons for disapproval and include recommendations for revisions that would result in its approval . if a work plan is not approved or only partially approved , the plan must be submitted to the commission for review and revision , if applicable . as noted earlier , the commission is charged with promoting rural development , including promoting infrastructure improvements in rural areas , such as improvements in power generation and transmission facilities , telecommunications , and water and sewer facilities . the commission is also charged with providing job training and repairing or replacing , as appropriate , bulk fuel tanks . the commission defines a "rural area" as any community that lacks adequate public infrastructure ; is so remote as to impose additional cost on persons and businesses importing and exporting products , traveling to , and communicating with , urban centers ; or is a one - industry village or community located near a natural resource with a small population and a low - wage labor pool . the act did not identify specific criteria to be used in determining eligibility for assistance ; instead it left that task for the commission . it did include language that requires the commission to provide job training and other economic development services to residents of distressed rural communities and noted that many of these areas have unemployment rates in excess of 50% .