no one was killed . a growing body of information about central figures in the february 1993 bombing of the world trade center in new york , particularly the reputed key bomb maker ramzi ahmad yusuf , suggests possible al qaeda involvement . as noted above , abd al - rahman was convicted for plots related to this attack . al qaeda claimed responsibility for arming somali factions who battled u.s. forces there in october 1993 , and who killed 18 u.s. special operations forces in mogadishu in october 1993 . in june 1995 , in ethiopia , members of al qaeda allegedly aided the egyptian militant islamic group in a nearly successful assassination attempt against the visiting mubarak . the four saudi nationals who confessed to a november 1995 bombing of a u.s. military advisory facility in riyadh , saudi arabia claimed on saudi television to have been inspired by bin laden and other radical islamist leaders . five americans were killed in that attack . the september 11 commission report indicated that al qaeda might have had a hand in the june 1996 bombing of the khobar towers complex near dhahran , saudi arabia . however , then director of the fbi louis freeh previously attributed that attack primarily to saudi shiite dissidents working with iranian agents . nineteen u.s. airmen were killed . al qaeda allegedly was responsible for the august 1998 bombings of u.s. embassies in kenya and tanzania , which killed about 300 . on august 20 , 1998 , the united states launched a cruise missile strike against bin laden's training camps in afghanistan , reportedly missing him by a few hours . in december 1999 , u.s. and jordanian authorities separately thwarted related al qaeda plots against religious sites in jordan and apparently against the los angeles international airport . in october 2000 , al qaeda activists attacked the u.s.s . cole in a ship - borne suicide bombing while the cole was docked the harbor of aden , yemen . the ship was damaged and 17 sailors were killed . after the 1998 embassy bombings , the clinton administration began to exert pressure on al qaeda's host , the taliban regime of afghanistan . on august 20 , 1998 , two weeks after those attacks , the united states launched cruise missile strikes against an al qaeda camp in an attempt to hit bin laden , but the strike apparently missed him by a few hours . in july 1999 , president clinton imposed a ban on u.s. trade with taliban - controlled afghanistan and froze taliban assets in the united states . on december 19 , 2000 , u.n. security council resolution 1333 banned any arms shipments or provision of military advice to the taliban . the clinton administration also pursued a number of covert operations against bin laden during 1999-2000 , and the bush administration considered some new options prior to september 11 , including arming anti - taliban opposition groups . the september 11 attacks instilled greater urgency in the u.s. effort against al qaeda .