the pjd . like many islamist groups across theglobe , it is difficult to discern what the pjd's true goals and objectives are over the long term . ( 18 ) some believe that,although the party has agreed to work within the current system , it remains committed to establishingan islamic state in morocco with islamic law , or sharia , as the basis for legislation . - funded seminars or training programs . moreover , egyptian law prohibits even legalorganizations or parties from accepting financial support from "foreign entities. nevertheless , theunited states has not outrightly rejected having any contact with brotherhood members . accordingto the u.s. state department , the united states will not deal directly with the brotherhood since itis banned under egyptian law , but brotherhood members will not be barred from meetings betweenu.s . officials and parliament members . according to j. scott carpenter , deputy assistant secretaryof state for near east affairs at the u.s. state department , "there is recognition that there are anumber of folks who have been elected to parliament , and they are there . this is an issue foregyptian society to deal with it , it's not something for us necessarily to involve ourselves with. ( 53 ) given these barriers , u.s. officials must be cautious in broaching the islamist issue in egypt.still , according to some observers , the possibility for informal dialogue between the united statesand some egyptian islamists exists . the al wasat organization , whose legal status is precarioussince it is an aspirant political party that has been unsuccessful in its registration attempts ( rather thanan outright illegal organization like the muslim brotherhood ) , could be more amenable to futureparticipation in u.s. - government sponsored democracy training programs . however , u.s. policymakers would need to be careful about appearing to favor any one group in egyptian politics . in june2006 , the egyptian government accused the local head of the international republican institute's ( iri ) egypt program of meddling in egypt's internal affairs and demanded that the organizationtemporarily halt its activities there . u.s. officials are continually pressing islamists on their views on issues of importance to u.s.policy in the region . with 88 independent members of parliament sympathetic to the muslimbrotherhood , mb politicians operate openly and are readily accessible . according to j. scottcarpenter , deputy assistant secretary of state for near east affairs at the u.s. state department,"on specific things like protection of minorities and protection of women's rights , that is somethingthat in our discussions with islamists parties we have to continue asking them: what is yourposition ? do you protect women's rights ? what about the coptic ( christian ) community in egypt ? it is important that we retain our clarity even as these groups struggle to come to a conclusion withinthe gray zones. ( 54 ) some analysts question whether islamists in egypt would welcome u.s. dialogue in the firstplace due to their deep suspicion of western intentions and foreign meddling . observers note thatmany muslim brotherhood members are opposed to u.s. policy in the middle east and might wantto steer clear of any appearance of cooperation in politics .