figure 1 . reit assets by type , december 31 , 2005 source: national association of reits . there are two basic types of reits: equity and mortgage . equity reits develop , own , andoperate income - producing real estate and provide tenant services , whereas mortgage reits lendmoney to real estate owners and operators or acquire loans or mortgage - backed securities . a few hybrid reits operate in both modes . the investment characteristics of the two typesdiffer: mortgage reits are highly sensitive to interest rates because their profits depend on thespread between the income from their loans and other debt assets and their own cost of funds . asinterest rates have risen since 2004 , the returns on investment in ( and share prices of ) mortgagereits have fallen sharply . equity reits , on the other hand , are affected by a range of economic fundamentals besidesinterest rates . for example , reits that invest in hotels are sensitive to corporate profits and otherfactors that affect business travel . similarly , returns on investment in hospitals , office buildings , andshopping malls depend on a host of sector - specific , uncorrelated trends . reits may be either private or publicly held companies . ( 2 ) shares of publicly held reitsare traded on the stock markets like shares of any other corporation . as of the end of february 2006,there were 202 reits listed on the stock exchanges , with a total market value of $368 billion . ( ofthe 202 , 156 were equity reits , 40 were mortgage reits , and the remaining 6 were hybrids . market capitalization of the classes was $335 billion , $27 billion , and $5 billion , respectively. ) ( 3 ) table 1 summarizes thegrowth of the publicly traded reit market since 1975 . table 1 . number and market capitalization of publicly tradedreits , 1975-2005 source: national association of reits . the thrift savings plan ( tsp ) is a tax - deferred retirement savings vehicle for federalworkers , akin to "401 ( k ) " plans for private sector employees . although available to all federalemployees , it is particularly important to those covered by the federal employees retirement system ( fers ) , whose contributions are partially matched by their federal agency . at present , the tsp hasfive investment vehicles , three of which are broad stock indexes . one of the stock funds tracks thes&p 500 index of major u.s. - listed companies ( the c fund ) . the i fund tracks international stocksand the s fund invests in stocks not included in the s&p 500 , including shares of small and mid - sizecompanies . the remaining two funds invest in bonds ( the f fund ) and government securities ( theg fund ) . in addition , the tsp has five automatic "lifecycle" arrangements of investing among the fivevehicles , each geared toward a projected time frame over which accounts will remain in the tsp . at this time , the tsp does not allow for investment in individual stocks , nor in funds made up ofparticular economic sectors or industries ( such as biotech , or aeronautics ) .