the operation was ordered by the east timor government . alkatiri stepped down in june as a result . former prime minister alkatiri was accused by his opponents of forming "hit squads," which he denied . a u.n. investigation found him to have failed "to use his firm authority to denounce the transfer of security sector weapons to civilians. former interior minister rogerio lobato was sentenced to seven years imprisonment for authorizing the transfer of weapons to pro - fretilin supporters and a fretilin - linked hit squad . lobato reportedly had a "frosty" relationship with gusmao and had bought large quantities of arms for the police and had established two paramilitary police units . one of the leaders of the violent protests of march 2006 , which resulted in the mutiny of soldiers from western districts , was major alfredo reinado . reinado's support base was drawn from the west . reinado and 50 of his supporters escaped from prison in august 2006 . australian forces failed to capture reinado on march 11 , 2007 . the decision to apprehend reinado was apparently taken after he persuaded a border patrol unit to hand over their assault rifles on february 25 , 2007 . the government had previously been in negotiations with reinado for killing a soldier while fighting against east timorese army units . although reinado had not been a major political figure in east timor , he had attracted much support among young men who were increasingly resentful of the foreign military presence in east timor . reinado was resentful of fretilin for ordering the dismissal of protesting troops . another dimension of the escalating violence in east timor is the gangs of largely unemployed youth . unemployment and underemployment is estimated to be as high as 70% in east timor . with the collapse of law and order in the wake of the may 2006 police and military clashes , gang violence swept through dili , leading to further deaths , the displacement of more dili residents from the capital , and the widespread destruction of property . many of the dili gangs reportedly view reinado in a positive light . in addition to the united nations , timor - leste's main external relations are with australia and new zealand , portugal , indonesia , and increasingly with china . timor - leste would also like to become a member of the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) . the australian military contingent was the largest with some 1,100 troops in country . many recruited into the military "were xanana loyalists" while a u.n. decision led to over 300 individuals who had earlier served in the indonesian police force in east timor to be hired into the new police of east timor . the peacekeepers were deployed at the invitation of the east timorese government . u.n. security council resolution 1704 of august 25 , 2006 , established the united nations integrated mission in timor - leste ( unmit ) had a civilian component as well as up to 1,608 police personnel and up to 34 military liaison and staff officers .