table 1 . state department and related agencies appropriations and proposedauthorizations ( millions of dollars ) source : the congressional research service . notes: amounts in parentheses indicate subaccount funds which are included in the account funding level . = not available . *fy2004 and fy2005 enacted appropriations reflect rescissions and supplementals for those years . 104-134 , sec . the authorization acts as a ceiling for theappropriations . the foreign relations authorization process dovetails with the annual appropriationprocess for the department of state ( within the science , state , justice , commerce and relatedagency appropriation in the house and the state - foreign operations appropriation in the senate ) and foreign assistance activities ( within the foreign operations appropriation in both house andsenate ) . in the past 10 years , congress has had an inconsistent record on getting a stand - alone foreignrelations authorization bill passed and signed into law . congressman christopher h. smith introduced h.r . 2601 on may 24 , 2005 . the subcommittee on africa , global human rights and international relations held a markupsession on may 26 and forwarded the bill on to the full committee the same day . the houseinternational relations committee held markup sessions on june 8 and 9 . the house internationalrelations committee completed its full committee markup on june 9 , 2005 . the bill was reportedon july 13 ( h.rept . house floor debate occurred the week of july 18 , 2005 . earlier in 2005 , senator lugar introduced a senate version of the foreign relationsauthorization legislation ( s. 600 ) on march 10 . the measure was reported to the senatethe same day ( s.rept . on april 5 and 6 , the senate debated the bill at which time thecombination of numerous amendments on the bill , world events ( the death of the pope ) ,nominations , and filibusters on judges put off action on the measure . congress is required by law to authorize the spending of appropriations for the statedepartment and foreign policy activities every two years . during the two decades prior to thegovernment shutdown of november 1995 , virtually every congress enacted stand - alone foreignrelations authorization laws . since 1995 , however , congress has waived the requirement to provideauthorization prior to expenditures more times than it has met the requirement . the mostrecently - enacted stand - alone authorization act was for fy2003 ( p.l . 1646 ) signed september 30 , 2002 . ( see appendix ii for foreign relations authorization history. ) since foreign relations authorization legislation is typically passed the first session of eachcongress , the senate foreign relation committee and the house international relations committeeof the 109th congress began working on their bills early in 2005 . the foreign relations authorizationlegislation typically provides authority for state department spending for such activities as salariesand other operating expenses , passport and visa processing , embassy and foreign service activities,as well as public diplomacy and international broadcasting . in addition , the legislation oftenbecomes a convenient vehicle for numerous foreign policy - related issues , such as nonproliferation,human rights , international family planning policy , and international health and environment issues .