in addition to being disappointed , i'm also angry. although japanese officials — including abe — emphasize the importance of acting on climate change both domestically and in coordination with the international community , some experts assess japan's greenhouse gas emissions reduction plan is insufficiently ambitious , particularly in light of japan's expansion of coal power plants . nevertheless the two countries continue to cooperate on energy issues under a japan - united states strategic energy partnership established in november 2017 . the partnership focuses on advanced nuclear energy technologies , clean coal technologies , natural gas market development , and energy infrastructure in the developing world . from 2007 to 2012 , japanese politics was plagued by instability . the premiership changed hands six times in those six years , and no party controlled both the lower and upper houses of the parliament for more than a few months . the abe - led ldp coalition's dominant victories in five consecutive parliamentary elections , in december 2012 , july 2013 , december 2014 , july 2016 , and october 2017 have ended this period of turmoil . the first event , the 2012 elections for japan's lower house , returned the ldp and its coalition partner , the komeito party , into power after three years in the minority . since 1955 , the ldp has ruled japan for all but about four years . abe has benefitted from disarray among japanese opposition parties , which in the fall of 2018 struggled to surpass 10% in public opinion polls ( compared to 40% - 50% for the ldp ) . some japanese and western analysts argue that another factor contributing to abe's strength is his government's and the ldp's success in managing the japanese media . according to these sources , the government and the ldp have attempted to influence japanese news outlets through measures such as hinting at revoking licenses of broadcasters , pressuring business groups not to purchase advertisements in certain media outlets , and shunning reporters from critical broadcasters and print publications . in 2013 , the diet passed an act on protection of specially designated secrets that has been criticized for criminalizing the publication of information that the government had disclosed to the public . since abe came to power in december 2012 , the nongovernmental organization reporters without borders has moved japan down twenty - one places , to 72 nd place , in its rankings of global freedom of the press . abe government officials deny that they have attempted to unduly influence the press or restrict press freedoms . japan's combination of a low birth rate , strict immigration practices , and a shrinking and rapidly ageing population presents policymakers with a significant challenge . polls suggest that japanese women are avoiding marriage and child - bearing because of the difficulty of combining career and family in japan ; the fertility rate has fallen to 1.25 , below the 2.1 rate necessary to sustain population size . japan's population growth rate is - 0.2% , according to the world bank , and its current population of 125 million is projected to fall to about 95 million by midcentury .