, infringement ) . according to the authors of the report , private sector owners of patents permitted such infringement in academia ( with the exception of those associated with diagnostic tests in clinical trials ) "partly because it can increase the value of the patented technology. analysis of software companies by professor ronald mann indicates the importance of software patents to small companies , particularly later - stage start - ups firms . he notes that the software industry is comprised primarily of small businesses and "the data suggests a different picture , one in which software r&d is impressively robust. mann's research indicates that small firms spend proportionally more on software r&d than large companies . research and development spending by software firms "tends to be relatively stable over time as a percentage of sales . indeed , company size seems to be more important in explaining variations in r&d spending within the industry. studies by mann also indicate that the importance of software patents is dependent on where the firm is in its development process . patents play a more significant role in later - stage start - up companies when firms can generate revenues through licensing . at that point , "patents are useful as "barter" in cross - licensing agreements that the firm enters if it reaches a sufficiently mature stage to be a significant player in the industry. patents may allow a firm to differentiate its areas of expertise and innovative activity . patents enable a company to transform ideas into a tangible form of property that can provide value . this can be useful in negotiations for the acquisition of the firm . while intellectual property is important to some investors but not to others , it is considered a significant factor when a company is involved in acquisition negotiations or in an ipo . it can prevent large companies from appropriating a small firm's technology . bradford smith and susan mann , writing in the university of chicago law review , concur with the argument that patents are beneficial for small , software firms . they maintain that patents prevent larger companies from utilizing the technologies developed by small businesses while allowing these companies to attract venture capital . the multiplicity of patents involved in computer - related products has resulted in the extensive use of cross licensing in these industries such that one commentator argues: "licensing of software patents has become an industry unto itself. instead of promoting innovation , some experts maintain that the ownership of intellectual property has become an obstacle to the development and application of new ideas . the expansion in the number of patents associated with software is a consequence of the changes in patent law that make these patents easier to obtain , rather than an indication of increased innovative activity . there are indications , according to bessen and hunt , that patents are being substituted for increases in r&d . the substitution occurs in industries that patent strategically but not in other sectors . the propensity to patent software appears to be related to the utilization of the software by companies rather than to the r&d resources expended in developing the product .