( see table 1 . ) within the 40-year period , however , the pace of growth fell by more than half during the most recent compared to the first 20 years . the tendency of employers to eliminate health benefits coverage for retirees also could be prompting older workers to remain in the labor force , at least until they qualify for medicare . so , too , could the movement of employers away from traditional ( defined - benefit ) pensions to defined - contribution retirement plans . the latter , which employers began to offer in the 1980s after section 401 ( k ) was inserted in the internal revenue code ( irc ) , are age - neutral and do not pay out a guaranteed level of benefits . in addition , the 107 th congress passed legislation to allow h - 1b nonimmigrants to remain beyond the statutory limit on their time in the country if their employers petition for them to become legal permanent residents ( lprs ) of the united states . one empirical analysis found that most of the increase between 1992 and 2004 in the intention of baby - boomers to continue working after age 62 was due to decreased rates of employer - provided retiree health benefits , higher levels of educational attainment among workers , and reduced rates of coverage under traditional pension plans . in addition to changes in the irc , congress has enacted and amended other laws over the years that encourage older workers to remain engaged in the labor force and remove obstacles to their continued participation . several such changes were made to the public pension system , including gradually raising from 65 the age at which workers can receive full retirement benefits , increasing the reduction in benefits for those who retire between 62 and the full retirement age , and enhancing the delayed retirement credit for those who forgo benefits receipt until after they have attained full retirement age . most recently , congress loosened the earnings test for employed beneficiaries between 62 and the full retirement age and eliminated it for those at or above the full retirement age . if policymakers become convinced that a labor shortage is imminent , they might consider additional modifications of the public pension system , such as further relaxing or eliminating the earnings test for workers between 62 years old and the full retirement age . the results of empirical research are mixed , however , on whether removal of the earnings test for employed beneficiaries at or above the full retirement age has increased the labor supply . some regard federal policies that ban age - based discrimination in the workplace and virtually eliminate mandatory retirement to be among the leading reasons for the increase in labor force participation among older members of the population . when the age discrimination in employment act of 1967 ( adea ) was passed , it barred employers from discriminating against people between 40 and 65 years old on the basis of age . thus , firms still were permitted to include involuntary retirement clauses in their pension plans as long as they were not applied to persons under age 65 .