as the sponsor of h.r . 683 has explained: trademarks give customers assurance that the goods or services they are buying are what customers think they are . if a customer has purchased items in the past from a particular company that bears a specific mark or logo , the customer has an impression , favorable or not , of that company and the goods or services it produces . so trademark law empowers consumers by giving them information that is often critical to their purchasing decisions . motivated by the v secret case and by the other judicial decisions discussed above , the 109 th congress considered legislation , h.r . 683 , amending the ftda to clarify federal dilution law and address what some members of congress considered to be problematic judicial interpretations of the ftda . according to the bill's sponsor , the trademark dilution revision act of 2006 ( hereinafter "tdra" ) "represents a clarification of what congress meant when it passed the dilution statute almost a decade ago. the tdra makes the following changes to the ftda: requires that a mark be both famous and distinctive . allows federal dilution protection for famous descriptive marks that have acquired distinctiveness . provides a definition of "famous" to limit application of dilution law to only widely recognized marks . expressly provides that dilution may be actionable if done by tarnishment or by blurring . establishes that the standard of harm in a federal dilution case is "likelihood of dilution. explicitly requires that the defendant had used a mark as a designation of source for a dilution claim to be actionable , thus adding a free speech safeguard for competitors , disgruntled consumers , and the media to criticize , parody , and comment on the goods or services of the famous mark owner . some observers and legislators wonder whether the act too heavily favors major corporations over small businesses and future businesses . others raise concerns that it may negatively affect consumer rights and free speech . several critics speculate that the tdra will limit existing small businesses and potential future businesses in the choice of names for themselves and their products . despite these sentiments , the house passed h.r . 683 by a vote of 411 to 8 , on april 19 , 2005 . the senate passed h.r . 683 with an amendment in the nature of a substitute , by unanimous consent , on march 8 , 2006 . the most prominent difference between the house - and senate - passed versions of h.r . 683 is that the house bill would remove "noncommercial use" of a mark as one of the affirmative defenses to a dilution claim brought under the ftda ; the senate bill retains this exemption . if this defense is removed from existing law , it may affect the outcome of cases that resemble the factual circumstances of the barbie girl decision and possibly raise questions regarding the ftda's preservation of free speech rights .