geography has also been an obstacle . indonesia's sprawling topography of many islands has resulted in a highly decentralized national government , and poor coordination among the different levels of government . the who criticized this lack of central authority to institute mandatory culling of infected birds , and accused the country of using "band - aid" solutions rather preventative measures . in june 2006 , indonesia's national committee for avian influenza control and pandemic influenza preparedness held a three - day consultation with international experts in order to review the spread of the virus in animals and humans , as well as review strategies for its control . the conference brought together experts from the who , indonesia's ministries of health and agriculture , the fao , unicef , and other u.n. agencies . the experts decided not to raise the global pandemic alert based on the evidence that the virus has not substantially changed to become more transmissible . the who announced that human - to - human transmission of the h5n1 virus had occurred in indonesia . because of significant interest in how the virus might pass between humans , in august 2006 indonesia agreed to give full access to its h5n1 data to foreign scientists . an outbreak of h5n1 in poultry was confirmed in early 2004 , but laos has had no known cases in humans , and no new outbreaks reported . in june 2005 , the lao government estimated that 60,000 birds had been lost to the infection and another 98,000 to culling . however , this number reflects only documentation from commercial farms ; the vast majority of poultry - rearing in laos takes place in smaller , family - run farms . some experts argue that there is an urgent need for foreign health organizations to focus upon and assist laos , given its proximity to other countries with the disease and the lack of government capacity , particularly its weakness in surveillance . some are said to fear detainment . nigeria requested international aid in the form of protective clothing and disinfectants . some experts caution , however , that the focus on bird flu in laos , where no outbreaks of h5n1 have been reported in two years , may unnecessarily distract foreign and domestic public health attention away from the control and treatment of other infectious diseases . the fao and the who reportedly have strong working relationships with the lao government . in october 2005 , u.s. secretary of health and human services michael leavitt , on a visit to southeast asia , signed a cooperation agreement with lao officials pledging $3.4 million to laos for controlling outbreaks of avian flu . in february 2006 , fao signed an agreement with the lao government to establish a $2.9 million bird flu control program funded by germany . the h5n1 strain spread into central asia in 2005 and was first detected in southern russia ( in the novosibirsk region ) in july 2005 . outbreaks were attributed to contact between domestic birds and waterfowl migrating from southeast asia . there have been no confirmed human cases in russia .