the major difference between the bills is that h.r . 4093 does more than simply reorganize the ninth circuit . the bill also authorizes more than 60 additional judgeships throughout the nation , and creates an article iii court in the u.s. virgin islands ( a topic not addressed in this report ) . by contrast , s. 1845 concentrates solely on splitting the ninth circuit , adding judgeships only in a new ninth circuit . history suggests that if congress maintains the status quo for the ninth circuit , the issue will likely remain active . several members of congress reportedly remain interested in splitting the circuit , and proponents of a split argue that rapid population growth in the current ninth circuit will only exacerbate the court's alleged management challenges . many proponents of a split view dividing the circuit as "inevitable," with only the timing of a division and some details remaining uncertain . others are equally determined to oppose dividing the circuit , asserting that a split is not a solution to perceived problems , and that the ninth circuit continues to function effectively . the data and analysis presented throughout this report suggest that splitting the ninth circuit would have different impacts in different areas common to the debate over the circuit's future , such as caseload , cost , and en banc procedures . in some cases , the impact of splitting the circuit is unclear . in every case , the impact of splitting the ninth circuit would vary with context . each dimension of the debate over splitting the ninth circuit offers congress potential benchmarks to consider in deciding whether to split the ninth circuit or maintain the status quo . different measures of the concepts discussed here , or different variables altogether , might produce alternative findings to the analysis presented in this report . the fy2007 budget resolution agreed to by the house ( h.con.res . 376 ) reportedly "assumes the 9 th u.s . circuit court of appeals will be reorganized and additional judgeships created—reviving a battle from last year's budget. the senate judiciary committee held a hearing on s. 1845 on september 20 , 2006 . that hearing echoed many of the same themes , and featured some of the same witnesses , as other recent hearings on splitting the ninth circuit . as of this writing , there has been no additional legislative action on proposals to split the ninth circuit . in the 109 th congress , these two bills— h.r . 4093 in the house , and s. 1845 in the senate—have received the most legislative and media attention . 4093 was the focus of first - session attention , while senate action on s. 1845 has commanded more attention during the second session . as table 1 shows , both bills offer substantially similar revisions of the ninth circuit . the witnesses and contents of that hearing were largely reminiscent of other recent hearings on the topic . the status of that debate is discussed throughout this report .