5576 was not enacted . section 809 , which prohibits payment to political appointees who are filling positions for which they have been nominated , but not confirmed . included as section 909 of the house bill and section 809 of the senate bill . section 819 , which prohibits the obligation or expenditure of appropriated funds for employee training that ( 1 ) does not meet identified needs for knowledge , skills , and abilities bearing directly upon the performance of official duties ; ( 2 ) contains elements likely to induce high levels of emotional response or psychological stress in some participants ; ( 3 ) does not require prior employee notification of the content and methods to be used in the training and written end of course evaluation ; ( 4 ) contains any methods or content associated with religious or quasi - religious belief systems or "new age" belief systems ; or ( 5 ) is offensive to , or designed to change , participants' personal values or lifestyle outside the workplace . included as section 919 of the house bill and section 819 of the senate bill . section 820 , which prohibits the use of appropriated funds to implement or enforce employee non - disclosure agreements if they do not contain whistleblower protection clauses . included as section 920 of the house bill and section 820 of the senate bill . section 823 , which requires that the committees on appropriations approve the release of any "non - public" information , such as mailing or telephone lists , to any person or any organization outside the federal government . included as section 923 of the house bill and section 823 of the senate bill . section 834 , which states that congress recognizes the united states anti - doping agency as the official anti - doping agency for olympic , pan american , and paralympic sports in the united states . included as section 934 of the house bill and section 834 of the senate bill . section 836 , which prohibits the use of appropriated funds to implement or enforce restrictions or limitations on the coast guard congressional fellowship program or to implement opm's proposed regulations limiting the detail of executive branch employees to the legislative branch . included as section 936 of the house bill and section 836 of the senate bill . section 837 , which requires agencies to report to congress on the amount of the acquisitions made from entities that manufacture the articles , materials , or supplies outside the united states . not included in the house bill . included as section 845 of the senate bill . section 839 , which requires appropriate executive department and agency heads either to transfer funds to , or reimburse , the federal aviation administration to ensure the uninterrupted , continuous operation of the midway atoll airfield . not included in the house bill . included as section 838 of the senate bill . section 840 , which provides certain requirements for conducting a public - private competition for the performance of an activity that is not inherently governmental for executive agencies with less than 100 full - time employees . not included in either the house bill or the senate bill .