that we have done and that we will continue to do. a general theme in the april 3 recommendations and the december 7 final decision seems to be that the role of epa senior management in the naaqs - setting process should be heightened , and that of casac lessened . the recommendation for preparation of a single integrated planning document , for example , "would provide an opportunity for early involvement of epa senior management and / or outside parties in the framing of policy - relevant issues," according to the review workgroup's march 2006 report . the new policy assessment document would be reviewed after the document's publication , despite casac's recommendation that it review a first and second draft . the march 2006 report also suggests: 1 ) a single casac review of the policy assessment document , as opposed to the current iterative process ; 2 ) the apparent discontinuation of casac closure on the document ; and 3 ) casac's comments to be solicited along with those of the public . three recommendations regarding casac in the workgroup report also suggested a less independent role for the committee . these were: that epa prepare more comprehensive guidance on casac's statutory role , to enhance the orientation of panel members and "increase awareness of the importance of maintaining the distinction between science and policy judgments" in casac's recommendations ; that further consideration be given by epa and "perhaps communication with casac" regarding the issue of casac "closure" on epa documents ; and that epa's sab staff office consider issues related to the selection and management of casac naaqs review panels . these recommendations may have arisen simply from concerns for effectiveness — i.e. , they may represent only a concern that the agency better orient new members , make the selection process for review panels more transparent , and review the issue of closure , which was raised by several current and former casac members in comments they submitted to the workgroup . but coming in the context of the other recommendations , they raised the possibility that epa intended to weaken the independence and power of casac through a variety of means . as part of the 2006 naaqs process review , epa solicited comments from current and former casac members and from stakeholder groups . the most consistent comments concerned the need to improve the focus of criteria documents and the need to reinstate the "closure" procedure . sections 108 and 109 of the clean air act establish statutory requirements for the identification of naaqs ( or "criteria" ) air pollutants and the setting and periodic review of the naaqs standards . but the process used by epa is as much the result of 37 years of agency practice as it is of statutory requirements . in section 109 , for example , the statute establishes the clean air scientific advisory committee to make recommendations to the administrator regarding new naaqs and , at five - year intervals , to make reviews of existing naaqs with recommendations for revisions .