in addition , p.l . 111-212 allows each grantee to use up to 5% of its cdbg disaster recovery funds for administrative costs ; hud to award cdbg disaster recovery grants to both states and local governments ; cdbg disaster recovery funds to be used to meet the matching fund requirements of other federal programs ; and hud , at the request of a grantee , to waive any statutes or regulations governing the cdbg program except for provisions related to environmental review , fair labor standards , civil rights , and nondiscrimination . the legislation appropriates supplemental cdbg funds for disaster recovery activities . specifically , provisions included during senate consideration and passage of h.r . if it is , what should be the level of cdbg assistance awarded to affected areas ? should cdbg assistance be controlled by the individual communities , by the states , or by a multi - state regional entity or entities ? should congress require states to meet a matching fund requirement as a condition for receiving disaster recovery - related cdbg funds ? any of the eligible activities undertaken by a community must address at least one of the program's following three national objectives: principally benefit low and moderate income persons ; aid in eliminating or preventing slums or blight ; or meet particularly urgent community development needs because existing conditions pose a serious and immediate threat to the public . it is this third program objective — meeting an urgent threat — that allows cdbg funds to be used to assist in disaster response activities . the program's authorizing statute requires each state and entitlement community to allocate 70% of its cdbg funds to activities that primarily benefit low - and moderate - income persons . in response to previous disasters , hud has waived this provision in order to allow a community to address an urgent threat to the safety of residents . the cdbg program has been used frequently by the federal government to respond to natural and manmade catastrophes ( for a list of cdbg disaster recovery appropriations see the appendix ) . in general , congress has provided increased flexibility and allocated additional cdbg funds to affected communities and states to help them respond to and recover from presidentially declared disasters . this includes allowing communities to reprogram cdbg funds to meet disaster - related needs , including short - term disaster relief , mitigation activities , and long - term recovery activities . in assisting communities and states in responding to disasters , hud may expedite grant awards for affected communities in presidentially declared disaster areas , including allowing affected grantees to move up their cdbg program start dates . in addition to providing cdbg funding assistance , congress has included a number of other provisions in past disaster relief appropriations to facilitate relief and recovery efforts and to ensure accountability . these have included the use of waivers , funding transfers , matching funds , and reporting requirements . on july 29 , 2010 , president obama signed into law the supplemental appropriations act for fy2010 , p.l .