this report focuses on the reading first program . reading first was drafted with the intent of incorporating scientifically based research on what works in teaching reading to improve and expand k - 3 reading programs to address concerns about student reading achievement and to reach children at younger ages . 1939 ( mckeon ) , the reading first improvement act , was introduced on april 19 , 2007 , and referred to the house committee on education and labor . this legislation establishes procedures for setting up a reading first advisory committee and potential subcommittees . it would prohibit one entity or individual from nominating a majority of the committee or subcommittee members . the bill would also require ed to establish stronger conflict - of - interest procedures and provide guidance on how the advisory committee and any subcommittees are to review and provide feedback on state applications , as well as ensure decisions are well - documented and available to the public . the legislation would also prohibit ed from providing a contract or subcontract for program evaluation to any entity that received a contract or subcontract to implement any aspect of reading first . additionally , it would require conflict - of - interest screening by contractors and subcontractors of all employees involved in the contract or subcontract . rct research protocol requires random assignment — with participants assigned randomly to either an experimental group that receives the treatment under investigation , or a control group that does not . rcts are viewed by many as the most credible way to verify a cause - effect relationship , when the rct study employs a well designed and implemented methodology with a large sample size . nevertheless , rct studies do not necessarily provide a one - size - fits all solution to all educational research needs . a crs report analyzing rcts included a summary of some of the potential limitations of putting too much emphasis on rcts: ... rcts are occasionally seen as impractical , unethical , requiring too much time , or being too costly compared to other designs that also seek to assess whether a program causes favorable outcomes . finally , there is wide consensus that rcts are particularly well suited for answering certain types of questions , but not others , compared to other evaluation research designs . for example , rcts typically do not assess how and why impacts occur , how a program might be modified to improve program results , or a program's cost - effectiveness . rcts also typically do not provide a full picture of whether unintended consequences may have resulted from a program or indicate whether a study is using valid measures or concepts for judging a program's success . many of these kinds of questions have been considered to be more appropriately addressed with observational or qualitative designs . three groups representing different reading programs filed separate complaints with ed's oig , asking that the reading first program be investigated . the three groups that filed complaints are dr. cupp's readers and journal writers , success for all , and the reading recovery council of north america . in response , the oig has conducted several audits of the reading first program .