the house passed h.r . 3132 on september 14 , 2005 . the spa would have amended aedpa and further restricted state inmates' access to federal habeas corpus relief . generally , spa would have imposed additional requirements on habeas corpus applicants in state custody . spa would have also imposed time limits on federal courts of appeal review of habeas corpus decisions . section 302 of h.r . 4472 would have barred federal judicial review of a state prisoner's habeas corpus application in cases where the state court has found harmless errors in sentencing , see discussion below . three additional bills ( h.r . 3132 / s. 956 and s. 1605 ) were also introduced in the 109 th congress . the bills would have provided for an expeditious habeas review of convictions that involved a killing of a child ( §303 of h.r . 3860 , and §4 of s. 956 ) and a public safety officer or state judge ( §6 of s. 1605 ) . in addition , it would have barred federal courts from tolling the current one - year deadline for filing habeas corpus claims for reasons other than those authorized by the state , as well as clarify when a state appeal is pending for purposes of tolling the deadline . following is a discussion of the spa's major provisions . as the debate over whether to reform federal habeas corpus law escalates , two major themes have emerged: trial finality and adequate representation . both of these issues are relevant when discussing state capital and non - capital post - conviction proceedings . following is a discussion of these two issues . the issue of what is the proper scope of federal habeas corpus relief resurfaced in the 109 th congress . although trial finality is often cited by proponents who favor further restricting federal habeas corpus relief to state prisoners as a desirable goal when discussing the scope of such relief , the question of a prisoner's constitutional rights is often cited by those holding an opposing viewpoint as equally paramount to the discussion of the proper scope of habeas corpus relief . the question of what is the purpose of constitutional rights in the criminal justice system , however , can be supported by both views . for example , do such rights exist primarily to protect the innocent and ensure that only those who actually committed a crime will be convicted or does the litigation of rights serve other purposes such as controlling police and prosecutorial behavior and protecting individual privacy and dignity ? regardless of the question , there appears to be a consensus among legislatures that adequate representation , arguably at all stages of the criminal justice system , is critical to ensure that an individual's constitutional rights are not violated . as early as 1989 , the powell committee studied the federal habeas corpus system . although the committee found that prisoners' abuses of the system were rampant , it also found that many states lacked representation for indigent prisoners in post - conviction proceedings . as a result of the committee's study , as well as several u.s. supreme court rulings that addressed some of the issues with the system , congress passed aedpa .