circuit . in 2009 , several habeas courts reached different conclusions regarding the scope of the president's military detention authority . a few district court judges held that the executive has authority to detain persons who were "part of" or "substantially supported" al qaeda , the taliban , or associated forces , so long as those terms are understood to include only those persons who were members of the enemy organizations' armed forces at the time of capture . other district court judges held that that the executive has authority under the aumf and the law of war to detain persons who were "part of" the taliban , al qaeda , or associated forces , but lacks authority to detain non - members who provide "support" to such organizations ( though such support may be considered when determining whether a detainee was "part of" one of these groups ) . in january 2010 , a three - judge panel of the d.c . circuit court of appeals considered the scope of executive's detention authority in the case of al - bihani v. obama . in an opinion supported in full by two members of the panel , the appellate court endorsed the definitional standard for the executive's detention authority that had initially been asserted by the bush administration ( a standard which was later somewhat circumscribed by the obama administration ) ; namely , that the president may detain those persons who were "part of or supporting taliban or al qaeda forces , or associated forces that are engaged in hostilities against the united states or its coalition partners. while the panel concluded that either support for or membership in an aumf - targeted organization may be independently sufficient to justify detention , it declined "to explore the outer bounds of what constitutes sufficient support or indicia of membership to meet the detention standard. the complete elimination of habeas corpus review by congress compelled the courts to address directly an issue they had avoided reaching in earlier cases: does the constitutional writ of habeas corpus extend to noncitizens held at guantanamo ? the constitution's suspension clause prohibits the suspension of habeas corpus except when public safety requires it in the case of invasion or surrender . the mca did not purport to be a suspension of habeas , and the government did not make such a claim to the courts . circuit unless the decision is overturned either by the circuit court of appeals sitting en banc or the supreme court , or unless congress takes up judge brown's separate invitation to craft appropriate habeas standards for detainee cases . the supreme court decision in boumediene holding that the dta violates the constitution's suspension clause ( article i , ยง 9 , cl . 2 ) leaves open a number of constitutional questions regarding the scope of the writ of habeas corpus and options open to congress to make rules for the detention of suspected terrorists . the following sections provide a brief background of habeas corpus in the united states , outline some proposals for responding to the boumediene holding , and discuss relevant constitutional considerations . instead , the government argued that noncitizens detained at guantanamo are entitled to no constitutional protections , including the privilege of habeas corpus .