the full senate did not take up the bill . legislation similar to the bills in the 111 th congress has not been re - introduced , while bills were introduced to block epa and the corps from issuing revised "waters of the united states" guidance . in the 114 th congress , bills to narrow the statutory definition of waters that are subject to cwa jurisdiction have been introduced , as has legislation to bar epa and the corps from issuing a revised "waters of the united states" rule or to require the agencies to re - start the rulemaking process for such a regulation . the senate and house passed a resolution of disapproval under the congressional review act ( s.j.res . 22 ) , which the president vetoed . the senate was unable to override the veto . ( for details , see crs report r43943 , epa and the army corps' "waters of the united states" rule: congressional response and options , by [author name scrubbed]. ) it is unclear whether this guidance was developed . swancc found invalid the assertion of cwa jurisdiction over isolated , non - navigable intrastate waters solely on the basis of their use ( or potential use ) as habitat by migratory birds . no circuit decision has opted for the plurality test alone . first , there is the federalism matter: where do cwa section 404 and the constitution's commerce clause draw the line between federal and state authority over wetlands ? the likely reason for these consistent denials is that with no change in the justices since rapanos that is likely to make a difference in their voting pattern , the court may see little point to taking another case in the area . district court decisions , at least the reported ones , seem to all follow either the kennedy test alone or the kennedy - or - plurality test view . as with the appellate decisions , there appears to be no reported district - court decision squarely holding that the plurality test alone governs . to a considerable extent , the court decisions turn on how the courts read supreme court guidance on what rule of law may be inferred from decisions of the court in which no rationale commands the support of five or more justices . the united states , for its part , has consistently taken the kennedy - or - plurality position in litigation , as it did in congressional testimony soon after the rapanos decision and in the corps / epa guidance on interpreting rapanos ( discussed below ) . in the wake of rapanos , several factors arguably put pressure on the corps and epa to do a rulemaking on the scope of "adjacent wetlands" permitting jurisdiction under the cwa ( assuming congress does not act ) . one is the fact that no fewer than three of the opinions in rapanos urged the agencies to do so . a second factor is the labor - intensive nature ( and vagueness ) of the kennedy case - by - case approach , requiring empirical study of each wetland near a non - navigable tributary .