as enacted , p.l . 109 - 59 requires less frequent conformity demonstrations ( at least every four years instead of every two years ) , and will shorten the planning horizon over which conformity must be demonstrated to 10 years in many cases , instead of the former requirement of 20 years . the local air pollution control agency will need to be consulted and public comments solicited if the planning horizon is to be shortened . these limitations are among the issues of concern . in addition , many have raised concerns about a mismatch between the sip , tip , and long range transportation planning cycles , and have called for less frequent , but better coordinated demonstrations of conformity . in its 2003 report , the gao recommended that "relevant federal agencies ... consider extending the three - year time frame between required [long range] transportation plan updates and asking the congress to amend the clean air act to change the conformity rules to match ...." this recommendation was generally supported by transportation planners and highway builders , but opposed by environmental groups and air quality planning officials . at what point does the federal role become so limited that converting the federal aid highway program to a revenue sharing or a block grant program make sense ? another controversial issue is whether the mg should be broadened , as some states have proposed , to include federal transit administration programs . the 109 th congress faced a difficult policy problem in resolving the seemingly contradictory goals of meeting donor state demands for a higher rate - of - return and donee state demands to be held harmless at a time when the htf revenue base was expected to be insufficient to easily fund both goals . part of the problem was that a bill that simply reduced the shares of donee states to increase the shares of donor states would have had difficulty overcoming a filibuster by donee states in the senate . to construct a minimum guarantee ( mg ) mechanism that could overcome this obstacle , previous reauthorization bills had included "hold harmless" provisions that maintained certain base shares for all states . this meant that part of the process of bringing donor state shares up to the mg percentage required increasing the overall federal highway program size , usually by a significant amount ( since donee state funding could not be reduced ) . in other words , providing equity remedies that keep both donor and donee states reasonably content has been accomplished by giving more money to all states but giving even more to donor states to bring their shares up to a designated per cent share , 90.5% during tea21 . providing equity in this way has been very expensive in dollar terms , the minimum guarantee program under tea21 , in fact , became the largest highway program . in the end , the constraints of limited funding availability and the practical politics of getting the surface transportation legislation through both houses of congress , resulted in a modest and gradual increase in the guaranteed rate - of - return to the states .