surveil . under foreign intelligence surveillance court rule 5 ( c ) , [o]n request by a judge , the presiding judge , after consulting with other judges of the court , may direct that an opinion be published . before publications , the opinion must be reviewed by the executive branch and redacted , as necessary , to ensure that properly classified information is appropriately protected pursuant to executive order 12958 as amended by executive order 13292 ( or its successor ) . three of the fisc judges who reside within 20 miles of the district of columbia , or , if all of those judges are unavailable , other fisc judges designated by the presiding judge of the fisc , comprise a petition review pool that has jurisdiction to review petitions filed pursuant to subsection 501 ( f ) ( 1 ) of fisa , 50 u.s.c . ยง 1861 ( f ) ( 1 ) , to challenge a production order for tangible things in a foreign intelligence , international terrorism , or clandestine intelligence activities investigation under section 501 of fisa , or a nondisclosure order imposed in connection with such a production order . the court of review is composed of three judges publicly designated by the chief justice from the united states district courts or courts of appeals . the chief justice also publicly designates one of the three judges as the presiding judge of the court . only one opinion has been published by the court of review , in re sealed case , 310 f.3d 717 ( u.s. foreign intell . surveil . ct. rev . 2002 ) , which is the first opinion the court has issued . each fisc and court of review judge serves for a maximum of seven years and is not eligible for redesignation . the government may seek review of a denial of an application for a court order under fisa authorizing electronic surveillance , physical search , or production of any tangible thing before the court of review . if the denial is upheld by the court of review , the government may seek u.s. supreme court review of the decision by a petition for certiorari . in addition , the court of review has jurisdiction over petitions for review of a decision under section 501 ( f ) ( 2 ) of fisa , 50 u.s.c . ยง 1861 ( f ) ( 2 ) , to affirm , modify , or set aside a production order or nondisclosure order filed by the government or any person receiving such an order . upon the request of the government , any order setting aside a nondisclosure order shall be stayed pending such review . the court of review shall provide for the record a written statement of the reasons for its decision and , on petition by the government or any person receiving such order for writ of certiorari , the record shall be transmitted under seal to the supreme court of the united states , which shall have jurisdiction to review such decision .