construction . the president requested $93 millionfor this account , which covers the construction of the tactical infrastructure that provides physicalimpediments to illegal entry . construction under this account includes the erection of lights , fences,and vehicle barriers , as well as the creation of access roads for immigration enforcement staff . thehouse appropriations committee fully funds the president's request . how much of the program would actually be transferred to sco ? is it simply thefunding , the policy planning , or would the whole function ( and the people who carry out thatfunction ) be transferred as well ? recent testimony by cbp commissioner bonner , and uscisdirector aguirre indicated that there remains some uncertainty concerning which operationalfunctions should remain at the agency level and which functions could be performed by thesco . ( 11 ) coordination would be a key challenge for the sco , particularly coordination between thesco and the other agencies of the bts directorate . other challenges recently identified by thegovernment accountability office ( gao ) include defining interrelationships and commonalitiesamong the programs proposed for transfer to the sco ; clearly delineating roles and responsibilities ; and identifying data needs . in addition , existing issues and concerns confronting some of theprograms proposed for transfer to sco ( such as secure flight , and twic ) would still have to beaddressed . cbp is responsible for security at and between ports - of - entry along the u.s. border . since9 / 11 , cbp's primary mission is to prevent the entry of terrorists and the instruments of terrorism . cbp's on - going responsibilities include inspecting people and goods to determine if they areauthorized to enter the united states ; interdicting terrorists and instruments of terrorism ; interceptingillegal narcotics , firearms , and other types of contraband ; interdicting unauthorized travelers andimmigrants ; and enforcing more than 400 laws and regulations at the border on behalf of more than60 government agencies . cbp is comprised of the inspection functions of the legacy customsservice , ins , and the aphis ; the office of air and marine interdiction ; and the border patrol . president's request . the administration hasrequested an appropriation of $6,717 million in gross budget authority for cbp in fy2006 . thisrepresents a 4% increase over the enacted fy2005 level ( including supplemental appropriations ) of$6,450 million . the administration is requesting an appropriation of $5,575 million in net budgetauthority for cbp , representing a 4% increase over the fy2005 enacted level of $5,371 million .