the act includes new requirements for plan conversions . if a defined benefit plan is converted into a cash balance plan after june 29 , 2005 , the plan will not satisfy the age discrimination provisions unless each participant receives the sum of ( 1 ) the pre - conversion accrued benefit determined under the prior plan formula plus ( 2 ) the post - conversion accrued benefit determined under the cash balance plan formula . , fixed or variable interest rates ) . a newly converted plan must also credit a participant with the amount of any early retirement benefits or retirement - type subsidies if the participant has met the requirements for the benefit or subsidy under the prior plan . the final section of this report discusses the pension protection act . on august 17 , 2006 , president bush signed into law the pension protection act of 2006 ( p.l . the act clarifies , among other things , the legality of cash balance plans if a plan meets certain requirements . adea ยง 4 ( j ) ( 1 ) [29 u.s.c . ยง 623 ( i ) ( 1 ) ]: [i]t shall be unlawful for an employer , an employment agency , a labor organization , or any combination thereof to establish or maintain an employee pension benefit plan which requires or permits - ( a ) in the case of a defined benefit plan , the cessation of an employee's benefit accrual or the reduction of the rate of an employee's benefit accrual , because of age . two primary claims have been made that cash balance plans or the conversions to such plans violate the law . the first claim is that the plans violate the age discrimination provisions because the rate of an employee's benefit accrual is reduced on account of age . the second claim is that the conversions to the plans violate the adea because older workers are treated unfavorably compared with younger workers . a plan satisfies the interest requirement if the terms of the plan provide that any interest credit ( or equivalent amount ) for a plan year is at a rate that is not more than the market rate of return , and not less than zero . the secretary of the treasury is expected to provide guidance as to the calculation of the market rate , as well as permissible methods for crediting interest to a participant's account ( e.g . the act also makes clear that certain circumstances do not violate the age discrimination provisions . under the act , a plan will be considered non - discriminatory if the plan allows for certain offsets of benefits to the extent the offsets comply with erisa , the irc , and the adea . under the act , a plan is not considered age discriminatory if a participant's entire accrued benefit , as determined under the plan's formula , is at least equal to that of any similarly situated , younger individual .