about half of those funds have been disbursed . as of december 2007 , the fund - supported grants have been used to treat an estimated 1.4 million hiv - positive people and 3.3 million people infected with tb , and to distribute 46 million insecticide - treated bed nets to prevent malaria transmission . an estimated 58% of global fund grants support hiv / aids interventions , about 17% fund anti - tb programs ; some 24% sustain anti - malaria projects , and 1% strengthen health systems . leadership against hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria act , prohibits u.s. government contributions to the fund from exceeding 33% of contributions from all donors . congress instituted the contribution limit to encourage greater global support for the fund . there is some debate about whether the 33% provision should be interpreted as the amount the united states should provide to the fund or as the maximum amount the united states can contribute . supporters of the fund contend that congress instituted the 33% mandate in recognition of the moral responsibility that the united states holds as one of the wealthiest countries in the world . opponents of this idea assert that if u.s. contributions to the fund were to reflect its share of the global economy , then u.s. contributions would and should range from 20% to 25% of all contributions . some global fund advocates who disparage the 33% restriction argue that the differing fiscal cycles of the fund and the united states complicate efforts to leverage support . opponents to the 33% restriction contend that the requirement is harmful to the fund , because the u.s. fiscal year concludes some three months before the fund's . the fund uses a performance - based funding system that permits it to temporarily suspend support for grants if it finds significant problems with project performance , such as accounting inconsistencies . in some instances , the fund restored support to grants once key concerns were resolved . for example , in november 2006 , the fund suspended support for grants in chad . after undertaking audits of the grants , the fund reportedly discovered evidence of "misuse of funds at several levels and the lack of satisfactory capacity by the principal recipient and sub - recipients to manage the global fund's resources. in august 2007 , the fund announced that it had lifted the suspension , "after a series of investigation and negotiations between the global fund and national authorities ... and after efforts and strong commitment of all relevant stakeholders which guaranteed that the issues have been addressed and better systems with clarified responsibilities will be put in place . as part of the [global fund's] mitigation — besides other measures — a fiduciary agent will guarantee for an interim period of 12 months adequate financial monitoring and accounting for our grants. the fund might discontinue support for grants in phase ii if it finds that they did not sufficiently meet their targets . countries whose grants have been discontinued can apply and have secured funding in subsequent rounds ( see nigeria below ) . in extreme cases , the fund will immediately cancel financial support .