of the four , h.r . 1266 , the permit provision would have been part of the cwa's overall regulatory , permitting , and enforcement mechanism . the cwa prohibits the discharge of pollutants into the nation's waters without authority under a cwa permit , and h.r . 1266 would have amended the act's principal permit provision , called the national pollutant discharge elimination system permit ( npdes , section 402 , 33 u.s.c . ยง1342 ) , by adding a new subsection with requirements specific to good samaritan permits . the administration bill , s. 2780 and h.r . 5404 , was a stand - alone bill . it proposed good samaritan relief from requirements of the cwa and the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla , or superfund , 42 u.s.c . ยง9601 et seq. ) the fourth , s. 1848 , also a stand - alone bill , proposed that a permitting authority could provide good samaritans with relief from the clean water act and cercla , plus other specified federal environmental laws , as well as state and local laws . proponents of good samaritan legislation have discussed many of these issues for nearly a decade , but until recently , congressional committees have given limited consideration to the concept . in the 106 th congress , the senate environment and public works committee held a hearing on s. 1787 , a good samaritan bill introduced by senator baucus . another good samaritan bill was introduced in the 108 th congress ( s. 1660 , senator campbell ) , but no legislative action occurred . in the 109 th congress , three house and senate committees held hearings on good samaritan issues raised by the legislation . the senate environment and public works committee approved a modified version of s. 1848 , incorporating some provisions of the administration's proposal and other amendments , in september 2006 ( s.rept . testifying at the hearings were witnesses representing epa , states , hardrock mining industry companies and associations , and environmental groups . reviewing these recent hearings and the senate hearing in the 106 th congress , it is evident that , except for epa and congressional witnesses testifying in support of their own bills , no witness endorsed any of the specific legislative approaches totally or wholeheartedly . the proposals have been criticized as either too narrow or too broad , depending on the witnesses' perspective . for example , some stakeholders want an expanded definition of who may be a remediating party and favor elimination of additional regulatory and legal disincentives . but every effort to broaden the proposals' scope seemingly enlarges the complexity of the legislation and raises stronger opposition from groups who prefer a narrower approach . this report discusses several issues that have drawn attention: eligibility for a good samaritan permit , standards applicable to a good samaritan cleanup , scope of liability protection , treatment of revenues from cleanup , enforcement and judicial review , the appropriate role for states and indian tribes , funding , terminating a permit , and sunsetting the permit program .