the question is on the amendment . the amendment was agreed to . [third reading and engrossment of the bill then took place , followed by a record vote on the bill's final passage . is the gentleman opposed to the bill ? mr. markey . i am opposed to the bill mr. speaker . the speaker pro tempore . the clerk will report the motion to recommit . [after the clerk reported the motion , representative markey was recognized for five minutes of debate . a member opposed to the motion was then recognized for the same amount of time . at the conclusion of debate , the previous question on the recommittal motion was ordered . after putting the motion to a voice vote , the speaker pro tempore announced that the noes appeared to have it , so representative markey demanded a record vote . the house then adopted the motion to recommit , 224 to 199 , after which the speaker pro tempore recognized representative bliley , chairman of the committee on commerce. mr. bliley . mr. speaker , pursuant to the instructions of the house , i report the bill , h.r . 1555 , back to the house with an amendment . the speaker pro tempore . the clerk will report the amendment . [the clerk began reading the amendment ( i.e. , the amendment proposed in representative markey's motion to recommit with instructions ) . at representative bliley's request , and without objection , the amendment was considered as read and printed in the congressional record . the speaker pro tempore . 1555 , amended as a result of the motion to recommit with instructions , was passed , 305-117. . motions to recommit conference reports also can be either simple motions or motions containing instructions . however , motions to recommit conference reports do not have the same purpose or effect as motions to recommit measures during their initial house floor consideration . a simple motion to recommit a conference report proposes only to send the report back to conference for further negotiation ; adopting this motion does not necessarily "kill" the bill . a motion to recommit a conference report with instructions also seeks to return a report to conference for further negotiation , but it also proposes to instruct the house conferees ( also referred to as "managers" ) as to what they should try to achieve during these negotiations . most commonly , the instructions enjoin the house conferees to insist on the house position on a certain issue or to disagree to a certain senate position . the instructions are advisory in nature ; they are not binding on the house conferees . a representative cannot make a point of order against a conference report on the ground that it is inconsistent with instructions that the house had given to its conferees . also , the instructions must stay within the scope of differences between the house and senate positions in the conference .