appendix 3 . u.s. - brazil servicestrade ( $ millions ) data source : u.s. department of commerce . bureau of economic analysis ( bea ) . * trade turnover = total trade or exports plus imports . figure 3 . brazil's direction of trade , 2004 some 30% of brazil's merchandise exports are primary products , 14% semi - manufactured goods , and 56% manufactured goods ( see appendix 1 ) . importantly , natural resource - based goods dominate in all categories . for example,together all steel and aluminum based products , fabricated to varying levels ofcompletion , represent 10% of total exports . there are many reasons for this . perhaps most transparent is resistence by firms andworkers who stand to bear most of the adjustment costs of freer trade , even ifnational welfare is ultimately enhanced through lower priced goods and services , agreater selection of choices from imports , and overall efficiency gains that can leadto higher national income . less obvious is that countries adopt diverse trade policiesbased on historically , socially , and politically determined "trade preferences" thatcannot be explained solely by a calculus of economic costs and benefits . the "trade preference" framework helps explain brazil's trade strategy . itpegs brazil as a "regional leader" based on its leadership in pressing for southamerican economic integration , its conditional support of multilateral negotiations,and its reticence to consummate separate trade deals with developed countries . ( 3 ) brazil's tradepreferences in order of priority are: 1 ) expand and strengthen mercosul , where brazilis the undisputed industrial hub and political leader ; 2 ) advocate developing countryinterests in the doha round , especially on agricultural issues , and ; 3 ) resist what itviews as a welfare reducing , u.s. - designed ftaa , and to a lesser extent , also apreferential trade arrangement with the european union unless it serves as a counterinfluence to the ftaa . ( 4 ) brazil and the united states approach trade liberalization from differentperspectives . u.s. trade strategy has been characterized as "competitiveliberalization," ( 5 ) where simultaneously negotiating comprehensivemultilateral , regional , and bilateral pacts allows gains to be achieved where partiescan agree . it is competitive in that gains at one level of negotiation ( e.g . bilateral orregional ) can create new incentives or pressures to make breakthroughs at otherlevels ( e.g . regional or multilateral ) . it is comprehensive by its inclusion of issuesthat go beyond market access such as services trade , intellectual property rights,government procurement , and investment . brazil has a narrower and more cautious tack , restricted largely to marketaccess and dominance in regional trade , where it feels most ready to compete . theperceived benefits of brazil's strategy include attaining greater bargaining powerthrough the mercosul coalition , slowing the multilateral trade liberalization processto allow more time for economic adjustment , and enhancing its national influence inthe world by protecting domestic economic ( industrial ) capacity . these "tradepreferences" are not randomly determined , but are deeply embedded in the country'sindustrial , foreign , and macroeconomic policies , discussed below . brazil has a modern , diversified economy , with services accounting for 53%of gdp , followed by industry and manufacturing at 37% , and agriculture at 9% .