some countries with which the united states has a consular treaty are not parties to the consular convention . the immunities accorded to consular personnel of such states are governed by the appropriate bilateral treaties , not by the authority discussed in this report . furthermore , not all international organizations are covered by the international organizations immunities act ( ioia ) , or , as is the case with the united nations , are covered not only by the ioia but also by a number of international agreements . even where immunities are governed generally by the authorities cited in the relevant chart , individuals serving in similar positions for different countries may nevertheless enjoy different immunities . for example , the diplomatic relations act , which effectively adopted the standards of the diplomatic convention for domestic application , provides that the president may , on the basis of reciprocal treatment , specify immunities for individual countries that are more or less favorable than those under the convention . both the diplomatic convention and the consular convention allow the united states to apply immunities restrictively where a particular country has applied immunity rules restrictively towards american representatives . similarly , the ioia conditions certain immunities on the basis of treatment of american representatives abroad . it must be emphasized that the immunities provided to foreign diplomats , consular officials , and employees of international organizations may be waived by the sending state or the appropriate international organization , with or without the consent of the individual involved . on the other hand , certain individual acts may lead to a waiver of immunity . for example , the initiation of civil proceedings by an otherwise exempt individual may preclude him from invoking immunity with regards to a directly - connected counterclaim . another example of this type of personal waiver is the relinquishment of all immunity by consular employees and staff who undertake private gainful employment in the receiving state . still another example is when a foreign person accorded immunity wishes to become a lawful permanent resident of the united states , in which case the person must waive the rights , privileges , immunities , and exemptions he would otherwise accrue on account of his occupational status . finally , note that even where an individual enjoys immunity from jurisdiction , a person harmed by the immune individual nevertheless may have recourse to compensation under one of two statutes . first , the diplomatic relations act requires that ( 1 ) each diplomatic mission in the united states ( including otherwise immune missions to international organizations ) , ( 2 ) members of these missions and their families , and ( 3 ) high ranking united nations officials all meet liability insurance requirements relating to the operation of motor vehicles in the united states . second , the foreign sovereign immunities act provides that a foreign state shall not , with limited exception , be immune from suit for money damages being sought against it for harm occurring in the united states and caused by a wrongful nondiscretionary act of one of its officials or employees acting within the scope of duty .