this amount is not indexed for inflation . account owners may rollover balances from one hsa to another without being restricted by the annual contribution limits or affecting new contributions . if the owner withdraws funds and deposits them in another account , only one rollover is allowed each year . deposits must be made within 60 days in order for the transfer to be considered a rollover . if instead an hsa trustee transfers funds to another , there is no limit on the number of rollovers allowed each year . ( more details on permitted insurance and these other forms of coverage are provided under the heading " what is disqualifying coverage ? for self - only coverage , the annual deductible in 2012 must be at least $1,200 ; for family coverage , it must be at least $2,400 . these amounts will be adjusted for inflation ( rounded to the nearest $50 ) in future years . only usual , customary , and reasonable charges for covered benefits are taken into account in determining whether deductibles are met . premiums are not included in meeting the deductible , though copayments may be at the option of the hdhp . the minimum deductible requirement does not apply to preventive care . the exception is established in the statutory language , which does not define the term . however , irs regulations provide that preventive care includes but is not limited to periodic health evaluations ( including tests and diagnostic procedures ordered in connection with routine examinations ) , routine prenatal and well - child care , immunizations , tobacco cessation programs , obesity weight - loss programs , and various screening services . drugs and medications can be included when taken by a person who has developed risk factors for a disease , or to prevent its recurrence . in general , preventive care does not include services or benefits intended to treat existing illnesses , injuries , or conditions ; an exception is allowed when the treatment is incidental to the preventive care service and it would be unreasonable or impracticable to perform another service . prescription drugs are not exempt from the minimum deductible , whether they are treated like other benefits in the high - deductible insurance plan or have different deductibles and copayment requirements . prescription or other discount cards do not disqualify individuals from meeting the minimum deductible requirement . similarly , individuals are not disqualified by coverage under an employee assistance program , disease management program , or wellness program , provided the program does not provide significant benefits in the nature of medical care or treatment . for self - only coverage , the annual limit on out - of - pocket expenditures for covered benefits must not exceed $6,050 in 2012 . for family policies , the limit must not exceed $12,100 . these amounts will be adjusted for inflation ( rounded to the nearest $50 ) in future years . these limits should not be interpreted as ceilings on all out - of - pocket expenditures for health care . premiums for the hdhp and other insurance would be extra , as would payments for benefits not covered by insurance .