so why would these markets suffer from bubbles ? few goods markets meet these criteria . if it had done so , could a recession have been avoided ? is the targeting of asset bubbles consistent with the fed's dual mandate of maximum employment and low inflation ? how can bubbles emerge when standard economic theory strongly predicts they cannot ? and given theoretical predictions , how would the fed be able to accurately identify a bubble ? in his classic study , kindleberger argued that a bubble often emerges after a legitimate shift in fundamentals that warrants some increase in asset prices . in the case of equity prices in the 1990s , fundamental changes such as the acceleration in productivity growth , reduction in inflation , increased appetite for risk , strength and duration of that economic expansion , and so on merited some legitimate increase in stock prices . in hindsight , it is clear that these fundamental changes did not justify the full increase in stock prices that actually occurred . yet , at the time , financial professionals justified the price rises by using optimistic assumptions about fundamentals within standard models . a market is said to be competitive when there are many buyers and sellers who are perfectly informed and rational , prices can be easily altered , and there are no barriers to entry . a bubble is said to occur when price does not equal marginal cost . standard economic theory ( called "efficient markets" theory ) strongly concludes that bubbles cannot occur in competitive markets because any time price exceeds marginal cost , producers will increase their supply , thereby pushing price back down to marginal cost . at first glance , few markets seem to better fit the "perfect competition" criteria than the markets for equities and homes — there are millions of buyers and sellers , an enormous number of transactions take place , information abounds , professional analysts closely evaluate market trends , prices adjust rapidly , and so on . equity prices are based on the present discounted value of future dividends and price appreciation . obviously , it is extremely difficult to accurately forecast these values into the distant future , and this would seem to suggest that bubbles could form . still , standard theory rules out bubbles developing based solely on uncertainty for two reasons . first , theory predicts that systematic errors will not be made by market participants overall . in other words , optimistic and pessimistic prediction errors should on average nearly cancel out . most participants should not systematically overestimate future prices , as a bubble implies . second , standard theory does not necessarily require all market participants to be equally smart or sensible . but it predicts that less skilled participants will eventually be driven out of the market because they regularly lose money in transactions with more skilled participants . in other words , analysts who recognize the existence of a bubble should be able to profit from it by selling stocks short , and in the process of short selling , the bubble should be deflated . this possibility seems to rule out a large and protracted bubble similar to the one that developed in the 1990s .