they differ in how to fund them . 788 would authorize appropriations to carry out the bill's provisions ; s. 484 would rely on user fees , expanding fda's existing authority to use such fees ; and h.r . 1165 does not address funding . the iom committee not only recommended that congress provide "substantially increased resources" to fda , but noted that all its other recommendations could not be implemented without those resources . table 1 addresses the range of fda drug safety activities that the iom recommended , along with fda's response , and activities that the bills would authorize or require . the table structure follows the 25 iom recommendations within the five categories of organizational culture , science and expertise , regulation , communication , and resources . highlighted below are a few of the more significant items regarding drug safety . iom released its report in september 2006 . fda issued its response in january 2007 and noted relevant activities the agency has begun and others it has planned . among the planned activities are those in its proposal for a reauthorization of the prescription drug user fee program ( pdufa iv ) . 788 lays out requirements that the new center for postmarket evaluation and research for drugs and biologics would administer ; s. 484 would achieve this with a process it calls a risk evaluation and mitigation strategy ( rems ) ; and h.r . 1165 would allow the secretary to require certain studies . the iom recommended and all the bills would allow the secretary to penalize ( through civil fines , injunctions , or withdrawal of marketing approval or licensure ) sponsors who do not conduct required studies or complete them on time , or who fail to report study results . the iom report and the bills address the need for fda authority to require pre - and postmarket studies . s. 468 alone would give fda the authority to require that those studies compare a drug's safety and effectiveness with that of other drugs . in the meantime , several members of congress have introduced bills to address drug safety and fda's role in protecting the public's health . this report provides a side - by - side comparison of: institute of medicine: recommendations in its september 2006 report , the future of drug safety: promoting and protecting the health of the public ; food and drug administration: announced actions and plans to address problems identified in the iom report ; s. 468 / h.r . 788 ( the food and drug administration safety act of 2007 ) , introduced on january 31 , 2007 , by senators grassley , dodd , mikulski , and bingaman , and representatives tierney and ramstad ; s. 484 ( the enhancing drug safety and innovation act of 2007 ) , introduced on february 1 , 2007 , by senators enzi and kennedy ; and h.r . 1165 ( the swift approval , full evaluation ( safe ) drug act ) , introduced on february 16 , 2007 , by representative markey . the bills and the iom report address many of the same issues , often with similar approaches though at times with major differences .