, to avoid prosecution . to evade arrest or prosecution" ) . thus , there must be some evidence that the person knows his apprehension is sought . the statute's use of the words "to avoid prosecution" confirms that for "flight" to result in a suspension of benefits , it must be undertaken with a specific intent , i.e. thus , the court found the ssa's implementing regulation to be consistent with the statutory requirements because the regulation includes a requirement of a finding of intentional "flight. indeed , the court posited that the regulation "may be stricter than the statute , insofar as it provides that the effective date of a benefits suspension is the date of issuance of a warrant or order issued by a court or other authorized tribunal on the basis of a finding that an individual fled or was fleeing from justice . thus , the regulation does not permit the agency to make a finding of flight ; rather , it demands a court or other appropriate tribunal to have issued a warrant or order based on a finding of flight. the court found that the poms passages cited by the commissioner were in direct conflict with the regulation in that they contemplate suspension of benefits without any finding of "flight" by a court or other tribunal . the court held that benefits may be suspended only as of the date of a warrant or order issued by a court or other authorized tribunal on the basis of a finding that a person was fleeing or had fled from justice . the circuit court remanded the fowlkes case back to the district court for further proceedings consistent with the court's holding that the ssa is only permitted to suspend benefits because of a person's fugitive felon status as of the date that a warrant or court order finding that a person has fled or is fleeing from justice was issued . on april 6 , 2006 , the ssa issued an acquiescence ruling that explains how the agency will apply the fowlkes v. adamec ruling to agency decisions to suspend the benefits of persons deemed to be fugitive felons . although the fowlkes case dealt only with ssi benefits , this acquiescence ruling will apply to all administrative determinations or decisions by the ssa involving title ii and title xvi applicants , title ii beneficiaries and title xvi recipients who live in states within the jurisdiction of the court of appeals for the second circuit ( i.e. , connecticut , new york , and vermont ) . the acquiescence ruling went into effect on april 6 , 2006 , however , it can be applied retroactively to the date of the court's decision in fowlkes , december 6 , 2005 , if a beneficiary or recipient can demonstrate that the application of the acquiescence ruling would have changed the outcome of his or her case . within the states affected by the fowlkes decision , the ssa will no longer rely solely on the existence of an outstanding warrant to determine the fugitive status of a beneficiary . see black ' s law dictionary 670 ( 8 th ed . 2004 ) ( defining "flight" as "[t]he act or an instance of fleeing , esp .