the district court rejected all three arguments . the district court concluded that the question of fox's standing was irrelevant because the court had "an obligation to implement the mandate issued by the eleventh circuit even without the request of any party. the district court also found that , according to controlling case law , it was unable to review or alter the mandate from the court of appeals , as the parties' settlement agreement did not present new evidence or an intervening change in controlling law , the only circumstances under which the district court held it would have discretion to review the court of appeals' mandate . the district court also concluded that implementing the law would not constitute "manifest injustice," as it would be "neither clearly erroneous nor contrary to law," the standard for a court making that finding . the report concludes with possible legislative action . the satellite home viewer act of 1988 ( shva ) , as amended , grants satellite carriers like echostar a compulsory license to retransmit copyrighted "distant network programming" to "unserved households. the purpose behind granting the compulsory license is to "satisfy the public interest in making available network programming in these ( typically rural ) areas , while also respecting the public interest in protecting the network - affiliate distribution system. distant network programming is programming that a satellite television subscriber receives from a network - affiliated broadcast station located outside his or her market area . an example is a person who lives in fort lauderdale but receives an abc , cbs , fox , or nbc network station from new york city . an unserved household , for the purposes of this discussion , is one in which a subscriber ( 1 ) cannot receive an over - the - air television signal at a certain level of signal intensity , ( 2 ) has received a waiver from the local affiliated network station , or ( 3 ) is grandfathered in . under shva , the satellite carrier bears the burden of proving its subscribers reside in unserved households . if it fails to provide sufficient evidence that a household is unserved , the satellite carrier may be held liable for damages and injunctive relief . for households receiving an over - the - air television signal , shva permits two methods of determining whether a household is unable to receive a signal of requisite strength: the use of the "accurate measurements method" and the "accurate predictive model. the accurate measurements method requires actual physical measurements to determine the strength of the television signal at the subscriber's residence , performed in accordance with statutory and regulatory requirements . by contrast , the accurate predictive model , or illr , does not require home visits , yet allows the satellite carrier , through a computer model , to presumptively establish that a household cannot receive a sufficient signal and is therefore unserved . penalties for violating shva vary , depending on whether they are classified as "individual violations" or "patterns of violations. an individual violation occurs where there is a willful or repeated retransmission to a subscriber who is not eligible to receive the transmission .