challenged in the d.c . circuit court of appeals , the pm 10 standard was remanded to epa , the court having concluded that pm 10 is a "poorly matched indicator" for thoracic coarse particles , because it includes the smaller pm 2.5 category as well as the larger particles . in response , earlier this year , epa proposed a 24-hour standard for pm 10-2.5 . the standard would have been set at a level of 70 µg / m 3 , compared to the current 24-hour pm 10 standard of 150 µg / m 3 . the final standards signed by the administrator september 21 reversed course , leaving in place the current form of the standard ( pm 10 ) and the current level ( 150 µg / m 3 ) . the only change to the pm 10 standard was revocation of its annual component . the agency argues that it has provided more thorough reasoning in support of the use of pm 10 as its coarse particle indicator , and believes that its explanation will satisfy the court . a major focus of congressional attention in the first session of the 109 th congress was whether to take action on the clear skies act , a bill that would regulate multiple pollutants from coal - fired electric power plants . a tie vote in the senate environment and public works committee blocked a senate version of the bill , s. 131 , from advancing to the senate floor , march 9 , 2005 . the committee's 9-9 vote brought to an end , probably for the remainder of the congress , further attempts to find a compromise on clear skies amendments . earlier markups of clear skies , scheduled for february 16 , march 2 , and march 3 , 2005 , had been postponed so that senators could undertake discussions aimed at crafting a compromise . the bill would have significantly amended the clean air act to establish a cap - and - trade system for emissions from electric power plants and other sources of air pollution , while eliminating or deferring numerous existing regulations affecting those sources . coal - fired power plants are among the largest sources of air pollution in the united states . under the clean air act , they are not necessarily subject to stringent requirements . emissions and the required control equipment can vary depending on the location of the plant , when it was constructed , whether it has undergone major modifications , the specific type of coal it burns , and , to some extent , the vagaries of epa enforcement policies . more than half a dozen separate clean air act programs could potentially be used to control emissions , which makes compliance strategy complicated for utilities and difficult for regulators . and , since the cost of the most stringent available controls , for the entire industry , could range into the tens of billions of dollars , utilities have fought hard and rather successfully to limit or delay regulation . as a result , emissions from power plants have not been reduced as much as those from some other sources .