appendix a . calculating effective capital income tax rates the tax rates in this paper are calculated by first determining , given a required after - tax return and an expected rate of decline in productivity of the asset due to depreciation , how much the investment must initially produce in order for the sum of profits after tax over time , discounted by the after - tax return , to equal the individual investment outlay ( i.e. , to break even ) . then all of the tax payments and deduction are eliminated and the before profit flows are used to determine what pre - tax discount rate would sum the flows to original cost . the effective tax rate is the pre - tax rate of return minus the after - tax rate of return , divided by the pre - tax rate . discounting means dividing each flow by a discount factor ; for a flow earned a year from now , the discount factor is , for a flow earned two years from now , for a flow three years from now , where r is the discount rate . in practice , however , the analysis uses a continuous time method with continuous compounding . the formula derived from this method is ( 1 ) where r is the pre - tax return , r is the after - tax discount rate of the corporation , d is the economic depreciation rate , u is the statutory tax rate , and z is the present value of depreciation deductions ( discounted at , where is the inflation rate ) . the effective tax rate for equity at the firm level is . when including individual level taxes and debt finance , the tax rate is measured by determining r as above , where , where f is the share debt financed , i is the nominal interest rate , and e is the real return to equity before individual tax but after corporate tax . e is equal to d + g , where d is the dividend rate and g is the growth rate . the after - tax real return , is , where t is the effective individual tax rate and c is the effective capital gains tax rate . the total tax rate is . for a more complete description of the methodology and data sources , including useful lives for depreciation purposes , formulas for measuring z , and the allocation of assets in the economy , see [author name scrubbed] , the economic effects of taxing capital income , cambridge , ma , mit press , 1994 . for purposes of this analysis , the following assumptions were made: the interest rate is 7.5% , the inflation is 2% , and the real return to equity before individual taxes is 7% , with a 4% return ( or 57% of real profits ) paid as dividends . the corporate rate is 35% , the average individual marginal tax rate on investment income is 23% ( data consistent with calculations in the national bureau of economic research taxsim model ) .