there is no single account for war funding in any agency . generally , war funding is appropriated in regular appropriation accounts for incremental expenses associated with war activities or programs . for dod , war funding designations has been provided in individual accounts in emergency supplemental , omnibus , or dod appropriation acts for amounts that cover incremental or additional expenses related to deploying military personnel , conducting combat or train and assist operations , and supporting troops overseas . according to recent reports , the administration is considering keeping more u.s. troops in afghanistan at least into the spring of 2014 to make up for shortages in training capacity due to delays in commitments of isaf allies to commit troops . there may also be pressure to retain troops because of the administration's recent agreement to expand the mission of u.s. forces to include providing air support and sometimes accompanying iraqi ground troops on operations . at the september 4 , 2014 , wales summit , international security assistance force ( isaf ) , made up of united states and its allies supporting afghanistan , "reaffirmed their commitment" to operation resolute support , the "non - combat train , advise , and assist mission in afghanistan beyond 2014. . there were no specific funding commitments beyond 2015 . if the afghan government signed a bilateral security agreement ( bsa ) , isaf agreed to "contribute significantly to the financial sustainment of the ansf [afghan national security force] throughout the decade of transformation. on september 30 , 2014 , the united states and afghanistan signed the bilateral security agreement , the day after president ghani succeeded president karzai , who had been unwilling to sign the agreement . in light of this potential , long - term commitment , and the current presence of over 60,000 u.s. troops in the region , congress may have to face the issue of whether and how much dod funding would be needed in later years and whether those funds should continue to be designated as oco — and exempt from budget limits — or whether paying for a u.s. "enduring presence" mission like the u.s. military in south korea or japan should be carried in the base budget . post - withdrawal expenses that might or might not be considered "oco" could possibly include the cost of residual u.s. troops in the region or the "enduring presence" ; continued support of the afghan security forces in the next decade ; continued or expanded funding of train - and - equip programs with partner countries ; and reset and reconstitution of equipment , army and marine corps excess strength from the earlier planned force structure expansion , and some intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) programs , as proposed in the fy2015 ctpf request . in august , 2014 , press reports suggested that dod would soon issue "migration guidance" to the services for the fy2016 budget that would identify areas currently funded as oco that would be folded back into the base budget . more recently , dod deputy secretary robert work suggested that oco funding should be continued but under stricter rules .