that is right . the president pro tempore . is there objection to that understanding . the chair hears none , and it is agreed to . bill managers apparently took the initiative in propounding unanimous consent agreements . their increasing use in subsequent decades led one senator , roger mills , d - tx , to complain that the senate "reaches its vote on all questions like the historic diet of poland , by the unanimous agreement of the whole , and not by the act of the majority. other issues associated with these early accords also sowed confusion among the membership . many of the complaints stemmed from the fact that the early unanimous consent agreements were often viewed "as an arrangement simply between gentlemen" and could , as a president pro tempore once said , be "violated with impunity by any member of the senate. to reduce the confusion , the senate adopted a new rule . the fundamental objective of rule xii was to clarify several uncertainties associated with these senatorial contracts . in the early 1900s , the senate took modest steps to reduce some of the confusion associated with unanimous consent agreements , such as requiring these accords to be submitted in writing to the desk , read to the chamber , and "printed on the title page of the daily calendar of business as long as they were operative. more changes were in the offing , however . two overlapping factors explain why the senate agreed to a formal rules change to govern these accords . first , there were a couple of ambiguities associated with these accords that continued to arouse contention and confusion . past precedents simply did not adequately address these recurring problems . second , a riveting event — a senator was caught by "surprise" when a unanimous consent agreement was entered into — underscored the need for a formal rule ( rule xii ) to clear up issues associated with these "gentlemen's agreements. today , in a period of heightened individualism and partisanship , unanimous consent agreements tend to be piecemeal , such as establishing debate limits on a number of discrete amendments without limiting the number of amendments or specifying a time or date for final passage of the legislation . still , compared with the compacts promulgated during the early 1900s , today's accords are often broader in scope , more complex , and involve more procedural detail . a large body of precedents has even evolved to govern "how [unanimous consent agreements] are to be interpreted and applied in various situations. in short , unanimous consent agreements are essential to the processing of the senate's workload and protecting the procedural prerogatives of individual senators . the president pro tempore . perhaps the first instance occurred in the mid - 1840s . on april 13 , 1846 , however , a consensus developed among senators that a final vote on the joint resolution should occur three days later . finally , after spending around 65 days debating the matter , the senate on april 16 enacted the joint resolution .