no action was taken on the measure . on july 18 , 2008 , the senate appropriations committee reported its version of the fy2009 department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , s. 3288 ( s.rept . among its cuba provisions , the bill would have provided $1 million for preliminary work by the department of state , or other entity designated by the secretary of state , to establish cooperation with appropriate cuban agencies on counternarcotics matters . the report to the bill recommended full funding for the administration's requests of $34.392 million for cuba broadcasting and $20 million in esf for cuba democracy programs , and called for the state department and usaid to conduct regular evaluations to ensure the cost effectiveness of the programs . no action was taken on the measure . on july 14 , 2008 , the senate appropriations committee reported its version of the fy2009 financial services and general government appropriations bill , s. 3260 ( s.rept . 110 - 417 ) , which included provisions that would have eased restrictions on payment terms for the sale of agricultural goods to cuba ( section 618 ) , travel relating to the sale of commercial and agricultural goods ( section 619 ) , and family travel ( section 620 ) . no action was taken on the measure . on july 11 , 2008 , the gao issued a report that criticized the practices of the international broadcasting bureau and the office of cuba broadcasting for their practices in awarding noncompetitive contracts in december 2006 to two private u.s. commercial stations to transit radio and tv martí . according to gao , the approach for awarding the two contracts did not reflect sound business practices . ( u.s. government accountability office , "broadcasting to cuba , weaknesses in contracting practices reduced visibility into selected award decisions," gao - 08-764 , july 2008. ) on june 25 , 2008 , the house appropriations committee approved a draft version of the fy2009 financial services and general government appropriations bill that included provisions that would have eased restrictions on family travel and u.s. agricultural exports to cuba . the house appropriations subcommittee on financial services and general government had approved the measure on june 17 . no action was taken on the measure . ( also see " restrictions on travel and remittances " and " agricultural exports and sanctions " below. ) on june 19 , 2008 , the european union approved the permanent lifting of diplomatic sanctions that it had imposed on cuba in 2003 . the action was largely symbolic , because the sanctions had been temporarily suspended since 2005 . cuban foreign minister felipe perez roque welcomed the eu's decision , which will be reviewed in 12 months . u.s. state department officials looked positively at the benchmarks that will be used in the eu's dialogue with cuba , including cuba's release of political prisoners , implementation of the international covenant on civil and political rights , access to the internet , and allowing all eu delegations to meet with members of the opposition as well as the cuban government .