current reports indicate that beekeepers in most states have been affected . overall , the number of managed honey bee colonies dropped an estimated 35.8% and 31.8% in the winters of 2007 / 2008 and 2006 / 2007 , respectively . preliminary loss estimates for the 2008 / 2009 winter are reported at 28.6% . to date , the precise reasons for colony losses are not yet known . this report provides an overview of the importance of honey bee pollination to u.s. agricultural production , especially specialty crops . it describes the extent and symptoms of ccd and how it differs from previous honey bee colony losses , describing some of the reasons why scientists believe honey bee colonies are being affected by ccd . finally , the report discusses policy options and actions that congress has taken to address this issue . honey bees ( apis mellifera ) are the most economically valuable pollinators of agricultural crops worldwide and are the only bee species kept commercially in the united states . in the united states , bee pollination of agricultural crops is said to account for about one - third of the u.s. diet , and to contribute to the production of a wide range of high - value fruits , vegetables , tree nuts , forage crops , some field crops , and other specialty crops . the monetary value of honey bees as commercial pollinators in the united states is estimated at about $15 billion annually ( table 1 ) . some studies report the estimated value of honey bee pollination at as much as $20 billion annually . this estimated value is measured according to the additional value of production attributable to honey bees , in terms of the value of the increased yield and quality achieved from honey bee pollination , including the indirect benefits of bee pollination required for seed production of some crops . about one - third of the estimated value of commercial honey bee pollination is in alfalfa production , mostly for alfalfa hay . another nearly 10% of the value of honey bee pollination is for apples , followed by 6% - 7% of the value each for almonds , citrus , cotton , and soybeans . overall , pollinator - dependent crops are reported to make up an estimated 23% of total u.s. agricultural production in 2006 , up from an estimated 14% in the 1960s . a number of agricultural crops are almost totally ( 90% - 100% ) dependent on honey bee pollination , including almonds , apples , avocados , blueberries , cranberries , cherries , kiwi fruit , macadamia nuts , asparagus , broccoli , carrots , cauliflower , celery , cucumbers , onions , legume seeds , pumpkins , squash , and sunflowers . other specialty crops also rely on honey bee pollination , but to a lesser degree . these crops include apricot , citrus ( oranges , lemons , limes , grapefruit , tangerines , etc .

 ) , peaches , pears , nectarines , plums , grapes , brambleberries , strawberries , olives , melon ( cantaloupe , watermelon , and honeydew ) , peanuts , cotton , soybeans , and sugarbeets .