in addition to these measures , h.r . 2649 called for establishing no - fly zones during periods of high terrorist threat levels and any other applicable times identified by the dhs around all sensitive nuclear facilities , chemical facilities where a release of hazardous materials could endanger one million or more lives , and any other facilities designated by the secretary of homeland security . also during the 109 th congress , representative sweeney introduced the general aviation security act of 2005 ( h.r . this bill would have required all operators of public and private - use airports in the united states to register with the dhs and undergo a registration renewal process every three years . vision 100 ( p.l . in developing security plans , operators would have been required to provide a written description of how the airport has addressed each recommendation or justify why a particular recommendation was not adopted . the legislation called for using self - assessment tools to identify airport characteristics for security purposes in the development of airport - specific security plans . in addition to providing security plans to the dhs as part of the registration process , airports would have also been required to submit their security plans to local law enforcement agencies having jurisdiction over the airport . this encompasses a wide variety of aircraft types and flight operations . table 1 shows the distribution of aircraft and flight operations formally categorized as ga . since september 11 , 2001 , policies and approaches for protecting ga aircraft and airports from being exploited in terrorist attacks have focused on providing general guidelines and establishing cooperative arrangements between the ga industry and the tsa for carrying out security enhancements without imposing a rigorous statutory or regulatory framework . the ga industry has argued that inflexible statutory or regulatory measures could impose unnecessary burdens on certain sectors of the ga industry and could be extremely costly to carry out effectively . legislative actions addressing ga security have focused primarily on the vetting of foreign flight school applicants , ga pilots , and more recently , prospective charter and lease customers . regulatory actions have primarily focused on airspace restrictions and protections , mostly around the nation's capital , in addition to addressing statutory mandates for vetting certain individuals with access to ga airports and aircraft . physical security of ga airports and aircraft has largely been left to aircraft owners and pilots , airport operators , and local authorities . while aircraft owners and pilots have generally favored this approach to avoid potentially restrictive federal security regulations , it has created a perceived burden on airport operators and local authorities to identify and address security needs at the airport level . the tsa has issued guidelines , largely based on industry recommendations , but the federal involvement in terms of both regulatory activity and funding for ga security initiatives has been relatively limited . this approach has led the media and some policymakers and security experts to voice concerns over what they perceive to be persisting vulnerabilities at some ga airports . some media reports have raised significant concerns over what has been described as "practically nonexistent" security at many small general aviation ( ga ) airports .