in the house report ( h.rept . 109-265 ) accompanying the fy2006 foreign operations appropriations ( p.l . 109-102 ) , members urged ogac to develop and implement a strategy to address the nutritional requirements of those taking arvs . in division j — the explanatory section for department of state and foreign operations appropriations — of the fy2008 consolidated appropriations , congress directed that ogac allocate no less than $100 million of pepfar funds to "address short - term and long - term approaches to food security as components of a comprehensive approach to fighting hiv / aids. additionally , in december 2007 , representative donald payne introduced the global hiv / aids food security and nutrition support act of 2007 ( h.r . 4914 ) to amend the pepfar authorization to integrate food security and nutrition activities into hiv / aids activities . some hiv / aids advocates oppose congressional spending requirements , in part because they limit the ability of implementers to explore emerging technologies . a growing number of health experts are increasingly optimistic about the possible development of a microbicide . hiv / aids proponents urge congress to increase support for microbicide research and development . members have introduced legislation in support of microbicide research , such as house and senate versions of the microbicide development act ( h.r . the bills amend the public health service act ( 42 u.s.c . 300cc - 40 et seq. ) and direct the office of aids research to expedite the implementation of a federal microbicide research and development plan , annually review the plan , and prioritize related funding and activities . the bills also mandate the director of the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases to establish , within the division of aids , an organizational unit that would conduct microbicide research and development . the bills direct the head of the office of hiv / aids at usaid to develop and implement a program that would support the development of microbicides products and facilitate their wide - scale availability . some researchers recommend that congress expand support for hiv / aids vaccine research and development . drug resistance complicates efforts to halt the spread of tb and malaria . who estimates that about 450,000 new multi - drug - resistant tb cases occur each year . in september 2006 , who expressed concern about an increase in treatment - resistant tb cases , particularly in the soviet union , asia , and south africa . who found that extensive drug resistant tb ( xdr - tb ) is resistant not only to the two main first - line tb drugs — isoniazid and rifampicin — but also to three or more of the six classes of second - line drugs . health experts are particularly concerned about the most recent outbreak of xdr - tb in south africa , which killed 52 out of 53 patients within 25 days on average , including those being treated with anti - retroviral medication .