section 1273 . provisions from s. 2497 / h.r . 5141 on the extension of war reserves stockpile authority and the joint u.s. - israel assessment on pgms . arms sales , information sharing , and technical collaboration between the united states and israel raise questions about what israel might do with capabilities or information it acquires . the united states and israel have regularly discussed israel's dealings on sensitive security equipment and technology with various countries , especially china . sources have reported that the united states has established de facto veto power over israeli third - party arms sales . and s ince the 1980s there have been at least three cases in which u.s. government employees were convicted of disclosing classified information to israel or of conspiracy to act as an israeli agent . the united states is israel's largest single - country trading partner , and — according to data from the u.s. international trade commission — israel is the united states's 24 th - largest trading partner . the two countries concluded a free trade agreement ( fta ) in 1985 , and all customs duties between the two trading partners have since been eliminated . the fta includes provisions that protect both countries' more sensitive agricultural sub - sectors with nontariff barriers , including import bans , quotas , and fees . israeli exports to the united states have grown since the fta became effective . qualified industrial zones ( qizs ) in jordan and egypt are considered part of the u.s. - israel free trade area . in 2017 , israel imported approximately $12.6 billion in goods from and exported $21.9 billion in goods to the united states . the united states and israel have launched several programs to stimulate israeli industrial and scientific research , for which congress has authorized and appropriated funds on several occasions . for historical background on these issues , see crs report rl34074 , the palestinians: background and u.s. relations , by [author name scrubbed] . the prospects for an israeli - palestinian peace process are complicated by many factors . since president trump took office , he and officials from his administration have expressed interest in brokering a final - status israeli - palestinian agreement . many of their statements and policies , however , have raised questions about the timing and viability of any new u.s. - backed diplomatic initiative . the change in u.s. policy on jerusalem in december 2017 has complicated the u.s. role ( see " jerusalem ," below ) . israeli leaders generally celebrated the change , but plo chairman abbas strongly objected . many other countries opposed president trump's statements on jerusalem . this opposition was reflected in december action at the united nations . citing alleged u.s. bias favoring israel , palestinian leaders have broken off high - level political contacts with the united states and have sought support from other international actors and organizations to improve their negotiating position with israel . however , the pa continues security coordination with israel . tensions over jerusalem appear to have influenced administration decisions to reduce or delay certain types of aid to the palestinians , and have made prospects for restarting israeli - palestinian talks in 2018 less certain .