marshals service . the task forces locate and apprehend fugitives and are composed of members of federal , state , and local law enforcement . 110 - 177 authorizes $10 million each fy for fy2008 through fy2012 for the fugitive apprehension task forces . 110 - 177 extends the provision in current law that allows for the redaction of information in financial disclosure reports submitted by judges , justices , or judicial officers until december 31 , 2011 . this section discusses provisions in s. 378 , h.r . 3547 that would have addressed judicial security but are not included in p.l . several provisions in the aforementioned bills would have increased sentences for specified offenses , as discussed below . 2325 would have created specific penalties for people who commit certain crimes against federal judges or law enforcement officers ( as those terms are defined in 18 u.s.c . the bill would have provided for a fine and imprisonment for any term of years not less than 30 years , or life , or , if death results , the death penalty , for anyone who is convicted of murdering , attempting to murder , or conspiring to murder a federal judge or law enforcement officer . the bill would have required a fine and a term of imprisonment of not less than 15 years , but not more than 40 years , for anyone convicted of committing voluntary manslaughter against a federal judge or law enforcement officer . the bill would have also required a fine and a term of imprisonment of not less than 3 years , but not more than 15 years , for anyone convicted of committing involuntary manslaughter against a federal judge or law enforcement officer . the bill would have provided for a fine and a term of imprisonment for any term of years not less than 30 years , or life , or , if death results , the death penalty , for anyone convicted of kidnapping a federal judge or law enforcement officer . 2325 would have increased the penalty from a fine , 8 years imprisonment , or both to a fine , 15 years imprisonment , or both for anyone who forcibly assaults , resists , opposes , impedes , intimidates , or interferes with a u.s. government employee ( as defined in 18 u.s.c . ยง 1114 ) while the employee is engaged in or on account of the employee's performance of official duties , or for anyone who forcibly assaults or intimidates any former u.s. government employee on account of the employee's performance of official duties during the employee's time of service , if the person's actions constitute assault other than simple assault . the bill would have increased the penalty from a fine , 15 years imprisonment , or both to a fine , 20 years imprisonment , or both for anyone who uses a deadly or dangerous weapon to commit one of the above described assaults , or who inflicts bodily injury while committing one of the above described assaults . the bill would have also set forth specific penalties for assaults against federal judges and law enforcement officers .