june 2001 . 82 p. u.s. congressional budget office . future investment in drinking water and wastewater infrastructure . washington , november 2002 . 58 p. u.s. environmental protection agency . the national water quality inventory: 2000 report . washington , september 2002 . "epa - 841-r - 2-001. . the clean water and drinking water infrastructure gap analysis . washington , september 2002 . "epa - 816-r - 02-020. . clean watersheds needs survey 2000 , report to congress . washington , august 2003 . "epa - 832-r - 03-001. . 1 vol . u.s. government accountability office . key epa and state decisions limited by inconsistent and incomplete data . ( gao / rced - 00-54 ) march 2000 . water infrastructure: information on financing , capital planning , and privatization . ( gao - 02-764 ) august 2002 . 79 p . other factors also are at work . these include a general reluctance by most members of congress to address controversial environmental issues in view of the slim majorities held by political parties in the house and the senate ; lack of presidential initiatives on clean water issues ( neither the clinton nor the bush administration proposed cwa legislation ) ; and , since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , more prominent congressional focus on security , terrorism , and iraq war issues than on many other topics , including environmental protection . national research council , national academy of sciences . assessing the tmdl approach to water quality management . national academy press , washington , dc . authorizations for wastewater treatment funding expired in fy1994 . none of these programs has lapsed , however , as congress has continued to appropriate funds to implement the act . the clean water act has been viewed as one of the most successful environmental laws in terms of achieving its statutory goals , which have been widely supported by the public , but lately some have questioned whether additional actions to achieve further benefits are worth the costs . criticism has come from industry , which has been the long - standing focus of the act's regulatory programs and often opposes imposition of new stringent and costly requirements . criticism also has come from developers and property rights groups who contend that federal regulations ( particularly the act's wetlands permit program ) are a costly intrusion on private land - use decisions . states and cities have traditionally supported water quality programs and federal funding to assist them in carrying out the law , but recently many have opposed cwa measures that they fear might impose new unfunded mandates . many environmental groups believe that further fine - tuning to strengthen the act is needed to maintain progress achieved to date and to address remaining water quality problems . the year 2002 marked the 30 th anniversary of passage of the clean water act and 15 years since the last major amendments to the law . while , as noted , there has been measurable clean water progress as a result of the act , observers and analysts agree that significant water pollution problems remain . however , there is less agreement about what solutions are needed and whether new legislation is required .