if so , why , or why not nationwide ? how important is the problem ? while the problem may be acute in some areas , it may be less so in others — should an adjustment to the program acknowledge such differences and focus federal resources in certain areas ? should it be a federal responsibility to promote reuse in the west ? how does reuse contribute to national well - being ? if congress decides to affirm a federal role for water reuse in the west , a different set of questions arises: how does promoting or facilitating reuse in the west facilitate other federal goals , objectives , and legal obligations ( eg , protection of threatened and endangered species ) ? how does , or could , the title xvi program mesh with other federal activities ( eg , interior's water 2025 challenge grant initiative or calfed water reuse and storage activities ) ? should the program be tied to alleviating demand or reducing existing diversions where endangered species or other fish and wildlife , or water quality concerns are at issue ? should it be used to help communities drought - proof their supplies , or to slow pressure on agricultural water supplies , by possibly slowing conversion of "agriculture - to - urban" water transfers ? will promotion of water reclamation and reuse simply encourage more growth in already water scarce areas ? will growth or development come at the expense of federal investment in other economically depressed areas with plentiful water resources ? these questions are just a few that arise when discussing the future of title xvi . oversight hearings have been held on the title xvi program in both the 108 th and 109 th congresses ; however , only recently have comprehensive bills been introduced which would amend title xvi . stakeholders include local and regional proponents of new but unauthorized title xvi projects , proponents of authorized yet unfunded title xvi projects , the administration , congressional sponsors and committees of jurisdiction , as well as traditional reclamation stakeholders concerned about the programs' potential to siphon funds away from non - title xvi projects . the title xvi program is at a crossroad . growing demands on water resources in the west and elsewhere make it likely that demand for assistance with water reclamation and reuse projects will continue to increase . depending on one's perception of problems with the title xvi program , different solutions to resolving program issues will be sought . different stakeholders will have different opinions on the magnitude , importance , and scope of the broad policy , program criteria , project evaluation , and funding issues identified in this report . congress and the administration have several options to address title xvi implementation issues . resolution of these issues will depend on many factors , including whether or to what degree congressional and administration priorities for the program can be articulated and balanced . for example , it appears from recent testimony that projects sponsors are generally interested in a more streamlined project development process and expanded program appropriations , while the administration supports a more limited program with long - term objectives focused on federal interests .