a provision in the senate version of h.r . 4297 ( 109 th congress ) would have eliminated a portion of the tax benefits from lifo inventory accounting for major integrated oil companies with gross receipts in excess of $1 billion . under threat of presidential veto , this provision , which would have increased taxes on such companies by an estimated $3.5 billion in fy2006 , was deleted from the final law , the tax increase prevention and reconciliation act of 2006 ( p.l . a fourth example is the foreign tax credit , which is a federal tax credit against u.s. tax liabilities for income taxes paid to foreign countries . this section of the tax code is intended to prevent the double taxation of foreign source income ( income earned abroad by u.s. residents and corporations ) . however , many countries in which domestic u.s. oil companies conduct business ( either through branches or foreign subsidiaries ) impose levies that are not strictly considered to be creditable income taxes , which may have the effect of going beyond prevention of double taxation of foreign source income — it may actually lead to a reduction of taxes on domestic source income . a provision in the senate version of h.r . 4297 ( 109 th congress ) would have denied the foreign tax credit , under certain conditions , for major integrated oil companies with gross receipts in excess of $1 billion . this method values the goods sold as the most recent inventory purchase . during a period of rising prices , this method of inventory accounting increases production costs and reduces taxable income and tax liabilities . the foreign tax credit would have been denied in the event that the foreign levy was assessed in exchange for an economic benefit provided by the foreign jurisdiction to the domestic oil company and if the foreign jurisdiction did not generally impose an income tax . this provision , which would have increased taxes on such companies by an estimated $0.8 billion over the 10-year period from fy2006 to fy2015 , was deleted from the final law , the tax increase prevention and reconciliation act of 2006 ( p.l . finally , table 2 excludes targeted taxes that impose special tax liabilities on the domestic oil and gas industry — taxes that are not imposed on other industries . the bill passed the house on january 18 by a vote of 264-123 . the energy policy act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-58 ) , enacted on august 8 , 2005 , expanded some of the existing tax subsidies for the oil and gas industry and created several new ones . the oil and gas tax incentives in epact05 were added on top of several existing special tax subsidies for oil and gas . the industry also benefits from provisions of current tax law that are not strictly tax subsidies ( or tax expenditures ) but that nevertheless provide advantages for and reduce effective tax rates of the oil and gas industry . the remainder of this report discusses these tax provisions in detail . the first section , below , discusses the origin and evolution of the oil and gas tax subsidies that were incorporated into the 2005 act .