among them is h.r . 2744 , the fy2006 agriculture appropriations bill , which was signed into law as p.l . section 796 of this law specifies circumstances under which religious organizations are exempt from criminal penalties related to the smuggling and harboring of certain aliens , and states that it is not a violation of ina ยง274 for a bona fide , nonprofit , religious organization to encourage or allow an unauthorized alien to work for the religious organization as a volunteer minister or missionary . under the provision , the alien must have been a member of the religious denomination for at least one year and may not be compensated as an employee , but may be provided room , board , travel , medical assistance , and other basic living expenses . 4437 , as passed by the house , and s. 2611 , as passed by the senate , would rewrite ina ยง274 . although the bills are similar , they are not identical in language or in scope . both bills would broaden the types of acts that are considered alien smuggling . for example , they would make it a smuggling offense to transport a person outside the united states knowing or in reckless disregard of the fact that the person is in unlawful transit from one country to another , or on the high - seas , and is seeking to illegally enter the united states . s. 2611 would also provide new exemptions from criminal liability for persons or organizations providing assistance to unauthorized aliens on humanitarian grounds ( such exemptions are not contained in current law ) . 4437 , in contrast , contains no such exemptions , and would also remove the current exemption contained in p.l . 109-97 for religious organizations that encourage certain unauthorized aliens to work for the organizations as volunteer ministers or missionaries . in addition , h.r . 4437 and s. 2611 would establish mandatory minimum sentences for those convicted of alien smuggling , and would enhance penalties for persons carrying firearms during smuggling offenses . furthermore , as recommended in a recent government accountability office ( gao ) report on alien smuggling , both proposals would amend the law to allow for the seizure and forfeiture of any property used to commit or facilitate alien smuggling . other pending bills would variously increase penalties or establish minimum penalties for alien smuggling ( h.r . 3938 , s. 1916 , s. 2061 ) ; increase the personnel devoted solely to combating alien smuggling ( h.r . 688 ) ; and grant s visas to aliens outside the united states who have information on alien smuggling operations ( h.r . under the ina , there is broad authority to detain aliens while awaiting a determination about whether the aliens should be removed from the united states . the law mandates that certain categories of aliens be subject to mandatory detention ( i.e. , the aliens must be detained ) . aliens subject to mandatory detention include those arriving without documentation or with fraudulent documentation , those who are inadmissible or deportable on criminal or national security grounds , those certified as terrorist suspects , and those who have final orders of deportation .