each of these are briefly examined below . the army's flage / srhit program conducted eight flight tests from 1984-1987 to prove the feasibility of lower atmosphere intercepts . five of these flight tests were planned intercept attempts . from the data provided by mda all the primary and secondary test objectives in the series were achieved . the targets included stationary targets in the atmosphere and an air - launched target . only one target , however , was a short - range missile . can the now - deployed nmd system protect the united states from long - range ballistic missile attacks ? can kinetic energy interceptor technologies for use against long - range ballistic missiles be developed successfully and deployed as an effective part of the u.s. military posture ? the answer appears to be ambiguous at this juncture . currently , there is insufficient empirical data to support a clear answer . there have been a number of major kinetic - energy tmd programs since the early 1990s: extended range intercept technology ( erint ) , flexible lightweight agile guided experiment / small radar homing intercept technology ( flage / srhit ) , navy lightweight exoatmospheric projectile ( leap ) , the navy aegis bmd , patriot pac - 3 , and theater high altitude area defense ( thaad ) . the degree to which any conclusions might be drawn regarding very short - range hit - to - kill in this effort is therefore limited . building on the srhit effort , the army's erint flight test program ( 1992-1994 ) conducted five flight tests . three of these were planned intercepts ; two of these three flight tests successfully intercepted their targets ( the failure cited was hardware related ) . despite the missed intercept , the army concluded that all of its primary test objectives for the three tests were met fully or partially , and that all but one of the 26 secondary objectives in the three tests were met . only then , they could argue , could assessments to confirm the validity of the hit - to - kill concept for bmd be made with confidence . as far as the two non - intercept flight tests were concerned , the army determined that all of its primary and secondary flight test objectives were met . the navy developed its own indigenous leap program , which flight tested from 1992-1995 . three non - intercept flight tests achieved all primary and secondary objectives . of the five planned intercept tests , only the second was considered a successful intercept , however . failures were due to various hardware , software , and launch problems . even so , the navy determined that it achieved about 82% of its primary objectives ( 18 of 22 ) and all of its secondary objectives in these tests . building on some of its previous efforts in srhit and erint , the army's thaad program nevertheless experienced significant challenges from 1995 to 1999 . after three relatively successful non - intercept flight tests ( almost all of the primary and secondary test objectives were partially or fully met ) , thaad failed to intercept in seven of its nine planned attempts .