others are u.s. challenges to developing countries . the issues generally cut across u.s. trade relations with most developing countries at all levels of economic development . the report will be updated as determined by events . the category "developing countries" includes economies representing many levels of economic development . however , they share one important quality: they are generally technology receivers rather than technology innovators , and so their economies still have room to "catch up" with industrialized countries through the increased application of technology - based production . some of the developing countries have been more successful in "catching up" than others , leading to wide gaps in economic welfare among them . for the purposes of this report , developing countries include all countries except australia , new zealand , europe , japan , canada , and the united states . the term also excludes the former soviet republics and the former communist states in central and eastern europe . u.s. trade policy toward developing countries is evolving . for many years , the policy largely consisted of trade preference programs extended conditionally and unilaterally to various groups of developing countries . while those programs are still in place , u.s. trade policy is clearly shifting with successive presidential administrations . the bush administration especially has negotiated bilateral and regional reciprocal trade agreements with a decided emphasis on trade with developing countries . observers have also pointed out that u.s. trade policy toward developing countries is ambiguous — on the one hand encouraging trade liberalization through trade preference programs and free trade agreements , while on the other hand applying high import tariffs on products in which developing countries are more likely to have a comparative advantage: labor - intensive goods and semi - finished goods that contain raw materials . the emergence of developing countries as an important factor in u.s. trade has generated a range of policy issues that , while not unique to developing countries , arise more often in u.s. trade with them . the issues described below do not constitute an exhaustive list but , nevertheless , represent the most prevalent issues that have emerged in u.s. bilateral and multilateral negotiations with developing countries . some of the issues are developing country challenges to the united states ; that is , changes to u.s. laws and practices . developing countries have become an increasingly significant factor in u.s. trade over the last two or more decades , and this influence is reflected in the issues on the trade agenda of the 110 th congress: the possible renewal of trade promotion authority ( tpa ) ( or fast track trade authority ) ; implementing legislation for ftas ; reauthorization of trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) for workers and firms ; review and possible re - authorization of gsp and other trade preference programs ; oversight of the doha development agenda ( dda ) round negotiations in the wto ; and other issues . the growth of developing countries' foreign trade presents the united states with opportunities and challenges . the imports from many developing economies provide u.s. consumers with an ever widening range of choices of products at lower prices , raising real incomes and contributing to a higher u.s. standard of living .