101-508 ) led to more sustainable fiscal policies . european union fiscal rules on public deficits and debt - to - gdp ratios , however , may not have led to sustainable fiscal policies in some countries . while the recent economic recession and past policy choices have led to large deficits in fy2008 and fy2009 , the divergence between government revenues and expenditures is projected to grow . the "fiscal gap," the estimated magnitude of revenue increases or spending decreases necessary to stabilize the ratio of public debt to gdp over a given time horizon , is one measure of that divergence . according to cbo extended baseline projections , the "fiscal gap" between government revenues and spending over the next 25 years may be as high as 2.1% of gdp or a total of an additional $7.1 trillion in debt over the next decade . cbo's alternative fiscal scenario , which many analysts believe gives a more realistic approximation of future policy , puts the 25-year fiscal gap even higher at 5.4% of gdp . over longer horizons , the fiscal gap is projected to become wider still . the "cash for clunkers" program ( p.l . 111-47 ) was created to generate auto sales and improve fuel efficiency . some argue that the program helped the automobile manufacturers general motors and chrysler remain viable concerns , encouraged greater sales of cars made in the united states , and prevented larger increases in unemployment . arra extended a first - time home - buyer tax credit that provides up to an $8,000 credit to first - time home buyers for sales occurring between january 1 , 2009 , and april 30 , 2010 . while these programs stimulated home and auto sales , many suspect that they were more effective in shifting the timing of sales rather than affecting the overall volume of sales . helping households smooth income , according to standard public finance theory , may justify short - run deficits . the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; h.r . 111-5 ) funded programs that are projected to provide $814 billion to stimulate the economy with financial assistance , loans provided to financial firms , and increased government spending including aid given to states . certain supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) benefits were cut by p.l . 1546 ) , which is projected to reduce arra spending in future years . in 2008 , tax cuts and income tax refunds under president bush also provided economic stimulus and increased personal consumption expenditures . the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( eesa ; p.l . 110-343 ) , injected capital into key financial markets as part of the troubled assets relief program ( tarp ) . if governments were required to balance their budgets in each fiscal year , so that current spending were constrained by available cash reserves and incoming revenues , then negative economic shocks would require spending cuts or tax increases . public spending tends to rise during recessions due to the effect of automatic stabilizers , while revenues fall .