appendix a . selected provisions of the child and family services act of 2006 as compared to prior law and to earlier versions of the bill ( section references in prior law column are to the social security act , as amended prior to enactment of p.l . 109-288 ) appendix b . legislative history of the promoting safe and stable families program at least since the creation of the current federal child welfare program structure by the adoption assistance and child welfare act of 1980 ( p.l . researchers have suggested more study of the effectiveness of specific caseworker activities , more effective and more selectively delivered parent training classes ( which are a staple service in both preservation and reunification cases ) and different service delivery models , or activities on behalf of specific subgroups of child welfare clients ( eg , young mothers or families with substance abuse concerns ) are needed . need for in - home services apart from the specific way in - home services are delivered to families , there remains an apparent need for services to families in which children have not been removed from their homes but have been maltreated in those homes . of the estimated 872,000 children found to be victims of child maltreatment in fy2004 , a little more than 40% received in - home services ( following the investigation that confirmed their maltreatment ) , an additional 19% were removed to foster care while the remaining 41% of these child victims continued to live at home and received no post - investigation services of any kind . while some of the children may not have been served because their parents refused assistance offered ( unlike removal to foster care , parents generally must voluntarily participate in services offered to intact families ) , researchers also note that there may not be enough of the kind of services needed or there may be long waiting lists for the services . beyond the substantial number of children and families arguably in need of services who do not receive them , a case - level analysis of findings in the initial child and family services review ( cfsr ) shows that states were less successful in meeting the needs of children and families served in their own homes , than those with children in foster care . this analysis found that in the on - site review of cases , in - home cases were significantly more likely than foster care cases to receive an "area needing improvement" rating for a number of key indicators related to ensuring the well - being of children and families . these items in which in - home cases were significantly more likely to receive this rating than foster care cases include those related to assessing child and family needs and providing needed services ; involving children / families in case planning ; adequate face - to - face worker visits with children ; and ensuring that children receive services to meet their educational , mental health and physical health needs . in - home cases were also significantly more likely to be rated lower on the safety item related to reducing risk of harm to children served than were foster care cases .