data security act of 2007 . this bill would prescribe security procedures which an entity that maintains or communicates sensitive account or personal information must implement and enforce in order to protect the information from an unauthorized use likely to result in substantial harm or inconvenience to the consumer . the bill defines "sensitive personal information" as an individual's name , address , or telephone number combined with at least one of the following relating to that individual: ( 1 ) the social security number or numbers derived from that number ; ( 2 ) financial account or credit or debit card numbers combined with codes or passwords that permit account access , subject to exception ; or ( 3 ) a state driver's license or resident identification number . the proposed act requires a covered entity ( 1 ) to report a security breach to the federal trade commission ( ftc ) ; ( 2 ) if the entity determines that the breach creates a reasonable risk of identity theft , to notify each affected individual ; and ( 3 ) if the breach involves at least 1,000 individuals , to notify all consumer reporting agencies specified in the fair credit reporting act . the bill would also authorize additional appropriations for investigating and prosecuting criminal activity involving computers . 4175 would require the u.s . sentencing commission to review and amend , if appropriate , its sentencing guidelines and policies related to identity theft and computer fraud offenses . the bill authorizes the attorney general and state attorneys general to bring civil actions and obtain injunctive relief for violations of federal laws relating to data security . 4175 would require federal agencies as part of their rulemaking process to prepare and make available to the public privacy impact assessments that describe the impact of proposed agency rules on the privacy of individuals . personal data privacy and security act of 2007 . this bill would amend the federal criminal code to ( 1 ) make fraud in connection with the unauthorized access of sensitive personally identifiable information ( in electronic or digital form ) a predicate for racketeering charges ; and ( 2 ) prohibit concealment of security breaches involving such information . the bill also directs the u.s . sentencing commission to review and amend its guidelines relating to fraudulent access to , or misuse of , digitized or electronic personally identifiable information ( including identify theft ) . additionally , the bill requires a data broker to ( 1 ) disclose to an individual , upon request , personal electronic records pertaining to such individual maintained for disclosure to third parties ; and ( 2 ) maintain procedures for correcting the accuracy of such records . the bill also establishes standards for developing and implementing safeguards to protect the security of sensitive personally identifiable information . additionally , the bill imposes upon business entities civil penalties for violations of such standards and requires such business entities to notify ( 1 ) any individual whose information has been accessed or acquired ; and ( 2 ) the u.s. secret service if the number of individuals involved exceeds 10,000 .