presidential powers also are shared . for instance , the president has the constitutional authority to nominate senior officers of the executive branch and all federal judges and justices and to negotiate treaties with other nations . the senate must agree , however , by majority vote to each of his nominations , and no treaty can take effect unless the senate approves it by a two - thirds vote . the president also is commander - in - chief of the armed forces , but congress passes legislation controlling the size , composition , and budget of the military . in short , if either branch of government is to fulfill its constitutional responsibilities effectively , it needs the cooperation , or at least the acquiescence , of the other . the reason for this system of shared powers lies in both an historic mistrust of government power and a concern over the efficient administration of the law . the authors of the constitution had experience with excessive power in the hands of executive officials ( the british king and his ministers ) , but they also feared that an uncontrolled legislative majority also might be liable to abuse its power . the best way to protect against abuses of power , they concluded , was to divide it among officials of different institutions , giving these officials an incentive to restrain each other in their own self - interest . the authors' experience with the ineffective articles of confederation also convinced them of the need for a strong apparatus to administer the law , a responsibility they saw better vested in an executive body than the legislature . in this way , a system of "checks and balances" prevents any single institution of government from becoming too powerful . although sharing powers between different institutions can create obstacles and cause delays for the government in making decisions , having a government that its citizens can control and hold accountable was preferred in 1787 , when the constitution was written , to having one effectively controlled by either the executive or the legislative branch . and although circumstances have changed dramatically since then , the fundamental framework of government under the constitution remains unchanged today . in order for the sharing of power to protect against the abuse of power , more is required than the words of the constitution . each branch of government must be able to protect its independence and assert its power effectively . in its continuing effort to preserve its constitutional authority and independence , congress can suffer from an important competitive disadvantage: it often possesses less information and knowledge than the executive branch , which has more than 2.75 million employees . if the executive branch could control what congress knows , it might largely nullify congress's independent exercise of its powers and its ability to oversee the exercise of executive powers . while congress would remain independent of the executive branch in theory , it could become its captive in practice . this is an important reason why congress has created permanent committees of the house and senate with responsibility for studying issues , recommending legislation , and conducting oversight on the subjects assigned to them .