there are other related issues . for instance , will federal , state , and industrial policies to increase support for academic research — but often for short - term applied studies — overwhelm traditional academic research which traditionally has tended toward the conduct of basic research studies ? in a 2003 report , fulfilling the promise: a report to congress on the budgetary and programmatic expansion of the national science foundation ( nsb - 2004-15 ) , the board recommended meeting unmet needs by funding nsf annually at $18.7 billion , including about $12.5 billion for r&d , and outlined priorities for support . because the budget levels recommended in that report had not been attained , the national science board released a final report in january 2006 , 2020 vision for the national science foundation ( nsb 05-142 ) , which identified four main investment principles , attainment goals , and enabling strategies . prominent among groups which in the past recommended increased funding for nsf is the coalition for national science funding ( cnsf ) , which represents many universities and professional science associations . homeland security r&d funding has grown from about 2.5% of the fy2002 federal non - defense r&d budget to about 6.8% of the fy2007 request for non - defense r&d budget authority . see table 1 for trends based on data compiled by the american association for the advancement of science ( aaas ) . homeland security r&d funding is becoming an increasingly significant issue in priority - setting discussions . omb's term "combating terrorism" r&d includes homeland security r&d and overseas combating terrorism r&d . an appendix to omb's fy2007 analytical perspectives budget request volume includes data on homeland security funding , but these data do not clearly identify r&d funding . the largest fy2007 programs are in nih largely for bioterrorism r&d and for containment facilities . this is followed in size by the requests for dhs , dod , nsf , usda , epa , nasa , doe , and the doc's nist . 107-296 , the homeland security act of 2002 , mandated dhs to coordinate federal agency homeland security r&d programs . the law also consolidated some federal homeland security r&d programs in dhs . dhs's r&d funding has almost quintupled since fy2002 but in fy2007 appropriations action , congress reduced dhs r&d funding about 22% below the fy2006 amount ( aaas data , see the appendix table ) . dhs is emphasizing support of development over research , with the result that basic and applied research in dhs would be reduced by about 20% for fy2007 . some observers recommend more centralized r&d priority - setting in congress and in the executive branch . others say that congressional jurisdiction for r&d , split as it is among a number of committees and subcommittees , prevents examination of the r&d budget as a whole . this means that r&d funding can serve particular local or program interests , but may not be appropriate for a national r&d agenda .