appendix a . basic center program ( bcp ) funding appendix b . additional federal support for runaway and homeless youth since the creation of the runaway and homeless youth program , other federal initiatives have also established services for such youth . youth homelessness demonstration program ( yhdp ) : the omnibus appropriations laws for fy2016 through fy2018 enabled hud to set aside up to $33 million ( fy2016 ) , $43 million ( fy2017 ) , and $80 million ( fy2018 ) from the homeless assistance grants account to implement projects that demonstrate how a "comprehensive approach" can "dramatically reduce" homelessness for youth through age 24 . the appropriations laws each fiscal year direct this funding to up to 10 communities with the fy2016 funding ; up to 11 communities with the fy2017 funding , including at least five rural communities ; and up to 25 communities with the fy2018 funding , including at least eight rural communities . hud has allocated $33 million to 10 communities for fy2016 and $43 million for fy2017 . in addition , hud is taking steps to evaluate the yhdp grantee communities in developing and carrying out a coordinated community approach to preventing and ending youth homelessness . ( 3 ) what interventions can be attributed to any positive outcomes experienced by youth who participate in the tlp ? according to hhs , the pilot study revealed challenges "in collecting data from a large enough sample size of youth to detect any effects so that conclusions could be drawn about the impact of homeless youth served by tlps. hhs is not certain how it will move forward with the study . in fy2016 , hhs began the transitional living program special population demonstration project . the project funded nine grantees over a two - year period that tested approaches for serving populations that need additional support: lgbtq runaway and homeless youth ages 16 to 21 ; and young adults who have left foster care because of emancipation . grantees were expected to provide strategies that help youth build protective factors , such as connections with schools , employment , and appropriate family members and other caring adults . according to hhs , a process evaluation will assess how grantees are implementing the demonstration project . hhs separately funded a project from fy2012 through fy2014 to build the capacity of tlps in serving lgbtq youth . known as the 3 / 40 blueprint: creating the blueprint to reduce lgbtq youth homelessness , the purpose of the grant was develop information about serving the lgbtq youth population experiencing homelessness , such as through efforts to identify innovative intervention strategies , determine culturally appropriate screening and assessment tools , and better understand the needs of lgbtq youth served by rhy providers . the website developed by the grantee , the university of illinois at chicago , identifies promising practices that serve lgbtq youth who are experiencing homelessness and publishes information about their challenges . in fy2009 , hhs began the support systems for rural homeless youth demonstration project . six states received grants to support tlps in rural communities in serving young adults who have few or no connections to a supportive family structure or community resources .