no market power . no one acts as if he can influence prices through his actions . symmetric information . however , to the extent society cares about fairness or the evenness of distribution , it may wish to use taxes and transfers to alter the distribution of buying power . if transfers and taxes could be made without economic distortions , then society could move to another distribution of buying power , and the economy would run at full efficiency . in practice , however , all taxes and transfers will cause some economic distortions . thus , society alters the distribution of buying power to a more "fair" allocation , but at some cost of economic efficiency . the rapid rise in health care costs is straining public budgets at all levels of government , and projected increases in health care costs promise to intensify pressures on public budgets . if health care costs continue to grow at past rates , cutbacks in other types of consumption will be inevitable . even if health care costs moderate , a substantial portion of the gains from economic growth will be directed towards the health care system . rising costs have stemmed in part from the introduction of medical advances , which have increased longevity and reduced morbidity . the increasing proportion of the elderly population is another cause of rising medical costs . finally , third - party reimbursement , by shielding consumers from health care costs , makes consumers less sensitive to price signals . this , in turn , gives providers incentives to expand the supply of health care and to change practice patterns to a more complex and intensive style of medicine . rising health care costs have cut into the growth of other types of consumption for most households . in the decades following world war ii , productivity and incomes grew fast enough relative to health care costs to allow steady increases in health and non - health spending . in more recent decades , real incomes for most households grew more slowly while health costs continued to rise rapidly and cut into the growth of non - health expenditures . since 1972 , real incomes for the lower 99% of household grew on average only 1.2% per year to 2002 . over the same period real national health expenditures rose 4.9% a year . had health care spending in the u.s. been held to 10% of gdp , a proportion similar that in canada , france , germany , and switzerland , non - health consumption would have grown about 25% faster . to the extent that choices of rational consumers , or of rational voters and politicians , drive this expansion of the health care system , rising health costs are not necessarily a cause for concern . in all advanced industrial countries the fraction of the economy devoted to health care has been rising . if consumers prefer to buy more technologically advanced medical care rather than more advanced cars or refrigerators , then higher medical costs are a natural consequence of rising standards of living .