most of those killed were ethnic chinese . rioting began on may 13 , three days after the alliance party , a predecessor to the bn , failed to win two - thirds of the seats in the dewan rakyat , and lost control of selangor and perak . much like the results of the 2008 elections , one of the main losers in the 1969 elections was mca , which lost 14 of its 27 seats in the dewan rakyat . because of the rioting , elections to be held in sabah and sarawak were suspended and a state of emergency was declared . partly in response to the 1969 riots , the new economic policy ( nep ) was instituted in 1971 . nep provided preferential treatment for the bumiputera majority via a kind of quota system in order to increase their share of the economic wealth of the country . the new development policy ( ndp ) replaced the nep in 1990 . the ndp retained nep goals , such as 30% bumiputera control of corporate assets . prime minister mahathir's subsequent vision 2020 policy had similar elements , but was more inclusive and attempted to do more to foster national ethnic unity . the bn appears to be relying on an expanding economy to be able to disproportionately favor bumiputeras , while not undermining its economic appeal to malaysia's chinese and indian population . in this way , malaysia's social harmony — and support for the bn — may be linked to economic growth . for this reason , periods of economic stagnation could carry the prospect of eroding the delicate balance between ethnic groups in malaysia and undermining support for the bn . malaysia has been playing an active role in international organizations both in its region and beyond . besides asia pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) , asean , and the world trade organization ( wto ) , malaysia is also a member of the asian development bank ( adb ) , the islamic development bank , the non - aligned movement ( nam ) , organization of islamic conference ( oic ) , the united nations , and the world bank . in 2006 , malaysia chaired asean , the organization of islamic conference ( oic ) , and the non - aligned movement ( nam ) . malaysia has been an active contributor to international peacekeeping , including most recently in east timor . it also sent personnel to assist the aceh monitoring mission in indonesia in 2005 and 2006 . malaysia has also been seeking to facilitate negotiations between the government of the philippines and the moro islamic liberation front . malaysia is a relatively mature industrialized nation , whose economy relies on both domestic forces ( personal consumption and private investment ) and external trade for its growth and development . following a short , severe recession in 1998 and a mild turndown in 2001 , malaysia's real gross domestic product ( gdp ) has grown between 5% and 6% per year for the past five years . the current official government estimate has its real gdp increasing 6.0% in 2007 and projecting 6.0% - 6.5% growth in 2008 ( see table 1 ) .