the woman was not herself infected with the disease , but she was a carrier and had been quarantined in her home . a court inferred that the regulations were properly authorized , but nevertheless struck them down as "not based on any established distinction in the conditions that are supposed to attend the plague , or the persons exposed to its contagions. shortly after , in jew ho v. williamson , the same court noted that the quarantine requirements applied only to chinese residents and questioned whether bubonic plague actually caused the reported deaths . it invalidated the quarantine because it was "unreasonable , unjust and oppressive" and constituted discrimination in violation of the fourteenth amendment . additional legal issues might be raised if quarantine , isolation , and other public health measures were used to deal with a widespread domestic public health emergency . namely , who is responsible for preventing an outbreak of the disease ; and precisely what may be done ? this report will examine federal and state authority to impose quarantine and isolation measures in order to prevent the spread of infectious disease . while the federal government has authority to authorize quarantine and isolation under certain circumstances , the primary authority for quarantine and isolation exists at the state level as an exercise of the state's police power . likewise , a state court in people ex rel . barmore v. robertson refused to grant a habeas corpus petition for a woman who ran a boarding house where a person infected with typhoid fever had boarded . she argued that her quarantine was unwarranted because she was not "actually sick," though the court noted that "[i]t is not necessary that one be actually sick , as that term is usually applied , in order that the health authorities have the right to restrain his liberties by quarantine regulations. for example , both federal and state agencies may have quarantine authority over an aircraft arriving in a large city from a foreign country . thus , coordination between the various levels of government would be essential during a widespread public health emergency . public health measures in emergency situations , including quarantine , involve balancing the rights of individuals with the state's police power to protect the needs of the public health , safety , and general welfare . historically , this balance can be seen in public health crises over the past century or so . the u.s. constitution and federal civil rights laws provide for individual due process and equal protection rights as well as a right to privacy , but these rights are balanced against the needs of the community . however , classic public health measures such as quarantine , isolation , and contact tracing are , nevertheless , available in appropriate situations , and , as new or resurgent diseases have become less treatable , some of these classic public health measures have been increasingly used . therefore , the issue of how to balance these various interests in a modern culture that is sensitive to issues of individual rights has become critical . some courts have recognized an individual's right to challenge his or her quarantine or isolation by petitioning for a writ of habeas corpus .