ultimately , west germany suspended the shipments . however , both to make up for this loss and to address increasing public and political pressure , adenauer offered to establish formal diplomatic relations with israel in march 1965 . as noted previously , germany has been one of the largest donors to the pa , and has provided direct assistance to the palestinian people through the eu's temporary international mechanism ( tim ) since july 2006 . members of congress also remain concerned about eu aid to the palestinians . congress has enacted a series of measures to restrict u.s. funding for the palestinian authority . after hamas's victory in parliamentary elections in january 2006 , chancellor merkel was one of the first european leaders to back quartet conditions for the provision of eu aid and negotiations with hamas . however , since unification and during a period of european integration and unprecedented eu expansion , germany has emerged as an increasingly proactive advocate for greater eu engagement in the middle east . in response to such allegations , german officials consistently cite a steadfast german commitment to the quartet principles . germany subsequently enacted legislation mandating direct compensation to individual victims of nazi crimes . the german government continues to make payments to individuals , mostly by way of pension contributions , and estimates that some 40% , or over 25 billion euros ( approximately $32.5 billion ) , of german reparations and compensation have gone to the state of israel or individuals living in israel . in 1992 , two years after german unification , the government expanded its compensation laws to include individuals previously denied compensation by the former german democratic republic ( east germany ) . according to historians , while the united states supported the idea of german reparations , american officials were unwilling to impose additional financial burdens on the young german state so soon after world war ii and urged israel to negotiate directly with germany . indeed , reparations to israel were neither required by the international community nor wholeheartedly endorsed by the german and israeli people . most agree that german support for israel arose largely due to the individual efforts of adenauer and israeli prime minister david ben - gurion . beginning in 1957 , the two leaders enhanced relations by establishing military ties , avoiding considerable domestic and international opposition by keeping arms shipments secret . in 1964 , german newspaper reports exposed arms shipments to israel , setting off crises both within and between germany , israel and the arab world . until this point , he had resisted renewing an initial 1952 offer of diplomatic ties , fearing retaliation from the arab world . german reparations and compensation for crimes committed during the holocaust and long - standing defense and scientific cooperation continue to represent the cornerstone of a robust german - israeli bilateral relationship . however , as memory of the holocaust fades and public criticism of israeli policies increases , the countries have focused on expanding cultural and broader societal exchanges . successive german governments have prioritized support for israel as a cornerstone of german policy in the middle east .