gulf of mexico states accord . established in1995 , this is an agreement among the eleven u.s. and mexican states ( six mexican states and fiveu.s . states ) bordering the gulf of mexico that is facilitating trade and cooperation between the twocountries . this organization views the gulf of mexico as a "trade superhighway," as a "borderwithout bridges," that promoted , for example , the shipment of daimler - chrysler vehiclesmanufactured in mexico from tampico , mexico , to tampa , florida in less time than using landroutes . other initiatives include promoting environmental standards in the gulf area , encouragingbinational university exchanges , and advancing private sector cooperation under the gulf of mexicopartnership . on march 23 , 2005 , president bush hosted a meeting in texas with president fox and primeminister martin , in which the leaders established the trilateral "security and prosperity partnership ( spp ) of north america. the new partnership seeks to advance the security and prosperity of thecountries , under a conception that is trilateral , but that will allow any two countries to move forwardon an issue , and create a path for the third country to join later . the initiative is to complement , notreplace , existing bilateral and trilateral fora . to implement this partnership the leaders establishedministerial - led working groups that were instructed to develop measurable and achievable goals topromote security and prosperity and to report back to the leaders within 90 days and semi - annuallythereafter . for the united states , the department of homeland security is the lead agency on theworking group on security , and the department of commerce is the lead agency on the workinggroup on prosperity , along with representation by the department of state . ( 29 ) on june 27 , 2005 , secretary of homeland security chertoff and secretary of commercegutierrez met with their canadian and mexican counterparts in ottawa , canada , and released areport to leaders with initial results and proposed initiatives for the future under the security andprosperity partnership ( spp ) of north america . ( 30 ) in the security area , the report discussed efforts to establish common approaches to securityto protect against external and internal threats and to further streamline legitimate trade and travel . among these efforts , the countries would implement common border security and bioprotectionstrategies , enhance infrastructure protection and emergency response plans , improve aviation andmaritime security and intelligence cooperation against transnational threats , and continue to facilitatethe legitimate flow of people and cargo at the borders . interested citizens and businessmenoften attend as well . the 35th meeting of the binational group met may 2-4 , 2005 , in reynosa,mexico , and agreed to advance cooperation to modernize the bridges and crossing points in that areain keeping with the border partnership announced by presidents fox and bush in march 2002 andthe commitments during the binational commission meetings in november 2004 . ( 26 ) border states conferences . operating since1980 , the border governors conference brings together on an annual basis the governors of the tenborder states ( six mexican states and four u.s. states ) to discuss the many issues affecting theborder .