appendix a . selected reports during the last four years , the congressional research service , general accounting office , department of defense inspector general , army audit agency , air force audit agency , and the special inspector general for iraq reconstruction have issued numerous reports on iraq contracting issues , including those listed below . congress dollars , not sense: government contracting under the bush administration . prepared by the special investigations division , committee on government reform - minority staff , u.s. house of representatives , june 2006 . congressional research service crs report rs22923 , department of defense fuel costs in iraq , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl34026 , defense acquisitions: how dod acquires weapon systems and recent efforts to reform the process , by [author name scrubbed] . ( 2 ) is there an appropriate federal role and presence in the oversight area ? and ( 3 ) is the federal government attracting the right types of acquisition professionals ? congress could require a separate report , from each military service , on the size , scope , costs , and structure of its acquisition workforce ( including military , civilian , and contractor personnel ) . congress could require dod to provide more details for better congressional oversight . there are five questions that congress could consider: ( 1 ) should dod move to limit sole - source or limited competition for iraq contracts ? ( 2 ) should dod use more fixed - priced contracting in iraq ? ( 3 ) should task and delivery orders have certain dollar constraints ? ( 4 ) should task orders be subject to public notice ? and ( 5 ) should larger contracts be divided into smaller contracts , with better - defined , discrete tasks ? to create more transparency and openness in defense acquisitions regarding contract administration , costs , and performance , congress could require a separate report from each military service . each report could include data on the size , scope , costs , and structure of all contracts , particularly no - bid , sole - source , and costs - reimbursement contracts . congress also could require that specific criteria be met before certain contract arrangements can be approved by dod or by congress . in addition , congress could require a periodic re - competition of certain types of contracts , like logcap , that have the potential of spanning for many years . congress could also require , for example , that task orders beyond a certain size be treated as a separate contract , and thus subject to competition among multiple contractors . and finally , congress could require that large defense contracts be subject to competition and that a minimum of three contractors be selected for contracts beyond a certain size . given the many problems associated with logcap contracts , oversight agencies like the dod ig could have a pivotal role in preventing future contractor waste , fraud , or mismanagement . congress may want to consider creating a singularly dedicated office for the audit and investigation of dod contracts for troop support services .