( mir was deorbited in 2001. ) phases ii and iii involve construction of the international space station itself , and blend into each other . phase ii began in 1998 and was completed in july 2001 ; phase iii is underway . president george w. bush , prompted in part by the february 2003 space shuttle columbia tragedy , made a major space policy address on january 14 , 2004 , directing nasa to focus its activities on returning humans to the moon and eventually sending them to mars . included in this "vision for space exploration" was a decision to retire the space shuttle in 2010 . the president said the united states would fulfill its commitments to its space station partners . the space transportation system ( sts ) — the space shuttle — is a partially reusable launch vehicle and is the sole u.s. means for launching humans into orbit . it consists of an airplane - like orbiter , with two solid rocket boosters ( srbs ) on each side , and a large , cylindrical external tank ( et ) that carries fuel for the orbiter's main engines . the orbiters and srbs are reused ; the et is not . nasa has three remaining spaceflight - worthy orbiters: discovery , atlantis , and endeavour . in passing the 2005 nasa authorization act ( p.l . 109 - 105 ) , congress basically agreed with the president's plan for directing nasa's attention to a return to the moon and manned missions to mars . the future role of the iss is also unclear . assuming that enough shuttle flights are made to carry out "core completion" of the station by 2010 , it is not clear what will be done with the iss after that . included in the moon - mars "vision" is the plan to end flights of the space shuttle in 2010 , and restriction of u.s. experiments on the iss mostly to those that forward the goal moon - mars goal . a number of critical questions remain , however . three crews were sent to live and work there in 1973-1974 . it remained in orbit , unoccupied , until it reentered earth's atmosphere in july 1979 , disintegrating over australia and the indian ocean . skylab was never intended to be permanently occupied , but the goal of a permanently occupied space station with crews rotating on a regular basis , employing a reusable space transportation system ( the space shuttle ) was high on nasa's list for the post - apollo years following the moon landings . budget constraints forced nasa to choose to build the space shuttle first . the first launch of the shuttle was in april 1981 . when nasa declared the shuttle "operational" in 1982 , it was ready to initiate the space station program . in his january 25 , 1984 state of the union address , president reagan directed nasa to develop a permanently occupied space station within a decade , and to invite other countries to join .