( see figure 1 . ) ( 5 ) how will success be measures and when will we know it is done ? and , ( 6 ) how likely is it that substantial increases will be made to current funding levels for restoration , given the current budget environment ? the great lakes have national and international importance because of their abundant natural resources and relationship to the economies of both the united states and canada . the implementation of the strategy relies on existing authorities , programs , and funding at federal , state , and local levels of government , as well as the creation of some new actions ( eg , enacting new legislation ) . further , the strategy aims to improve coordination among stakeholders and relies on the shared resources of all collaborators , especially noting the role of tribes . the collaboration emphasizes that the strategy is not meant to chart out the complete restoration of the great lakes ecosystem , and that decisions to implement activities affecting the great lakes should be guided by the strategy . the following sections provide a summary of issue areas and recommendations made in the strategy . the strategy envisions itself as the first step towards restoring the great lakes in the near term . its goals and recommendations reflect a five - year span and , according to the strategy , "do not represent all that needs to be done to completely restore the great lakes. the short - term outlook of the strategy and its $20 billion price tag generate questions regarding the process to completely restore the great lakes ecosystem . such questions include ( 1 ) what will it take to completely restore the ecosystem ? an estimated cost for implementing the recommendations over five years is provided after each set of recommendations . ( 2 ) how much will it cost and how long it will take ? ( 3 ) what are the federal and non - federal roles in the process ? ( 4 ) how will the process be governed ? the collaboration is expected to continue to serve as a broad forum to address issues related to restoration and protection of the great lakes ecosystem . the answers to these questions are not addressed in the strategy , but may come from the collaborative process that created the strategy . in 2004 , the great lakes interagency task force was created by an executive order . its purpose is to provide strategic direction on federal great lakes policy . the task force is chaired by the administrator of the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) and contains 10 agency and cabinet - level officers . the task force , in collaboration with the council of great lakes governors , the great lakes cities initiative , great lakes tribes , and the great lakes congressional task force , convened a group known as the great lakes regional collaboration . the collaboration includes representatives from great lakes states , local communities , tribes , nongovernmental organizations , and other interests in the great lakes region . the structure and goals of the collaboration were established through the great lakes framework , which outlined three goals for the collaboration .