they are discussed below . kelly v. arriba soft corp. is a significant internet copyright case arising from the ninth circuit court of appeals . there , the court addressed the interface between the public's fair use rights and two of a copyright holder's exclusive rights—those of reproduction and public display . in field v. google , a u.s. district court considered a claim for copyright infringement against the internet search engine , google . field sought statutory damages and injunctive relief against google for permitting internet users to access copies of images temporarily stored on its online repository , or cache . in the course of granting summary judgment for google , the court explained the caching process: there are billions of web pages accessible on the internet . it would be impossible for google to locate and index or catalog them manually . accordingly , google , like other search engines , uses an automated program ( called the "googlebot" ) to continuously crawl across the internet , to locate and analyze available web pages , and to catalog those web pages into google's searchable web index . as part of this process , google makes and analyzes a copy of each web page that it finds , and stores the html code from those pages in a temporary repository called a cache . once google indexes and stores a web page in the cache , it can include that page , as appropriate , in the search results it displays to users in response to their queries . when google displays web pages in its search results , the first item appearing in each result is the title of a web page which , if clicked by the user , will take the user to the online location of that page . the title is followed by a short "snippet" from the web page in smaller font . following the snippet , google typically provides the full url for the page . then , in the same smaller font , google often displays another link labeled "cached. when clicked , the "cached" link directs an internet user to the archival copy of a web page stored in google's system cache , rather than to the original web site for that page . by clicking on the "cached" link for a page , a user can view the "snapshot" of that page , as it appeared the last time the site was visited and analyzed by the googlebot . the court emphasized that there are numerous , industry - wide mechanisms , such as "meta - tags," for website owners to use communicate with internet search engines . owners can instruct crawlers , or robots , not to analyze or display a site in its web index . owners posting on the internet can use a google - specific "no - archive" meta - tag to instruct the search engine not to provide cached links to a website . in view of these well - established means for communicating with internet search engines , the court concluded that the plaintiff "decided to manufacture a claim for copyright infringement against google in the hopes of making money from google's standard practice.