appendix a . it's not about fences . it's not about border patrol agents . at issue for congress is how best to allocate scarce border security resources while safeguarding homeland security . does border fencing represent the best investment of border security funding , and what is the appropriate mix of border security resources ? in addition , the act provided a total of $1,225 million for sbinet . this represented an increase of $225 million over the administration's request , and the amounts recommended by the house - and senate - passed versions of the bill . of the $1,225 million provided by p.l . 110-161 , $1,053 million was designated as emergency funding , and $172 million comprises regular appropriations . the $1,225 million was apportioned as follows: $1,088 million for development and deployment ( $1,053 million in emergency funding , and $35 million in regular appropriations ) ; $73 million for operation and maintenance ; and $64 million for program management . funding for the construction of the border fence was included in the development and deployment activity in the bsfit account . however , it is important to note that other items , such as the deployment of cameras and sensors to the border , are also funded under this activity . currently available authoritative documentation does not provide funding details below the activity level . therefore , the portion of this funding that would be specifically directed to the border fence cannot be precisely determined . however , according to cbp congressional affairs , the president's $1,000 million fy2008 request for bsfit included $196 million in fence - related funding . 110-161 also withheld $650 million of the funding provided for sbinet until an expenditure plan is received and approved by the house and senate appropriations committees . proposed legislation in addition to the consolidated appropriations act , a number of bills were introduced in the 110 th congress that included provisions relating to the construction of border fencing . although the following analysis is not intended to provide a comprehensive list of every bill introduced that had fencing provisions , it does provide an overview of the main types of fence - related bills that have been introduced and their overarching themes . prior to enactment of the consolidated appropriations act , a number of other bills were introduced in the 110 th congress that would have expanded or underlined the secretary of homeland security's authority to construct fencing at the border . the act gives dhs discretion as to where fencing should be erected along the border , requires that 700 miles of reinforced fencing be constructed , and designates 370 miles as a priority area that must be constructed by december 31 , 2008 . s. 2348 would have authorized $3 billion in emergency funding for a variety of border security purposes , including the construction of 700 miles of fencing . s. 2294 and s. 1984 would have called for the construction of 700 miles of fencing and 300 miles of vehicle barriers within two years of enactment . s. 1269 would have called for the construction of double layer fencing along the border from the pacific ocean to the gulf of mexico .