security . congress may decide to examine theissue of security in greater detail . according to gao , in addition to a requirement to change jtrshardware to accommodate processing and memory capacity upgrades for enhanced security , thecurrent design of jtrs has been judged by the national security agency as: not sufficient to meet security requirements to operatein an open networked environment . specifically , particular versions of jtrs radios will be used byallied and coalition forces , requiring the army to release specific source code of the softwarearchitecture to these forces . to address the release , the national security agency has requiredchanges to the security architecture . ( 65 ) although gao expresses security concerns about jtrs use by allied and coalition forces,it is not readily apparent how pervasive a problem security is for jtrs and other components of thefcs network . given the stated security challenges of software - defined radios , it is conceivable thateven if cluster one and five can meet the army's communications and data transmissionrequirements , that security deficiencies might preclude the operational employment of clusters oneand five . it can be argued that network security would take on an even a more significant role in fcsthan compared to the army's current force . fcs manned ground vehicles - - lighter and less heavilyarmored than the m - 1 abrams and m - 2 bradleys that they are intended to replace - - would relyextensively on situational awareness provided through the fcs network for their survivability.furthermore , this network - provided situational awareness would have a significant impact on fcs'sability to engage enemy forces beyond line - of - sight . developmental . jtrs has experienced a numberof developmental difficulties to date . some of the more notable difficulties are discussed in thefollowing sections . size and weight constraints and limited range . according to a government accountability office ( gao ) report: to realize the full capabilities of the widebandnetworking waveform , ( 10 ) including transmission range , the cluster one radio requiressignificant amounts of memory and processing power , which add to the size , weight , and powerconsumption of the radio . the added size and weight are the results of efforts to ensure the electronicparts in the radio are not overheated by the electricity needed to power the additional memory andprocessing . thus far , the program has not been able to develop radios that meet size , weight , andpower requirements , and the current projected transmission range is only three kilometers - - wellshort of the 10-kilometer range required for the wideband networking waveform .. . the clusterone radio's size , weight , and peak power consumption exceeds helicopter platform requirements byas much as 80 percent . ( 11 ) the inability to meet these fundamental design and performance standards has raisedconcerns that cluster one may not be able to accommodate additional waveforms ( current plan isfor cluster one to have four to eight stored waveforms ) as intended and that it may be too bulky orheavy to fit into the stringently weight and size - constrained fcs manned ground vehicles ( mgvs ) ( 12 ) as well asthe army's helicopter fleet .