( recommendation 66 ) . some argue that bringing pressure to bear on other donors to participate in these relief efforts , either by funding unhcr's current supplemental appeal for iraqi refugees or by providing bilateral funding to host countries with specific allocations to iraqi refugees , could make a measurable difference in the humanitarian situation developing on the ground . determining the immediate steps the united states can take with regard to iraqi idps in particular ( and in a more general sense to the iraqi refugees ) and how other international partners could be involved may prove to be critical in the next phase of the u.s. iraq strategy . iraq's internal population displacement appears to have created a humanitarian crisis that may be beyond the current capacity on the ground . difficult decisions lie ahead including identifying who should be in charge of any comprehensive relief effort , bringing together key players , and working out a coordination strategy . whether or not the modm has the resources and competence to be effective remains to be seen in the long term , but in the immediate circumstance , it is reportedly overwhelmed . it is not clear what role the u.s. military might play in the humanitarian response on a local level in iraq and whether the provincial reconstruction teams ( prts ) may be an immediate resource to consider . amid efforts to tackle rising u.s. budget deficits by , among other measures , slowing or reducing discretionary spending or finding the resources to sustain u.s. aid pledges may be difficult . when disasters require immediate emergency relief , the administration may fund pledges by depleting most worldwide disaster contingency accounts . in order to respond to future humanitarian crises , however , these resources would need to be replenished . if not replenished , u.s. capacity to respond to other emergencies could be curtailed . donor fatigue is also an issue , with some experts concerned about funding priorities and the ongoing need for resources for other disaster areas . in the case of iraq , with a humanitarian crisis at hand , the question of whether sufficient funds have been requested by the administration for a potential crisis remains . some are also concerned about whether the u.s. government should continue to fund the humanitarian needs of displaced iraqis through supplemental appropriations . with a likely budgetary gap at hand , some believe the united states has a greater responsibility to lead the way on committing funds to address the needs of iraqi refugees and idps . they argue that if the united states increased its funding and resettlement numbers , this would encourage other countries in the region , and more broadly in the international community , to do the same . for broader political reasons , finding a balance on burdensharing with the international community may be unique in the iraq context . with respect to the possible repatriation of iraqi refugees , the refugee admissions report to congress states: "it is hoped that significant numbers of iraqi refugees located throughout the middle east and europe will soon be able to return home , although the security situation will remain an important consideration in repatriation.