the motion was denied . the california court of appeals affirmed , finding that suspicionless searches of parolees are permitted under california law and "reasonable" within the meaning of the fourth amendment . in a 6-3 decision , written by justice thomas , the court in examining the totality of the circumstances found that the parolee did not have an expectation of privacy "that society would recognize as legitimate" because on the continuum of punishments , parole is closer to prison that probation . the court noted that a parolee remains in the legal custody of the department of corrections through the remainder of his parole term . moreover , the parolee signed an order submitting to the condition . further , the court found that the state's interest in reducing recidivism is substantial and warrants privacy intrusions not otherwise tolerated . the court noted that requiring individualized suspicion would undermine the state's ability to effectively supervise parolees . justice stevens , joined by justices souter and breyer , dissented , arguing that the fourth amendment provides at least some protection to parolees and , therefore , suspicionless searches by police with no special relationship to the parolee cannot be considered "reasonable. the dissenters argued that this is the first time the court has ever found a search reasonable in the absence of either individualized suspicion or "special needs. further , the dissenters contended that the majority's near - equating of parolees to prisoners was unsupported by precedent . in addition , the dissenters felt that a "special needs" search by parole officers , who have a close relationship to a parolee , might be acceptable , but a blanket authorization allowing a parolee to be searched by any police officer is not . moreover , the dissenters were concerned that there are no procedural protections in california law to ensure that such searches were performed evenhandedly . probable cause is required to justify certain governmental intrusions upon interests protected by the fourth amendment . generally , probable cause is defined as "a fair probability that contraband or evidence of a crime will be found in a particular place. to satisfy the warrant requirement , an impartial judicial officer must assess whether the police have probable cause to make an arrest , to conduct a search , or to seize evidence , instrumentalities , fruits of a crime , or contraband . generally , the magistrate must consider the facts and circumstances presented in the warrant application , including the supporting affidavit , in a practical , common - sense manner , and make an independent assessment regarding probable cause . moreover , the fourth amendment requires that a warrant describe with "particularity ... the place to be searched and the persons or things to be seized. this limitation safeguards the individual's privacy interest against "the wide - ranging exploratory searches the framers [of the constitution] intended to prohibit. in united states v. grubbs , the court found that an anticipatory warrant satisfied the fourth amendment's probable cause requirement so long as there is a fair probability that the condition precedent to execution will occur and that , once it has , evidence of a crime will be found .