latin america has been at the forefront of that reassessment . in particular , some negative consequences for u.s. relations with latin america have occurred as a result of icc - related sanctions . restrictions on military training aid have resulted in a dramatic decline in the number of latin american military personnel receiving training in the united states . similarly , restrictions on economic aid have hindered the ability of u.s. democracy and rule of law programs to work with governments in the region , especially in the andean countries . although most members of congress still support efforts to shield u.s. citizens serving abroad from icc prosecution , many are beginning to oppose the use of sanctions to attempt to persuade countries to sign bilateral immunity ( so - called "article 98" agreements ) . some members of congress advocate ending all icc - related aid restrictions , while others believe that at least some restrictions should remain in place in order to encourage other countries to sign article 98 agreements . the issue of whether to continue these aid restrictions is likely to be considered by the 110 th congress . this paper discusses the evolving policy debate in the u.s. government concerning the use of icc - related foreign aid restrictions . it focuses on the case of latin america and the caribbean , a region in which twelve countries ( including brazil , bolivia , ecuador and mexico ) have faced aid cutbacks for failing to sign an article 98 agreement . there has been strong bipartisan support in congress for legislation aimed at protecting u.s. soldiers and civilian officials from the jurisdiction of the icc . until recently , there had also been strong support for sanctioning some foreign assistance to governments of countries that are parties to the icc and that do not have article 98 agreements with the united states . the aspa and the nethercutt amendment have had an impact on u.s. foreign assistance to latin america and the caribbean . in the last year , policy consequences of the aspa - mandated aid restrictions have prompted debates within the administration and in congress . in particular , consequences of aid cutbacks for u.s. security cooperation in latin america have begun to be examined and have led to some policy shifts . this shift became evident in administration policy , congressional hearings , and in new legislation . at the beginning of 2006 , the bush administration appeared to be divided over whether to continue linking u.s. assistance to article 98 agreements . secretary of state condoleezza rice acknowledged that invoking aspa sanctions on key u.s. military allies may be "sort of the same as shooting ourselves in the foot" and that waivers of military aid restrictions are being considered on a case - by - case basis . in addition , the defense department's quadrennial defense review called for a possible de - linking of military training programs from aspa . although the defense department , and particularly the u.s. southern command , opposed aspa sanctions on military aid , the bureau of political - military affairs of the state department reportedly strongly supported keeping the sanctions in place .