these studies do not support the ordinance . there is no indication that the games used in the studies are similar to those in the record of this case or to other games likely to be marketed in game arcades in indianapolis . the studies do not find that video games have ever caused anyone to commit a violent act , as opposed to feeling aggressive , or have caused the average level of violence to increase anywhere . and they do not suggest that it is the interactive character of the games , as opposed to the violence of the images in them , that is the cause of the aggressive feelings . the studies thus are not evidence that violent video games are any more harmful to the consumer or to the public safety than violent movies or other violent , but passive entertainments . the third and most recent court of appeals decision — the ninth circuit's — struck down a california statute that prohibited the sale or rental to minors of violent video games , and that required that violent video games "be labeled with a sold white '18' outlined in black" that is "no less than 2 inches by 2 inches" in size . applying strict scrutiny , the court held that the act violates rights protected by the first amendment because the state has not demonstrated a compelling interest , has not tailored the restriction to its alleged compelling interest , and there exist less - restrictive means that would further the state's expressed interests . additionally [the court held] that the act's labeling requirement is unconstitutionally compelled speech because it does not require the disclosure of purely factual information ; but compels the carrying of the state's controversial opinion . five federal district courts — in washington , illinois , michigan , oklahoma , and louisiana — have also struck down statutes that denied minors access to violent video games , and have not been reviewed by a court of appeals . what sort of evidence would be adequate to persuade a court that there was a compelling interest in denying minors access to violent video games ? in the st. louis county case , the eighth circuit held: before the county may constitutionally restrict the speech at issue here , the county must come forward with empirical support for its belief that "violent" video games cause psychological harm to minors . in this case , as we have already explained , the county has failed to present the "substantial supporting evidence" of harm required before an ordinance that threatens protected speech can be upheld . we note , moreover ... that the county may not simply surmise that it is serving a compelling state interest because "society in general believes that continued exposure to violence can be harmful to children. where first amendment rights are at stake , "the government must present more than anecdote and supposition. st. louis county also asserted that it has a compelling interest in "assisting parents to be the guardians of their children's well - being.