each is discussed below . over the two hundred year history of the republic , citizens of the district of columbia have sought political and judicial redress in their efforts to secure voting representation in congress . in 2000 , the supreme court affirmed a decision by a three - judge panel of the united states district court of the district of columbia in the case of adams v. clinton , which rejected a petition from district residents seeking judicial redress in their effort to secure voting representation in the national legislature . the court ruled that district residents did not have a constitutional right to voting representation in congress , but congress has the power to grant voting rights to district residents through the political process including options outlined in this report . any of the options outlined in this report must be able to withstand political and constitutional challenges . some , such as a constitutional amendment or retrocession are more problematic than others . others such as statehood , which can be achieved by statute , may trigger other constitutional issues . all must overcome what some observers consider conflicting provisions of the constitution . namely , art . 1 , sec . 2 , of the constitution which states that the house of representative shall be composed of members chosen every two years by the people of the several states and art . 1 , sec . 8 , clause 17 which conveys exclusive legislative authority in all cases whatsoever over the affairs of the district of columbia . it can be argued that , given the district's unique status as the seat of the national government and a strict reading of the constitution , the only fail - safe avenues that exist to provide district residents voting rights in the national legislature are a constitutional amendment or statehood , which could be achieved by statute . the former — a constitutional amendment — offers a degree of finality and permanence in settling the question of district voting representation in the national legislature , but the process of winning approval of such an amendment is by no means easy . to be successful , proponents of a constitutional amendment in support of district voting rights must win the support of two - thirds majority in both houses of congress . the amendment must then be ratified by three - fourths of the states ( 38 states ) in a state convention or by a vote of the state legislatures ; or two - thirds of the state legislatures may call for a constitutional convention for the consideration of one or more amendments to the constitution . if approved , the amendments must be ratified by three - fourths of the states ( 38 states ) in a state convention or by a vote of the state legislatures . the amendment process could take years and prove unsuccessful , as was the case with the d.c. voting rights amendment of 1978 , which was ratified by 16 states , but expired in 1985 without winning the support of the requisite 38 states . retrocession , the ceding of part of the district back to maryland , has not been fully tested in the courts .