wrda 2007 ( p.l . 110-114 ) became law on november 9 , 2007 , authorizing approximately 900 projects , studies , and modifications to existing authorizations . the president vetoed wrda 2007 , citing "excessive authorizations" and a lack of fiscal discipline and priorities . this was the first congressional override of a veto by president george w. bush . ( for information on the override process , see crs report rs22654 , veto override procedure in the house and senate , by [author name scrubbed]. ) the u.s. army corps of engineers is a federal agency in the department of defense with military and civilian responsibilities . crs report rl33597 , mississippi river gulf outlet ( mrgo ) : issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl33188 , protecting new orleans: from hurricane barriers to floodwalls , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl32470 , upper mississippi river - illinois waterway navigation expansion: an agricultural transportation and environmental context , by [author name scrubbed] et al . crs report rl32630 , upper mississippi river system: proposals to restore an inland waterway ' s ecosystem , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs22048 , everglades restoration: the federal role in funding , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rs20702 , south florida ecosystem restoration and the comprehensive everglades restoration plan , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . the agency's regulatory responsibility for navigable water extends to issuing permits for private actions that might affect wetlands and other waters of the united states . wrda is the main legislative vehicle for corps civil works authorizations . after providing background information on wrda , this report considers the major issues that shaped wrda 2007 in the 110 th congress , including changes to corps project development practices and policies , coastal louisiana wetlands restoration activities , umr - iww investments , and everglades restoration projects . because of the number of projects awaiting authorization and the length of time since congress enacted the last wrda in 2000 , there was considerable support among some stakeholders for the 110 th congress to enact a wrda 2007 . the bush administration did not send congress a wrda proposal ; instead , it expressed its position through administration letters and statements of administration policy by the office of management and budget ( omb ) . a reason cited by the president for vetoing wrda 2007 was billions in new authorizations ( including billions for projects that the administration considers to be outside the core mission of the agency ) that create unrealistic expectations among local communities of likely federal actions and funding . the growing backlog of corps construction and maintenance activities , constraints on federal water resources funds , the nation's aging water resources infrastructure , failure of the corps - constructed floodwalls in new orleans during hurricane katrina , and increased attention to the flood risks of urban areas have raised concerns about continuing the practice of adding billions of dollars in authorizations to the corps' portfolio of activities through omnibus wrda legislation .