as part of h.r . 1 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , the 111 th congress is considering legislation to promote the widespread adoption of health information technology ( hit ) , and the bill includes provisions dealing with the privacy and security of health records , and specifically authorizes state attorneys general to file lawsuits in federal court on behalf of state residents , seeking injunctive relief or civil damages against "any person" who violates hipaa's privacy provisions . to carry out the requirements of part c , the hipaa privacy rule , 45 c.f.r . parts 160 and 164 , was adopted as the national standard for the protection of individually identifiable health information . enforcement of the privacy rule began on april 14 , 2003 , except that for small health plans with annual receipts of $5 million or less enforcement began april 2004 . the office of civil rights ( ocr ) in hhs is responsible for enforcing the privacy rule . the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) has delegated authority to enforce the non - privacy hipaa standards , including the security rule . because of the explicit language of hipaa , the privacy rule applies only to a specified set of "covered entities": ( 1 ) health plans , ( 2 ) health care clearinghouses , and ( 3 ) health care providers who transmit information in electronic form in connection with standard transactions governed by the administrative simplification provisions . medicare prescription drug sponsors were added to the list of "covered entities" in 2003 . excluded from the definition of covered entities are employees of covered entities . business associates of covered entities are subject to certain aspects of the privacy rule . the privacy rule applies to protected health information that is individually identifiable health information "created or received by a health care provider , health plan , or health care clearinghouse" that "[r]elates to the ... health or condition of an individual" or to the provision of or payment for health care . the hipaa privacy rule governs the use and disclosure of protected health information by hipaa - covered entities ( health plans , health care providers , and health care clearinghouses ) . the rule requires a covered entity to obtain the individual's written authorization for any use or disclosure of protected health information that is not for treatment , payment or health care operations or otherwise permitted or required by the privacy rule . a covered entity is required to disclose protected health information in two situations: ( 1 ) to individuals when they request access to or an accounting of disclosures of their protected health information ; and ( 2 ) to hhs for compliance review or enforcement action . the hipaa privacy rule permits use and disclosure of protected health information , without an individual's authorization or consent , for 12 national priority purposes .