the sudan accountability and divestment act of 2007 ( p.l . 110-174 ) , enacted into law on december 31 , 2007 , authorizes state and local governments to adopt divestment measures involving ( 1 ) federally identified persons with investments and business in the sudanese energy and military equipment sectors or ( 2 ) persons having a direct investment in or carrying on a trade or business with sudan or the government of sudan , provided certain notification requirements are met ; the statute also provides that a measure falling within the scope of the authorization is not preempted by any federal law or regulation . the enactment is based on s. 2271 , an original bill of the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs ( s.rept . 180 ( lee ) and s. 831 ( durbin ) also addressed sudan divestment by state and local governments ; h.r . 180 passed the house on july 31 , 2007 . there are increased administrative costs related to screening investments for ties to targeted nations . broad restrictions on investment in certain companies could also undermine the goal of a diversified portfolio . whether the market participant exception applies in foreign commerce clause cases also remains unclear . where a state law is challenged as intruding into the federal foreign affairs power , the supreme court's ruling in garamendi suggests that executive agreements or statements might preempt state action , despite a lack of specific agreement language showing the intent to do so . at the same time , the court recommended following justice harlan's standard from the zschernig case as a minimum threshold for foreign affairs preemption , that is , that the state legislation should "produce something more than incidental effect in conflict with express foreign policy of the national government. some commentators have provided practical criticisms of the state divestment laws . for instance , state investors rely on private organizations to identify firms with business interests in targeted countries . the particular concern is that this information might be inaccurate or fail to take account of the federal government's interests . this could lead to divestment activities inconsistent or directly counter to u.s. foreign policy goals . in response , the national conference of state legislatures has asked the federal government to provide u.s. investors with "authoritative information" regarding foreign and domestic firms with financial and investment activities in states that sponsor terrorism . there are also overarching concerns about whether public plans are suitable means for achieving foreign policy goals . besides questions of their efficacy in changing foreign government behavior , divestment measures could diminish the rate of return on investment . these risks are likely to be especially problematic because there may well be limited overlap between those authorizing and making divestment decisions and the stakeholders whom these decisions will affect . president george w. bush , upon signing the act , stated that "the executive branch shall construe and enforce this legislation in a manner that does not conflict" with the federal government's "exclusive authority" to conduct foreign relations . the comprehensive iran sanctions , accountability , and divestment act ( p.l .