appendix a . acronyms appendix b . current law evolved from earlier attempts before bpca 2002 and prea 2003 , fda attempted to spur pediatric drug research through administrative action . table b - 1 shows the administrative and statutory efforts to encourage pediatric drug research . the following discussion highlights selected fda - specific rules and statutes that relate to discussions in this report . rule on drug labeling: 1979 in a 1979 rule on drug labeling ( 21 c.f.r . part 201 ) , fda established a "pediatric use" subsection . the rule required that labeling include pediatric dosage information for a drug with a specific pediatric indication ( approved use of the drug ) . it also required that statements regarding pediatric use for indications approved for adults be based on "substantial evidence derived from adequate and well - controlled studies" or that the labeling include the statement , "safety and effectiveness in children have not been established. despite the 1979 rule , most prescription drug labels continued to lack adequate pediatric use information . the requirement for adequate and well - controlled studies deterred many manufacturers who , apparently , did not understand that the rule included a waiver option . fda , therefore , issued another rule in 1994 . revised rule: 1994 the revised rule attempted to make clear that the "adequate and well - controlled studies" language did not require that manufacturers conduct clinical trials in children . the new rule described how fda would determine whether the evidence was substantial and adequate . if , for example , clinicians would use the drug to treat a different condition in children than its fda - approved use in adults , fda would require trials in children . however , if the drug would be used in children for the same condition for which fda had approved its use in adults , the labeling statement regarding effectiveness could be based on adult trials alone . in such instances , fda might also require pediatric study - based data on pharmacokinetics or relevant safety measures . the 1994 rule continued the 1979 requirement that manufacturers include statements regarding uses for which there was no substantial evidence of safety and effectiveness . it added a requirement that labels include information about known specific hazards from the active or inactive ingredients . food and drug administration modernization act of 1997 three years later , congress provided another approach to increasing pediatric labeling . fdama ( p.l . 105-115 ) , incorporating the provisions introduced as the better pharmaceuticals for children act , created a section 505a ( 21 u.s.c . 355a ) in the ffdca: pediatric studies of drugs . it provided drug manufacturers with an incentive to conduct pediatric use studies on their patented products . if a manufacturer completed a pediatric study according to fda's written request , which included design , size , and other specifications , fda would extend its market exclusivity for that product for six months . the law required that the secretary publish an annual list of fda - approved drugs for which additional pediatric information might produce health benefits .