guar . corp. , to determine whether the statute's retroactivity was rational . under the nachman test , courts examine: "the reliance interests of affected parties , the extent to which impaired private interests were previously subject to regulatory controls , the equities of imposing the burdens , and the statutory provisions that moderate the impact of the burdens. the court first determined that gpx had failed to identify a "vested right with which [ p.l . 112-99 ] interferes," noting that there is no right to import and that when trade remedies apply , importers have no certainty as to the final duty that that will apply . therefore , gpx could not demonstrate that it had a vested property right in any particular rate . considering the second factor , the court stated that "the area of trade is a highly regulated field in which duties are calculated … based on imprecise and retrospective trade remedy laws. the court noted that gpx had notice that china's status as a nme was uncertain at the time of the imports and that it is particularly difficult to predict duty rates , leading the court to conclude that "[a]s plaintiffs continued to enter merchandise , the only certainty was that there would be litigation. considering the third factor , the balance of the burdens , the court accepted the government's assertion that congress acted "based on the legitimate state interest of protecting u.s. industry from unfair trade practices while also ensuring the finality of existing cvd orders. the court did not explicitly consider the final nachman factor but ultimately concluded that congress did not act irrationally . finally , gpx claimed that p.l . 112-99 violated constitutional guarantees of equal protection by employing a standard that allowed double remedies on nme products subject to trade remedy investigations initiated between november 6 , 2006 and march 13 , 2012 while employing a standard that protects against double remedies on nme products subject to trade remedy investigations initiated after march 13 , 2012 . the court once again applied rational basis review and upheld the differential treatment , concluding that it was rationally related to the government's interest in the finality of the cvd investigations initiated between november 6 , 2006 , and march 13 , 2012 . having concluded that p.l . 112-99 was constitutional , the court proceeded to review doc's methodology for determining the cvds . the court remanded a number of issues to the department for reconsideration . first , the uscit remanded to commerce the issue of whether a subsidy to a company acquired by gpx was extinguished by the terms on which gpx acquired the company . second , the court remanded to commerce the issue of whether the company acquired by gpx received subsidized loans . 112-99 on further proceedings in the case . the united states asked that the appellate decision be vacated , arguing that it was not final and had been superseded by the new law , and that the case be remanded to the u.s. court of international trade for further proceedings in light of the new statute .