but the same provision in h.r . 3067 , and s. 725 would exempt these expenditures from the self - employment tax by allowing the self - employed to treat them as a deductible business expense . if enacted as proposed in these bills , the exemption would reduce the after - tax cost of health insurance to the self - employed by 15.3% , the self - employment tax rate . to what extent have these objectives been achieved ? numerous bills to create new tax subsidies for the purchase of health insurance have been introduced in the 111 th congress . some of the subsidies would be of greater benefit to the self - employed than the current deduction under irc section 162 . a case in point is a proposal ( h.r . 879 ) to establish a refundable tax credit for individuals who purchase health insurance on their own in the non - group market . depending on its design , such a credit could lead to more extensive health insurance coverage among self - employed individuals , as well as the population at large . a key consideration is the effective rate of the credit . if it is large enough to lower the after - tax cost of health insurance more than the deduction does , then a self - employed individual would be better off claiming the credit . a simple example illustrates this point . suppose a self - employed individual in the 15% tax bracket buys a health insurance policy for $3,000 . would he or she be better off with a 50% refundable tax credit for that purchase or a deduction of $3,000 ? with the credit , the after - tax cost of the policy would be $1,500 , but with the deduction , the after - tax cost of the policy would come to $2,550 . because the credit is refundable , the individual would receive the credit even if he or she has no federal income tax liability . at least five bills in the current congress would modify the deduction to equalize the tax treatment of health insurance purchased by the self - employed and the tax treatment of health benefits obtained by wage earners through their employers . under current law , health insurance expenditures by the self - employed are subject to the self - employment tax , whereas employer contributions to employee health plans are not subject to payroll taxes . a decline of that size may be sufficient to spur an increase in the health insurance coverage rate for the self - employed . it is not clear what the revenue cost of the proposed exemption would be . depending on the amount , the estimated cost could influence future congressional deliberations over whether to adopt such an exemption . health insurance coverage among the self - employed could also be affected by any major health care reform legislation congress passes . the 111 th congress is considering a variety of proposals to expand health insurance coverage and curb the rate of growth in health care spending .