this report is divided into three sections . the first describes the current intergovernmental division of responsibilities for flood management and the federal role and interest in flood management . the second provides a framework for understanding flood risk management issues and the challenge of addressing the reliability and level of protection of the nation's levees . the third section describes actions that the 110 th congress has already taken and selected remaining issues that it , and many previous congresses , have faced . recent major flooding events have drawn attention to ongoing debates about how to improve management of flood risk and the roles and responsibilities of individuals , communities , and the various levels of government . as with many other policy areas , the federal system has resulted in public functions for flood damage reduction being shared by all levels of government . local governments are responsible for land use and zoning decisions that direct floodplain and coastal development ; however , numerous federal and state flood policies and programs influence local and individual decision - making . the federal government also funds some flood and storm damage reduction measures , manages a flood insurance and mitigation program , and provides disaster assistance . it also generates essential data through mapping and other efforts . levees may be built by federal , state , or local entities ( including private entities at the local level ) . generally , levees are maintained by a local entity , with some exceptions . local levee districts are generally the first entities responsible for monitoring levee conditions during flooding . the levee districts are also the first entity responsible for emergency response . if a flood or other emergency exhausts the levee district's flood fighting resources , the district typically contacts the state . the state will contribute its flood fighting resources to the local effort ; as the state's resources are exhausted , it typically will contact the corps for assistance under the corps' emergency response authority . hurricane katrina and recent midwestern flooding demonstrate that not only property damage but also significant risks to life , economic disruption , and other social hardships occur during floods . flood risk is a composite of three factors: vulnerability , which allows a threat to cause consequences ( eg , level of protection provided by levees and dams , their reliability , and location within a floodplain ) ; threat of an event ( eg , probability of a category 5 hurricane storm surge or a 200-year flood affecting a particular location ) ; and consequence of an event ( eg , property damage , loss of life , economic loss , environmental damage , reduced health and safety , and social disruption ) . in the first omnibus water resources development act ( wrda , which is the legislative authorization vehicle for the corps ) enacted after hurricane katrina — wrda 2007 ( p.l . 110-114 ) — congress addressed a number of policy changes and authorized numerous flood and storm damage reduction projects and project modifications .