these ratios continue to remain relatively constant . the major international components of federal policies for the reduction of illicit supply are discussed below . on march 1 , 2006 , the state department released its annual international narcotics control strategy report ( incsr ) , a congressionally - mandated comprehensive assessment of the efforts of foreign nations to combat the illicit drug trade and drug related money laundering . the primary stated goal of u.s. international drug policy is to reduce the supply of illicit narcotics flowing into the united states . a second and supporting goal is to reduce the amount of illicit drugs cultivated , processed , and consumed worldwide . u.s. international drug control policy is implemented by a multifaceted strategy that includes the following elements: eradication of narcotic crops ; interdiction and law enforcement activities in drug - producing and drug - transiting countries ; international cooperation ; sanctions / economic assistance ; and institutional development . the u.s. state department's bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement ( inl ) has the lead role in coordinating u.s. international drug intervention and suppression activities . three major ongoing policy initiatives that are prominent components of u.s. international drug control efforts are described below . they are: ( 1 ) plan colombia / the andean counterdrug initiative ; ( 2 ) programs to counter illicit poppy cultivation and opium production in afghanistan ; and ( 3 ) the drug certification process . the direction of drug policy does not appear to be an immediate top foreign policy priority for the george w. bush administration . to date , pressing concern over issues such as terrorism and homeland security appear to command more attention . this does not mean that international drug policy has been neglected by the administration , or given a lower priority than by preceding administrations . for example , in addition to fine - tuning the nation's annual national drug control strategy , the administration has crafted and published the nation's first - ever synthetic drug control strategy . possible issues of concern to congress relating to international drug control policy and strategy implementation include the following: ( 1 ) can plan colombia and the andean counterdrug initiative as currently envisioned have a meaningful impact on reducing drug shipments to the united states and in reducing the current level of violence and instability in colombia ? to what degree can a counter - drug plan which does not aim to deal a decisive blow to insurgent operations in colombia be expected to meaningfully curb drug production and violence there ? ( 2 ) how does u.s. involvement in anti - drug efforts in the andean nations affect other aspects of american foreign policy in the region , and in latin america generally ? does a concentration on drug - related issues obscure more fundamental issues of stability , governance , poverty , and democracy ( i.e. , to what degree are drugs a major cause , or result , of the internal problems of certain latin american countries ) ? might u.s. pursuit of drug control objectives conflict in certain ways with efforts to resolve colombia's ongoing civil conflict , for instance by alienating large rural constituencies in contested regions of the country ?