, debt held by government accounts ) . borrowing from the public and the investment of the social security trust funds in special u.s. government obligations both fall under the restrictions of the federal debt limit . social security's past surplus revenues , therefore , are not available to finance benefits directly when social security is operating with annual cash flow deficits , as it does today . approximately 70% of those beneficiaries were retired workers and 13% were disabled workers . although all of the monies within the u.s. treasury are federal monies , the designation of an account as a trust fund allows the government to track revenues dedicated for specific purposes ( as well as expenditures ) . the remaining beneficiaries were the survivors of deceased insured workers or the spouses and children of retired or disabled workers . social security is financed primarily by payroll taxes paid by covered workers and their employers . the program is also credited with federal income taxes paid by some beneficiaries on a portion of their benefits , reimbursements from the general fund of the treasury for various purposes , and interest income from investments held by the social security trust funds . social security tax revenues are invested in u.s. government securities ( special issues ) held by the trust funds , and these securities earn interest . the tax revenues exchanged for the u.s. government securities are deposited into the general fund of the treasury and are indistinguishable from revenues in the general fund that come from other sources . funds needed to pay social security benefits and administrative expenses come from the redemption or sale of u.s. government securities held by the trust funds . the secretary of the treasury ( the managing trustee of the social security trust funds ) is required by law to invest social security revenues in securities backed by the u.s. government . the purchase of u.s. government securities allows any surplus social security revenues to be used by the federal government for other ( non - social security ) spending needs at the time . this trust fund financing mechanism allows the general fund of the treasury to borrow from the social security trust funds . in turn , the general fund pays back the trust funds ( with interest ) when the trust funds redeem the securities . the process of investing social security revenues in securities and redeeming the securities as needed to pay benefits is ongoing . the social security trust funds are both designated accounts within the u.s. tr easury and the accumulated holdings of special u.s. government obligations . both represent the funds designated to pay current and future social security benefits . the social security program is financed primarily by revenues from federal insurance contributions act ( fica ) taxes and self - employment contributions act ( seca ) taxes . fica taxes are paid by both employers and employees , but it is employers who remit the taxes to the u.s. treasury . employers remit fica taxes on a regular basis throughout the year ( eg , weekly , monthly , quarterly or annually ) , depending on the employer's level of total employment taxes ( including fica and federal personal income tax withholding ) .