australia is the driest inhabited continent . environmental challenges include introduced species , water quality , drought , wildfire , flooding , poor soil conservation , coral bleaching , and overfishing . about 6% of the land is arable . australia is an urban society , and 80% of australians live within 100 kilometers of the coast . sixty - eight percent of the 2,700 introduced plants are considered a problem for natural ecosystems as are many of the introduced animals . much of australia's flora and fauna are unique to australia . one environmental priority for the government is the land care program . over the period 2014-2018 the australian government is to invest a$1 billion to deliver biodiversity and sustainable agriculture outcomes that benefit australia's community and environment . the landcare program seeks to address problems such as loss of vegetation , soil degradation , the introduction of pest weeds and animals , changes in water quality and flows , and changes in fire regimes . this sentiment is also reflected in a regional arms race . australia contributed to the international coalition against terrorism ( icat ) and sent rotations of special forces troops plus regular troops to iraq and afghanistan . this support stems from australia's desire to support the united states and from a shared perspective on islamist extremist violence . terrorist attacks against australians in indonesia did much to shape australia's perceptions of islamist threats in the post - 9 / 11 environment . in 2002 , bombs decimated two crowded nightclubs full of foreign tourists in bali , indonesia , killing more than 200 foreigners and indonesians , and injuring over 300 . there were 88 australians among the dead and 7 americans . indonesian officials attributed the bombing to the militant islamic network jemaah islamiya ( ji ) , which had links to al qaeda . ji also carried out an attack against the australian embassy in jakarta in 2004 and a second attack in bali in 2005 . some within ji at that time reportedly set as their goal the establishment of an islamic state that would encompass indonesia , malaysia , the southern philippines , and northern australia . australian and indonesian counterterror cooperation improved as a result of cooperation on the investigation into the bali blasts . ji leader abu bakar bashir ( now imprisoned ) has announced his allegiance to the islamic state . it is not clear just how much influence this pledge will have on islamist militants in indonesia . there is concern that dozens of australians , and others from southeast asia , who have gone to fight with the islamic state ( is ) in syria and iraq may lead to future threats to australia and australians abroad . australia has approximately half a million muslims out of a total population of approximately 23 million . australia has enacted new security laws including enhanced data retention capabilities and has increased funding for intelligence agencies and police to help prevent terrorist attacks . australian intelligence officials reportedly know of 30 australians who were suspected of going to afghanistan to fight or train during the conflict there .