the following table provides citations to state parental involvement statutes . information concerning whether the applicable statute requires parental consent or notification is included in the table . rather , the court addressed the relatively narrow issue of remedies . it held that only certain applications of the act would violate a woman's constitutional right to an abortion , and remanded the case with orders for the lower courts to consider whether the act could be interpreted in a manner consistent with the judicial precedent that a state may not restrict access to an abortion when the health of the woman seeking the abortion is at issue . courts will now invalidate a government - imposed abortion restriction if it imposes an "undue burden" on a woman's right to obtain an abortion . applying the new standard , the casey court held that the parental consent provision did not unduly burden a pregnant minor's right to obtain an abortion because it included exceptions in the event of a medical emergency and when the minor demonstrates to a court that parental consent is not in her best interests . in january 2006 , the court confirmed the validity of state laws that place certain restrictions on a pregnant minor's right to obtain an abortion . in ayotte , the court considered a constitutional challenge to a state statute requiring parental notification before a minor may obtain an abortion . the plaintiffs argued that the new hampshire parental notification prior to abortion act violated the right of a woman to obtain an abortion because it did not contain an exception to allow a pregnant minor to obtain an abortion without parental notification when the procedure was necessary to preserve the minor's health . in writing for an unanimous court , justice o'connor stated explicitly that the holding did not revisit court precedent regarding abortion . the report also highlights recent federal parental involvement legislation and provides a survey of current state parental involvement laws . in roe v. wade , the u.s. supreme court held that a woman has a constitutional right to choose whether to terminate her pregnancy . the court in subsequent cases has affirmed the basic right to an abortion , but has also permitted restrictions on a woman's access to an abortion . casey established , for example , that a state may require parental involvement in a pregnant minor's abortion decision if the involvement does not unduly burden the minor's right to choose whether to obtain an abortion . in that 1992 case , the court considered a constitutional challenge to five provisions of the pennsylvania abortion control act of 1982 . one provision required a pregnant minor seeking an abortion to obtain consent from one parent or guardian before the procedure would be performed . the court upheld the parental consent provision and also concluded that a state law that banned abortion completely would be unconstitutional . in its holding , the court shifted away from the trimester - based strict scrutiny standard of judicial review it used in roe and articulated a new "undue burden" analysis .