b . in usda reports the terms estimate , forecast , and projection have very distinct and differentmeanings . see section "estimates , forecasts , & projections" for a description . c. these preliminary u.s. s&u projections use: linear - trend yield forecasts ; planting intentions areafrom the prospective plantings report ; and the historical harvested - to - planted arearelationship to derive harvested area for u.s. spring - planted crops . winter wheat harvestedarea is available from the crop production report for may . appendix table 4 . major nass crop production reports acreage winter wheat and rye seedings report ( january ) contains the first forecast of winter wheat and ryeplanted area . prospective plantings report ( end of march ) is a survey of farmer planting intentions allspring - planted field crops as of early march . acreage report ( late june ) is a survey of actual and intended farmer plantings of all field crops as ofearly june . this survey represents the first area forecast for crops . small grains summary ( late september ) contains the first estimate of winter and spring wheatharvested area for the just - finished marketing year . yields crop progress reports are released weekly between april and november . each report contains state - and national - level information on: ( 1 ) crop progress as of the report date in terms of plantings , various plant growth stages , andharvesting . comparisons are made with the previous week , the previous year , and thefive - year average . ( 2 ) crop condition rated as percent that is: very poor , poor , fair , good , and excellent . the weekly weather and crop bulletin provides a weekly weather update for the principal cropproducing regions . it includes weather map contours and indexes for crop moisture , extrememinimum and maximum temperatures , weekly precipitation , departure from average temperature,growing degree days , and a summer review of national weather , as well as the long - term palmerdrought severity index . in addition , the bulletin contains an international weather and crop summaryfor major foreign production regions . production crop production reports are released monthly throughout the calendar year . each report containsstate - by - state area , yield , and production estimates for major field and specialty crops . the cropcoverage varies in each report with a focus on those crops that are currently in an active seasonalgrowth pattern . prices the agricultural prices report , released monthly throughout the calendar year , contains estimatesof previous month's average farm price received for major field and specialty crops , as well as forlivestock , poultry , meat , and produce . each report also contains a preliminary farm price estimatefor the current month . monthly average prices are weighted by marketings . each report alsoincludes an all - farm products index of prices received and prices paid index for commodities andservices , interest , taxes , and farm wages paid . the july issue includes an annual summary . crop values - - annual summary , released in february , includes state - by - state estimates for averageprices received and the value of production for the preceding crop marketing years for major fieldand specialty crops .