other elements are more obvious . each nomination has its own political context , making each nomination somewhat different . however , several factors appear to be relatively constant in affecting the speed of supreme court nominations and senate decisions . how quickly the president announces his nominee and how quickly the senate considers that nomination can depend on how the vacancy occurred . when justices die unexpectedly , presidents can be eager to bring the court back to full strength as soon as possible . on july 19 , 1949 , for example , justice frank murphy unexpectedly died of a heart attack after a brief illness . president harry s. truman announced his nomination of thomas c. clark at a press conference nine days later , on july 28 . the senate also considered the nomination quickly , beginning hearings on august 9 . clark's entire nomination - and - confirmation process lasted just 30 days . a few months later , sherman minton was confirmed even faster — in 24 days — after the death of justice wiley b. rutledge . nonetheless , sudden death does not guarantee that either the president or the senate will make nomination - and - confirmation decisions quickly . for example , when justice rufus w. peckham died unexpectedly on october 24 , 1909 , president william howard taft waited 50 days to announce a nominee . once taft announced his choice , the senate confirmed horace h. lurton seven days later . retirements and resignations are often expected , allowing the president time to prepare for his choice even before an official announcement that a sitting justice will step down . for example , at the time of his retirement , justice william o. douglas's health had been so poor and abilities allegedly in such decline that seven of his fellow justices voted on october 17 , 1975 , to "effectively strip douglas of his power" and excluded the aging justice from deliberations . by the time justice douglas officially wrote to president gerald r. ford on november 12 , 1975 , announcing his retirement , the president was prepared to act quickly . he announced the nomination of john paul stevens just 16 days later . congress , too , acted quickly , confirming stevens 19 days later , on december 17 , 1975 . sometimes , though , even when retirements or resignations come with advance notice , the process moves slowly . for example , justice harry a. blackmun privately told president william j. clinton around january 1 , 1994 , that he was planning to leave the court . soon afterward , the white house staff began quietly considering replacements . however , president clinton did not publicly announce justice blackmun's retirement until april 6 , did not publicly announce judge stephen g. breyer's nomination until may 13 , and did not formally nominate breyer until may 17 . the judiciary committee began hearings 60 days after the nomination was announced , and the entire process surrounding breyer's nomination lasted 209 days . however , decisions affecting the nomination were apparently being made even before blackmun's retirement became public knowledge .