section 1057 . 2543 , the military commissions revision act of 2007 , would redefine "unlawful enemy combatant" to mean "a person who has engaged in , attempted , or conspired to engage in acts of armed hostilities or terrorism against the united states or its co - belligerents , and who is not a lawful enemy combatant. it would permit the admission into evidence of statements obtained by a degree of coercion less than torture in military commission only if the military judge finds that ( 1 ) the totality of the circumstances indicates that the statement possesses probative value to a reasonable person ; ( 2 ) the interests of justice would best be served by admitting the statement into evidence ; and 3 ) the interrogation methods used to obtain the statement do not amount to cruel , inhuman or degrading treatment . the bill would also repeal 10 u.s.c . ยง 948d ( c ) so that csrt determinations would no longer be dispositive for the purpose of establishing jurisdiction of military commissions , and would restore habeas corpus for persons detained as 'enemy combatants' for more than two years and have not been charged with a crime . s. 1547 and s. 1548 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2008 ( reported by the senate armed services committee and the senate select committee on intelligence on june 5 and june 9 , respectively ) , would make csrts mandatory for all detainees and would require the secretary of defense to provide procedural rules in some ways similar to those prescribed by the mca for military commissions . section 1023 . specifically , detainees would have a right to an attorney for csrt proceedings , would be entitled to obtain evidence and witnesses under rules consistent with those that apply to military commissions , and the detainee's counsel would have an opportunity to view classified evidence , including evidence to be admitted against the detainee and any potentially exculpatory evidence , consistent with the procedures for the protection of classified information in section 949d ( f ) of title 10 , u.s. code . the detainee would be entitled to have access to all unclassified evidence and "an unclassified summary of the classified evidence admitted against the detainee that is sufficiently specific to provide the detainee a fair opportunity to respond , with the assistance of counsel , to such evidence. information obtained through torture would not be admissible into evidence before a csrt . information obtained through lesser forms of coercion would be admissible under the same standards as in military commissions , amended as described below . with respect to military commissions , the bills would define "unlawful enemy combatant" to include any alien who has been a "knowing and active participant in an organization that engaged in hostilities against the united states.