senate . comprehensive nuclear test - ban treaty: message from the president of the united states transmitting comprehensive nuclear test - ban treaty ... , treaty doc . 105-28 , september 23 , 1997 . washington: gpo , 1997 , xvi + 230 p. u.s. department of defense . are monitoring and verification capability sufficient ? "monitoring" refers to technical capability ; "verification" to its adequacy to maintain security . supporters hold that advances in monitoring , such as the rollout of the international monitoring system , make it hard for an evader to conduct undetected tests . they claim that any such tests would be too small to affect the strategic balance . opponents see many opportunities for evasion , such as detonating an explosion in a large underground cavity to muffle its seismic waves . they believe that clandestine tests of even small weapons could put the united states at a serious disadvantage . how might the treaty affect nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament ? supporters claim that the treaty makes technical contributions to nonproliferation , such as limiting weapons programs ; some supporters believe that nonproliferation requires progress toward nuclear disarmament , with the treaty a key step . they note that all nato members excepting the united states have ratified the ctbt . opponents believe that a strong nuclear deterrent is essential for nonproliferation because it reduces the incentive for friends and foes alike to build their own nuclear weapons , that nonproliferation and disarmament are unrelated , and that the international community gives this nation little credit for its many nonproliferation and disarmament actions . 09 / 29 / 1 5 — the ninth article xiv conference on promoting ctbt entry into force is scheduled to take place in new york . 06 / 22 / 1 5 — the fifth ctbt science and technology conference began in vienna , austria , ending on june 26 . 06 / 02 / 1 5 — pakistan reiterated its "its consistent stance that it will not be the first in its region to resume nuclear testing. 05 / 22 / 1 5 — the nuclear nonproliferation treaty review conference , which began on april 27 , ended without producing a final document . 05 / 14 / 1 5 — the ctbto prepcom and others concluded a workshop on signatures of medical and industrial isotope production . the workshop began may 12 . 03 / 20 / 1 5 — angola became the 164 th state to ratify the ctbt . 02 / 24 / 1 5 — the ctbto prepcom and ecuador concluded an agreement to build two stations of the international monitoring system on the galapagos islands . 12 / 09 / 1 4 — the vienna conference on the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons was held december 8 and 9 in vienna , austria . 11 / 03 / 1 4 — the ctbto prepcom sponsored an integrated field exercise in jordan to test procedures and technologies for an on - site inspection to detect a clandestine underground nuclear test . the exercise concluded on december 9 , 2014 . 09 / 26 / 1 4 — the seventh ctbt ministerial meeting was held at u.n. headquarters in new york .