appendix b . early estimates of the unauthorized resident alien population according to demographer robert warren of the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) , the estimated unauthorized resident alien population grew to 3.4 million in 1992 and to 5.0 million in 1996 . by the close of the decade , the estimated number of unauthorized alien residents had more than doubled . jeffrey passel , now at the pew research center , estimated the unauthorized population in 2000 at 8.5 million , but this latter estimate included aliens who had petitions pending or temporary relief from deportation . subsequently , warren estimated that there were 7.0 million unauthorized aliens residing in the united states in 2000 . warren later revised his earlier analyses using the latest cps and estimated that there were 3.5 million unauthorized aliens living in the united states in 1990 and 5.8 million in 1996 . unlike passel , warren excluded "quasi - legal" aliens ( eg , those who had petitions pending or relief from deportation ) from his estimates . this is true through the first quarter of 2009 . as already discussed , if we compare the two - year period of the first quarter of 2007 ( which is reported as february ) to the first quarter of 2009 we find a total decline of 10.9 percent in the likely illegal population . they posited that "the observed decline must be due to a combination of less - educated young hispanic immigrants leaving the country and fewer entering the country. acknowledging that their analysis was over simplified and not inclusive of other factors likely to reduce unauthorized migration , camarota and jensenius estimated that out - migration of those mexicans aged 18-40 who have no more than a high school diploma might have been more than twice as large in the 2006 to 2009 period as in the 2002 to 2005 period . the research points to various factors that have contributed to the increase in unauthorized resident aliens over the past two decades as well as a leveling off of these trends in recent years . historically , unauthorized migration is generally attributed to the "push - pull" of prosperity - fueled job opportunities in the united states in contrast to limited or nonexistent job opportunities in the sending countries . accordingly , the economic recession that began in december 2007 may have curbed the migration of unauthorized aliens , particularly because sectors that traditionally rely on unauthorized aliens , such as construction , services , and hospitality , have been especially hard hit . some researchers maintain that lax enforcement of employer sanctions for hiring unauthorized aliens facilitated the "pull" for many years and that the ratcheting up of work site enforcement in 2007 and 2008 has subsequently mitigated the flow . trend data suggest a correlation , but it remains difficult to demonstrate this element empirically , especially because the increased worksite enforcement and removals were coincident with the housing downturn and the onset of the economic recession . political instability or civil unrest at home is another element that traditionally has induced people to risk unauthorized migration . asylum seekers who enter the united states illegally have always been included in the estimates of the unauthorized alien population .