the senate passed h.r . 3057 on july 20 , 2005 ( s.rept . 109-96 ) also fully funding the aci . both house and senate versions included conditions on assistance , similar to current law , regarding human rights , expanded authority for a unified campaign , a prohibition on combat , and the use of u.s. - provided helicopters . counternarcotics funds are not affected . in addition to state department programs , the defense department has a counternarcotics account for worldwide programs involving interdiction , training , equipment , and intelligence sharing . in the western hemisphere , these programs are managed by the u.s. army southern command . since first approving expanded assistance to colombia for counternarcotics programs in 2000 , congress has included a number of conditions on u.s. assistance in both authorization and appropriations legislation . the most recently enacted funding legislation is the fy2007 foreign operations appropriations act , as included in the revised continuing appropriations resolution ( h.j.res . the fy2007 national defense authorization act ( h.r . 109-364 ) also included provisions relating to colombia . the fy2006 national defense authorization act ( h.r . 109-163 ) authorized funding for department of defense drug interdiction activities . on june 28 , 2005 , the house passed h.r . 109-152 ) fully funding the aci at $734.5 million . the house passed the conference report ( h.rept . 109-265 ) on november 4 , 2005 , and the senate followed suit on november 10 . the president signed it into law on november 14 , 2005 ( p.l . the final agreement fully funded the aci at $734.5 million , but provided a different mix on how that money should be spent than did either the house or senate bills . the conference report made aci funds available until september 30 , 2008 . it adopted language with regard to demobilization , and appropriated $20 million to assist colombia with the demobilization of rightist paramilitary groups . the conference report removed a senate provision requiring the secretary of state to consult with the u.n. high commissioner for human rights in colombia before making a certification that colombia is meeting human rights conditions . instead , the conference report stated the expectation that the secretary will consider the opinion of the high commissioner and the committees on appropriations prior to making the certification . the resumption of a program in peru is still pending the development of safety enhancements . additional funding for the andean region is provided through the foreign military financing ( fmf ) program and the international military education and training ( imet ) program , both managed by the state department . recipients are subject to an aid cutoff if they have not signed so - called article 98 agreements with the united states . such agreements , referring to article 98 of the rome treaty on the international criminal court , prevent the international criminal court from proceeding with a request for the surrender of u.s. personnel present in the country . these agreements are required under the american services members protection act of 2002 , that was incorporated as title ii of h.r . 4775 , the fy2002 supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .