circuit . carriers in violation of the cpni requirements are subject to a variety of penalties under the act . under the criminal penalty provision in section 501 of the act , 47 u.s.c . section 501 , any person who willfully and knowingly does , causes or allows to be done , any act , matter , or thing prohibited by the act or declared unlawful , or who willfully and knowingly omits or fails to do what is required by the act , or who willfully or knowingly causes or allows such omission or failure , shall be punished for any such offense for which no penalty ( other than a forfeiture ) is provided by the act by a fine up to $10,000 , imprisonment up to one year , or both , and in the case of a person previously convicted of violating the act , a fine up to $10,000 , imprisonment up to two years , or both . section 502 of the act , 47 u.s.c . section 502 , punishes willful and knowing violations of federal communication commission regulations . any person who willfully and knowingly violates any rule , regulation , restriction , or condition made or imposed by the commission is , in addition to other penalties provided by law , subject to a maximum fine of $500 for each day on which a violation occurs . under section 503 ( b ) ( 1 ) of the act , 47 u.s.c . section 503 ( b ) ( 1 ) , any person who is determined by the commission to have willfully or repeatedly failed to comply with any provision of the act or any rule , regulation , or order issued by the commission shall be liable to the united states for a civil money "forfeiture" penalty . section 312 ( f ) ( 1 ) of the act , 47 u.s.c . section 312 ( f ) ( 1 ) , defines "willful" as "the conscious and deliberate commission or omission of [any] act , irrespective of any intent to violate" the law . "repeated" means that the act was committed or omitted more than once , or lasts more than one day . if the violator is a common carrier , section 503 ( b ) authorizes the commission to assess a forfeiture penalty of up to $130,000 for each violation or for each day of a continuing violation , except that the amount assessed for any continuing violation shall not exceed a total of $1,325,000 for any single act or failure to act . to impose such a forfeiture penalty , the commission must issue a notice of apparent liability , and the person against whom the notice has been issued must have an opportunity to show , in writing , why no such forfeiture penalty should be imposed . the commission will then issue a forfeiture if it finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the person has violated the act or a commission rule . each of these statutory schemes is described in more detail below .