neither h.r . 644 nor s. 301 has received further consideration . representative sean p. duffy introduced h.r . 656 , the women's public health and safety act , on january 24 , 2017 . the bill would allow a state to establish criteria for entities and individuals who perform abortions or participate in the performance of abortions for purposes of providing services in the medicaid program . on march 23 , 2018 , president trump signed h.r . 1625 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 . the measure retains the same long - standing funding restrictions on abortion and abortion - related services that appear in the consolidated appropriations act , 2017 . 244 with the entity's other funds . the omnibus measure prohibited the use of appropriated funds to pay for an abortion or for any administrative expenses related to a health plan in the federal employees health benefits program that provided benefits or coverage for abortions . this prohibition , however , did not apply when the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term , or in the case of rape or incest . funds provided to the department of justice could also not be used to pay for an abortion , except when the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term , or in the case of rape or incest . finally , funds appropriated for hhs , as well as funds derived from any trust fund that received appropriations , could not be used to pay for abortions except in cases of rape or incest , or when a woman who suffered from a physical disorder , injury , or illness would have her life jeopardized if an abortion was not performed . on january 24 , 2017 , the house passed h.r . 7 , the no taxpayer funding for abortion and abortion insurance full disclosure act of 2017 , by a vote of 238-183 . such voluntary family planning projects were required to meet specified requirements . contributions to the united nations population fund ( unfpa ) were conditioned on the entity not funding abortions . in addition , amounts appropriated to the unfpa were required to be kept in an account that was separate from the unfpa's other accounts . the unfpa could not commingle funds provided under h.r . introduced by representative christopher h. smith , the bill would amend title 1 of the u.s. code to add new sections that would permanently prohibit the use of federal funds for abortion . unlike the hyde amendment and the other hyde - type restrictions that have been included annually in various appropriations measures , the proposed sections would not have to be renewed each year . moreover , these funding limitations would apply to all federal funds and not just those specifically appropriated for hhs and other federal agencies . 7 would impose additional restrictions on the availability of abortion . the measure would amend the internal revenue code to indicate that a health plan that includes coverage for elective abortions is not a "qualified health plan" for purposes of the availability of a premium tax credit .