this report opens with a description of the current makeup of ojp . it then discusses someof the issues facing ojp that have been identified by gao and the oig that have led to the currentcongressional proposal to restructure the office . the act alsoreauthorizes and restructures grant programs under the cops office as well as grant programs underthe vawo . one of the more controversial titles of the act seeks to make doj grant programs moreefficient by creating an office of audit , assessment and management . doj currently has twocomponents that are supposed to monitor the effectiveness and efficiency of its programs: grantmanagers and the oig . ojp grant managers , who are located in each of ojp's bureaus and programoffices , are charged with monitoring the grants made by their office and the oig is charged withpromoting economy and efficiency within doj . ( 52 ) the role of ojp grant managers and the oig in monitoring theeffectiveness and efficiency of doj programs is discussed in greater detail below . in addition tocreating a new audit office , the act would also codify and restructure the ccdo . while the administration has previously taken steps to restructure ojp , there remainoutstanding issues regarding ojp grant program evaluations and compliance monitoring . at issuefor congress is whether ojp has done enough to fully correct the identified deficiencies in itsmanagement and oversight of its grant programs or whether another level of oversight is necessaryto streamline ojp grant programs and improve efficiency through greater monitoring of programs ? the gao and the oig reports raise questions about whether the current organizational structure ofojp is capable of properly managing its grant programs . are grant managers at ojp accountable forthe performance of the grants they manage ? has ojp done enough to train grant managers toaddress the issues reported by the gao and the oig when monitoring their grants ? has theadministration taken the steps necessary to ensure that grantees are held accountable for submittingtheir reports and producing results ? in exercising its oversight role , congress may want to explore how federal funds are overseenand the findings of the oig and the gao are addressed . the creation of the office of audit,assessment and management may raise questions about possible duplication of efforts . the actappears to give the office of audit , assessment and management many of the same oversightresponsibilities that ojp's grant managers , nij and the oig are already charged with . and would such an office be duplicative of other functions alreadyexisting within doj ? a description of the violence against women anddepartment of justice reauthorization act of 2005 is discussed and analyzed within the context ofrestructuring ojp . this report , however , does not discuss the violence against women act ( vawa ) provisions . ( 5 ) the report concludes with a discussion of possible issues and questions that could be raised withrespect to the act's restructuring ojp . in 1984 , congress created ojp by passing the justice assistance act of 1984 . ( 6 ) the assistant attorneygeneral ( aag ) for justice programs oversees ojp , which has approximately 700 employees .