concerns about this issue have by no means been limited to bcra supporters . the bush - cheney campaign filed its own lawsuit to block activities of some prominent 527 groups during the 2004 elections ; both the house administration and senate rules and administration committees held hearings in 2004 and 2005 ; both committees reported bills to regulate 527 organizations under feca in the 109 th congress ; and the house passed such legislation on two occasions in 2006 . while concern about the 527s has been voiced across the political spectrum , to some extent those concerns have different origins . bcra supporters have tended to see the enormous amounts of money raised and spent in recent elections as a result of what they argue is the fec's failure to enforce existing law , and they have also launched an effort to replace the agency with what they see as a more effective enforcement body . bcra critics , however , insist that what has occurred has been the predictable result of the ban on soft money activity by the national parties , thus redirecting massive amounts of unregulated money to outside groups that are less accountable to the political system . if the 110 th congress chooses to address 527s , a key question will be whether additional regulation should occur via legislation , new fec or other regulation , or enforcement of existing regulations . regardless of how policy change occurs , perhaps most importantly , it remains unclear whether the courts would uphold additional attempts to regulate 527 activity . indeed , whether regulation of 527 activity needs to be limited to only those organizations engaging in express advocacy is a topic of much controversy and debate . nevertheless , there is likely to be continued criticism that activity by 527s in the manner seen in recent elections threatens to undermine the effectiveness of regulation under federal election law . another issue that has received attention is whether , in the event that congress does require further regulation of 527 organizations , money might flow to other types of tax - exempt organizations , such as irc § 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) social welfare organizations and § 501 ( c ) ( 6 ) trade associations . these types of organizations may engage in political campaign activity so long as it is consistent with the organization's exempt purpose . there are , however , two limitations in the irc that would make these organizations less efficient than section 527 political organizations for carrying on election - related activities . first , the irc implicitly restricts the amount of political campaign activity that these organizations may conduct — specifically , participating in political campaign activity cannot be the organization's primary activity . second , under irc § 527 ( f ) , irc § 501 ( c ) organizations are subject to tax if they make an expenditure for an irc § 527 exempt function .