table 2 . naics codes used to model infrastructure sectors from epa rmp data source: crs analysis of the epa rmp*national database ( with off - site consequence analysis ( oca ) data ) , updated may 2005 . in the house , h.r . 1562 , the chemical facility security act of2005 , h.r . 2237 , the chemical security act of 2005 , h.r . 4999 , acompanion bill to s. 2145 , and h.r . 5695 , the chemical facilityanti - terrorism act of 2005 , have been introduced . the epa rmp*info database provides information on industrial classification of the reported chemical processes . crs analyzed the worst - casescenario data reported by each facility to the epa . crs identified which reported chemical process at each facility potentially affected the greatest numberof persons in a worst - case release . crs used the naics code reported for this chemical process as the naics code for the facility . crs combinednaics codes to provide descriptions of infrastructure sectors . in some cases , crs collapsed four , five , and six digit naics codes for the purposes ofclarity . naics codes from 1997 were converted into 2002 naics codes when found . the combination of naics codes presented here is one of manypossible approaches . the manner by which naics codes are sorted into infrastructure sectors affects which facilities would be impacted by policydecisions about and approaches towards particular infrastructure sectors . for a list of naics codes used to model infrastructure sectors , see table 2 . some efforts arevoluntary in nature , involving security best practices , or semi - voluntary , such as requirements formembership in trade associations . other efforts arise from state or local chemical facility securityregulation . finally , federal security legislation affecting some chemical facilities was enacted inprevious congresses . federal agency outreach activities continue . policymakers may decide to develop legislation with new authorities that would requireadditional chemical facility security . key policy issues that may arise during the consideration ofsuch legislation include the adequate coverage of the chemical facility universe ; the federal agencyoverseeing any new requirements ; the extent of new security measures required , such as requiringincreases in physical security or reducing chemical hazards through alternative approaches ; treatmentof existing federal and state laws ; and recognition of preexisting industry security efforts . in light of the various policy issues , four overarching legislative approaches emerge . theapproaches are maintaining the current approach to chemical facility security ; increasing availableresources under existing authorities ; enhancing existing programs with new authorities specificallyrelated to chemical facility security ; and creating new authorities to address chemical facilitysecurity . proposed legislation may aim to complement existing law or tooverride it . in the 109th congress , legislation has been introduced in both chambers addressing concernsregarding chemical facility security . in the senate , s. 2145 , the chemical facilityanti - terrorism act of 2005 , and s. 2486 , chemical security and safety act of 2006,have been introduced . each bill contain provisions requiringvulnerability assessment and the creation of security plans , though details vary significantly betweenthe bills . one area of previous contention involves inclusion of consideration or use of inherentlysafer technologies .