the dodand the overseas basing commission disagree on these points . others might also contend thatproposing a re - basing strategy before completing the 2005 base realignment and closure round andthe mobility capabilities study could result in mismatches of supporting infrastructure or mobilityassets . the consequence could be a shift of these unfunded requirements onto the services , whichare already under pressure from the cost of ongoing combat operations . is it feasible to conduct the basing realignment moves given the deployment tempo drivenby ongoing military operations in iraq and afghanistan ? units returning from combat deployments,only to immediately pack up families and relocate , can put immense burdens on an already stressedforce . willprojected savings outweigh the cost of realignment and associate systems procurement ? some of the issues congress may wish toconsider include the following . can the services permanently sustain the long term pace of frequent deploymentsrequired by the strategy ? does the igpbs have adequate linkage to an overarching strategic framework agreed uponby all key government parties in the national security strategy process ? what will be the effect of the re - basing on the relationship with long term u.s. allies , suchas germany , where a drawdown is proposed ? while most may agree thata revision of the overseas basing structure left from the cold war is overdue , some would argue thatdeveloping a re - basing strategy without completing the defense department's quadrennial defensereview and achieving buy - in across government agencies and with congress is premature . have sufficient legal arrangements , such as status of forcesagreements and overflight rights , been negotiated in advance of the arrival of u.s. forces in new hostnations ? the overseas basing commission argued that the preliminary diplomatic legwork had notbeen fully accomplished . do the political climates in the new host nations support u.s. values ofdemocracy and human rights ? while some nations , such as romania , have actively sought a u.s.presence , others , such as uzbekistan , have ended those arrangements as soon as they begin to annoyor lose their profitability . is the re - basing proposal affected by standing treaties to which the u.s.is a state party , such as the conventional forces in europe treaty ? early evidence may indicate thatdod and the state department need to further examine potential treaty impacts . the lackof overarching strategy and analysis may also be construed by some to miss vital linkages inexecution timing and schedule , which could lead to implementation pitfalls in the future . are the defense department's cost projections for the overseas realignment accurate ? this burden is exacerbated if the bases receiving new troops lack sufficient supportinginfrastructure . at some undetermined point , members may experience enough degradedquality of life for their families , and endure such frequent separations , that retention or recruitingbegin to suffer . lack of presence could find the united statesreducing its voice in european or asian affairs , and finding it harder to motivate internationalcoalitions or support when needed . ( 1 ) the dod plan could prompt budget and oversight decisions for the second session of the109th congress . these might include approval , modification , or rejection of the dod proposal .