appendix a . state ccp awards appendix b. drf allocations for ccp since the fall of 2005 , fema has provided weekly reports to congress on its allocations from the disaster relief fund ( drf ) for ccp activities in response to hurricanes katrina , rita and wilma . the weekly reports provide budget lines for "crisis counseling - nimh" and "crisis counseling - scc" for each disaster . are there interventions that are likely to be of benefit ? if so , when should they be delivered , and by whom ? how can victims who would benefit from assistance be identified , and how should they be monitored ? what can the federal government offer , through assistance to states , individuals , and others , that would be helpful to victims in enabling them to recover and move on with their lives ? the federal programs set up to address mental health and substance abuse problems in those affected by the 2005 hurricanes offer opportunities for scrutiny . careful study of these programs , and those established after the oklahoma city bombing and the 2001 terrorist attacks , could lend clarity to , and improve the effectiveness of future federal responses . scc is not defined . nimh is the national institute of mental health , an institute in the national institutes of health ( nih ) which administered ccp in the past . nimh staff have told crs that the institute does not administer ccp at this time , and has not received the reported funds from fema . fema has advised that its reported scc amounts correspond with samhsa's immediate services program ( isp ) awards — amounts that fema provides directly to states — and that its reported nimh amounts correspond with samhsa's regular services program ( rsp ) awards — amounts that fema provides to samhsa . fema accounts for the discrepancy between its reported nimh allocations and samhsa's reported rsp awards by noting that the rsp awards reflect amounts that have been approved , while the fema allocations reflect current information about states' use of the funds . the latter is subject to a lag in reporting , and is further complicated by requests for program extensions that have been made by many states . the table below shows amounts for ccp spending for the three disasters , as reported to crs by samhsa , and as published by fema in its weekly reports to congress . appendix c. scope of mental health treatment services mental health treatment is a term that has been used in the fields of psychology as well as psychiatry . while psychiatric services typically include a greater emphasis on pharmacotherapy , mental health services in the aftermath of hurricane katrina were primarily psychological . in this context , mental health treatment can include any or all of the following services: education and prevention services . information on predictors and symptoms of mental disorders , where mental health services are available , how to access them . emergency services . immediate response service available 24-hours a day for persons having a mental health crisis , or emergency . this includes the national suicide prevention lifeline , 1-800-273-talk ( 8255 ) . case management services .