mraps associated with surge forces were no longer needed . mrap sustainment numbers were lower due to fewer than expected combat losses . the marine's reduction in its mrap requirement from 3,700 to 2,300 was anticipated to result in a potential cost savings of approximately $1.7 billion in fy2008 and fy2009 . the army is also expected to cut a number of mraps from its current 10,000-vehicle requirement but has not yet publically committed to a specific requirement . another consideration is the readiness status of equipment being used for replenishment . some reports have asserted that much of the equipment being used in dod's current restocking efforts is in poor condition and requires extensive maintenance . on november 30 , 2007 , the marines reduced their mrap requirement from 3,700 to approximately 2,300 vehicles . the marines cited six factors in their decision: ied attacks were dramatically down over the preceding six months . the relatively heavy mrap cannot operate or pursue the enemy off - road , in confined areas , or across most bridges . reduced need to put marines on high - threat roads through the use of persistent surveillance and airlift of supplies . counterinsurgency focus requires marines dismount and interact closely with the local populace . will the army and marines reconstitute preposition stocks with equipment such as armored security vehicles ( asvs ) , mraps , and other specialized equipment developed in response to wartime needs or will the services instead replenish prepositioned stocks to pre - war authorization standards ? while decreasing mrap requirements based on the improving tactical situation in iraq and in anticipation of a reduction in troop levels can be considered prudent management by dod , at some point dod will need to establish a firm requirement for the total number of mraps to be procured . the army also cited decreasing casualties and ied attacks over the previous six months , as well as the need to dismount and interact with the populace , as factors in reducing its original mrap requirement . some may question why the army remains committed to upgrading an almost 50-year - old weapon when other dod organizations , such as special operations units , have adopted other weapons that are considered more reliable and effective in combat than the m - 4 carbine . allegations that the successor of the army's m - 16 / m - 4 carbine , the heckler & koch's xm - 8 assault rifle , was cancelled due to bureaucratic conflicts among army and dod acquisition officials might be an issue for congressional examination . it can be argued that the army has exhibited a tendency to pursue incremental improvements to legacy systems , such as repeated add - on armor upgrades to hmmwvs , instead of fully examining and rapidly procuring commercially - available systems that prove to be more effective than current systems . in its version of the fy2008 national defense authorization act ( h.r .