appendix a . selected msp legislation appendix b . smart act section by section summary of the statute during the 112 th congress , lawmakers approved additional changes to the process for resolving outstanding msp conditional payments . title ii of p.l . 112-242 , signed into law on january 10 , 2013 , is entitled "strengthening medicare secondary payer rules" ( also known as the smart act ) . the act's provisions make substantive and procedural changes to the msp statute and current cms procedures , including provisions relating to medicare conditional payments , mmsea section 111 reporting requirements , appeal rights , use of social security numbers , and statutes of limitations . the new provisions apply to what cms calls non - group health plans such as workers' compensation , no - fault , and liability insurance ( including self - insurance ) plans , but not to employer group health plans . section 201 of p.l . 112-242 directs cms to make a password - protected website available to medicare beneficiaries , authorized representatives , and "applicable plans" with information on the items and services claimed that relate to a specific injury or incident that forms the basis of a potential settlement , judgment , award , or other payment . cms must update the conditional payment information ( including provider or supplier name ( s ) , diagnosis codes , date of service , and conditional payment amounts ) on the website in as timely a manner as possible , but not later than 15 days after the date medicare pays a claim . cms is also required to provide a "timely process" for medicare beneficiaries / claimants and their authorized representatives to resolve discrepancies in downloaded statements of conditional payments from the website . no administrative or judicial review of this dispute resolution process is provided ; however , beneficiaries would still be able to exercise formal administrative or judicial appeals to contest final conditional payment demands from cms . a medicare beneficiary or applicable plan may notify cms at any time beginning 120 days before the reasonably expected date of a settlement , judgment , award , or other payment that a payment is reasonably expected and the expected date of payment . medicare then has a 65-day response period ( 95 days in some circumstances ) in which to post conditional payments on the website . after the response period , during a prescribed "protected period," a medicare beneficiary / claimant or applicable plan may download a "statement of reimbursement amount" that will constitute the final conditional payment amount recoverable by cms , if certain conditions are met . regulations implementing the website and dispute resolution requirements of section 201 must be promulgated within nine months of enactment of this statute . this section also requires the secretary to promulgate regulations ( no specified deadline ) establishing a right of appeal and an appeal process for non - group health plans and their attorneys , agents , or third - party administrators to appeal medicare final conditional payment determinations for which cms seeks to recover from such plans . an applicable plan must provide notice to medicare beneficiaries of its intent to appeal .