appendix a . 2sr initiative chronology appendix b. glossar . these initiatives are discussed below . secretary chertoff "proposed creation of a central policy office led by an under secretary for policy," which "will bring together our international affairs staff , a significant and new strategic planning capability , dhs - wide policy development assets , a senior policy advisor focused on refugee asylum policies , and enhanced private sector liaison resources . collectively," he continued , "the policy directorate will strengthen the department's ability to develop and plan vital policies. such an office , he noted , "is not a new idea — it builds in part upon the foundational work of the border and transportation [directorate] policy staff , which is to be folded into the new policy directorate. the authors of an august 17 , 2004 , heritage foundation report were among the first to propose an under secretary of policy for dhs and a consolidation of the department's policy analysis and development offices under the direction of such an officer . the issue underlying the comment made by senator collins involved secretary chertoff's interpretation of his reorganization authority . his interpretation was seemingly revealed in the text of a footnote in his july 13 , 2005 , reorganization notification letter to congress , which stated: "section 872 of the homeland security act of 2002 provides broad reorganization authority and permits the secretary to alter or consolidate existing organizational units , to establish new organizational units or to allocate or reallocate functions within the department. senator collins' comment suggested that she did not regard the reorganization authority conveyed at section 872 to be broad in scope , or at least not as broad as the secretary was asserting . moreover , the expressed agreement with her closing comments by senator joseph lieberman , the ranking minority member of the committee , appeared to imply that he , too , did not regard the secretary's reorganization authority to be broad . section 872 of the homeland security act ( hsa ) provides that the "secretary may allocate or reallocate functions among the officers of the department , and may establish , consolidate , alter , or discontinue organizational units within the department , but only ... after the expiration of 60 days after providing notice of such action to the appropriate congressional committees , which shall include an explanation of the rationale for the action," and subject to certain limitations specified in the section . these limitations include no abolition of "any agency , entity , organizational unit , program , or function established or required to be maintained by the [homeland security] act" or "by statute. noting that the term "organizational units" is not defined in the act , a crs legal analysis of the section is instructive regarding its scope . [i]n applying canons of statutory construction to the hsa , it appears congress intended an organizational unit to be something smaller than an agency or other statutorily created entity . in the limitation provision of §872 ( b ) ( 1 ) , for example , congress placed the term organizational units after the terms agency and entity , but before the terms program and function .