( see box below for a description of earthquake magnitude. ) because of its low population and infrastructure density , alaska has a relatively low risk for large economic losses from an earthquake . in contrast , california has more citizens and infrastructure at risk than any other state because of the state's frequent seismic activity combined with its large population . products such as shakemap ( described below ) are assembled as rapidly as possible to assist in emergency response and damage estimation following a destructive earthquake . a precise relationship between earthquake mitigation measures , nehrp and other federal earthquake - related activities , such as earthquake research , and reduced losses from an actual earthquake may never be possible . however , as more accurate seismic hazard maps evolve , as understanding of the relationship between ground motion and building safety improves , and as new tools for issuing warnings and alerts such as shakemap and pager are devised , trends denoting the effectiveness of mitigation strategies and earthquake research and other activities may emerge more clearly . without an ability to precisely predict earthquakes , congress is likely to face an ongoing challenge in determining the most effective federal approach to increasing the nation's resilience to low - probability but high - impact major earthquakes . the gsn provides worldwide coverage of earthquakes , including reporting and research . unlike other natural hazards , such as hurricanes , where predicting the location and timing of landfall is becoming increasingly accurate , the scientific understanding of earthquakes does not yet allow for precise earthquake prediction . instead , notification and warning typically involves communicating the location and magnitude of an earthquake as soon as possible after the event to emergency response providers and others who need the information . some probabilistic earthquake forecasts are now available that give , for example , a 24-hour probability of earthquake aftershocks for a particular region , such as california . these forecasts are not predictions , and are currently intended to increase public awareness of the seismic hazard , improve emergency response , and increase scientific understanding of the short - term hazard . in the california example , a time - dependent map is created and updated every hour by a system that considers all earthquakes , large and small , detected by the california integrated seismic network , and calculates a probability that each earthquake will be followed by an aftershock that can cause strong shaking . the probabilities are calculated from known behavior of aftershocks and the possible shaking pattern based on historical data . when a destructive earthquake occurs in the united states or other countries , the first reports of its location , or epicenter , and magnitude originate either from the neic or from the regional seismic networks that are part of anss . other organizations , such as universities , consortia , and individual seismologists may also contribute information about the earthquake after the event . close to 75 million people in 39 states face some risk from earthquakes . earthquake hazards are greatest in the western united states , particularly in california , but also in alaska , washington , oregon , and hawaii .