rumsfeld . the following sections provide relevant background and briefly discuss possible implications that the court's ruling may have on issues relating to the war crimes act . in response to the court's ruling in hamdan , congress passed the military commissions act of 2006 ( p.l . 109-366 ) , which was enacted into law on october 17 , 2006 . among other things , the mca made several amendments to the war crimes act , so as to retroactively limit its scope . the mca amended the war crimes act provisions concerning common article 3 so that only specified violations would be punishable ( as opposed to any common article 3 violation , as was previously the case ) , including committing , or attempting or conspiring to commit torture ( defined in a manner similar to that used by the federal torture statute , 18 u.s.c . §§ 2340-2340a ) ; cruel treatment ; the performing of biological experiments ; murder ; mutilation or maiming ; intentionally causing serious bodily injury ; rape ; sexual assault or abuse ; and the taking of hostages . prior to the enactment of the mca , there was some debate concerning the scope of cruel treatment that should be subject to criminal penalty under the war crimes act . the mca defined "cruel treatment" prohibited by the war crimes act in a similar manner to the definition of "torture" contained in the federal torture statute . however , whereas a person is criminally liable for torture only if he specifically intends to cause severe mental or physical pain and suffering , pursuant to the amendments made the mca , a person is criminally liable for inflictions of cruel treatment if he generally intended to cause serious mental or physical pain and suffering to a person protected under common article 3 . the mca further defined "serious mental pain and suffering" and "serious physical pain and suffering" rising to the level of cruel treatment punishable under the war crimes act . "serious mental pain and suffering" is defined by reference to the federal torture statute's definition of "severe mental pain and suffering" rising to the level of torture . serious mental pain and suffering constituting cruel treatment refers to pain and suffering arising from the intentional infliction or threatened infliction of severe physical pain or suffering ; the administration , application , or threatened administration or application of mind - altering substances or other procedures calculated to disrupt profoundly the senses or the personality ; the threat of imminent death ; or the threat that another person will imminently be subjected to death , severe physical pain or suffering , or the administration or application of mind - altering substances or other procedures calculated to disrupt profoundly the senses or personality . the type of mental pain and suffering constituting cruel treatment generally differs from the type rising to the level of torture , in that it only needs to be of a serious and non - transitory nature which need not be prolonged , as opposed to being of a severe and prolonged nature .