but once they are out there , they are out there for good . names don't change . it's either been stolen or misplaced . has the victim's identity truly been stolen ? the event clearly fits within the definition above , but it is not the wholesale theft of the victim's identity . however , should the offender be working with an accomplice , the card could be turned over several times and even sold on the street . finally , should the victim's driver's license and other identifying documents such as a health card with a social security number on it also be stolen , the basic elements for stealing an individual's identity are present . a january 2007 white paper by the computer security research company mcafee avert labs reports a dramatic increase in global identity theft trends . one key finding was that "[p]ersonal data for tens of millions of people disappears each year . despite this disturbing trend , the number of complaints is surprisingly low , which leads us to believe the losses are not fully acknowledged. a california law that requires notice of security breaches to the affected individuals is the major reason for the increased awareness of these breaches . this law , which was implemented in july 2003 , was the first of its kind in the nation . state security breach notification requires companies and other entities that have lost personal data to notify affected consumers . thirty - five states have enacted legislation requiring companies or state agencies to disclose security breaches involving personal information . state security freeze laws allow a customer to block unauthorized third parties from obtaining one's credit report . identity theft victims spend almost 300 million hours a year trying to clear their names and re - establish good credit ratings . for additional information on this topic , see crs report rl31919 , federal laws related to identity theft , by [author name scrubbed] . in december 2006 , a senior editor for wired new s noted a milestone: "... the total number of lost or exposed personal records since february , 2005 , [has passed] the 100 million mark. the new york times wrote an article discussing this landmark and questioned the usefulness of computing such data breaches . [t]he bigger picture here may be that we are now slicing and dicing the niceties of data breaches against a running tally so large , that it has lost nearly any meaning at all... 'the threat of identity theft from data losses is being greatly exaggerated,' fred h. cate , the director of the center for applied cybersecurity research at indiana university in bloomington , told this newspaper not long ago . 'and that's because a lot of people have fallen into the trap of equating data loss with identity theft. whether or not that is true is open to debate , but what all this data loss does represent , however , is the potential for identity theft — one that will never go away . sure , it's a game of odds . there is only so much a crook can do with a few hundred thousand names and social security numbers . neither do social security numbers or dates of birth .