the program is not open to interns . attendance at this program is a prerequisite for the advanced legislative process institute seri es ( see below ) . registration information is available at http: / / www.crs.gov / events / category / 4 .legislative concepts . crs also offers a monthly introductory "legislative concepts" class to house staff and interns in the house learning center . information is available on housenet at https: / / housenet.house.gov / training under "training. advanced legislative process institute this institute builds on the basic procedures and resources provided in "congress: an introduction to resources and procedure. in - depth sessions describe processes and procedural strategy that are specific to each chamber . additional information on this class and others can be found at http: / / www.crs.gov / under the "events" tab . house advanced legislative process institute series ( halps ) this overview of the "other chamber" includes a description of the senate's rules and norms , and salient committee and floor procedures , focusing on those that differ from the house . other discussion will cover the senate's orientation toward individuals and minorities ; its attitude toward and use of committees ; its norm of collective scheduling of legislation ; its use of motions to proceed , unanimous consent , and time agreements to call up , consider , and amend measures ; the role of the presiding officer ; holds ; filibusters ; and invoking cloture . this program is not open to interns . register at http: / / www.crs.gov / events / category / 4 . senate advanced legislative process institute series ( salps ) this overview of the "other chamber" is an introduction to the organization and operation of the house with an emphasis on differences in procedure and their impact on legislation . fee - based databases such as lexis or westlaw will not be covered . this program is open to interns who have attended the crs intern orientation . to register , go to http: / / www.crs.gov / events / category / 3 , and select the "register" tab . federal statutory research: using print and electronic resources this seminar examines methods of identifying and locating print and electronic versions of statutes and conducting research in the united states code . it describes historical sources of federal statutory law and illustrates research techniques using case studies . the law library of congress and the congressional research service jointly sponsor this seminar , which emphasizes both internet and traditional print research techniques . knowledge of the u nited s tates code and legislative procedure is a prerequisite for this program . a law library specialist will discuss electronic and print chronological and topical publications containing federal statutory law , including electronic and print sources of public laws and the united states code . the seminar will cover the organizational principles and features facilitating research , the historical development of federal statutory publications , and the significance of enactment of titles of the united states code into positive law . rss news feeds are also provided as news occurs . fee - based databases such as lexis or westlaw will not be covered . this program is open to interns who have attended the crs intern orientation .