this option has the advantage of being the simplest . the house bill ( h.r . 2881 ) , however , would make some changes in the spending guarantee mechanism . because of the nature of the topic , the analysis of the various spending guarantees in this report , necessarily , assumes the existing programmatic structure and funding levels of the times . advocates of the guarantees view the fully authorized funding of the capital programs as well as a significant general fund share as good things . over time , however , there has also been an alternative view , that too much was being spent on faa programs . this environment might have encouraged adherence to the cap and penalty provisions during the appropriations process . as mentioned earlier , the success of the cap and penalty provisions has been mixed , and at times may have had a role in unintended consequences such as rapidly growing trust fund balances and , in the view of some , a higher than justified general fund shares of the faa budget . this view casts a more critical eye on aip and f&e , whose funding the guarantees were specifically designed to assure . these critics often view the breadth of aip spending and ever - widening project eligibilities as allowing for spending that is increasingly inefficient , unfocused and of questionable federal purpose . they are often critical , for example , of the amount of aip's resources that go to projects at small local airports , that by their nature are questionable from a national mobility standpoint . they tend to view f&e spending as having often been wastefully managed and having pursued questionable technologies that have failed to pan - out . some would even argue that by downsizing faa programs and / or restricting program spending , it could be feasible to fund the entire faa budget out of the trust fund and thereby ease the burden on the general taxpayer . despite questions about the effectiveness of existing and previous spending guarantee mechanisms , it may be unlikely that an faa reauthorization bill would be enacted without language designed to encourage full funding of the faa's capital programs , including aip . the guarantee language in an authorization bill emphasizes the importance that authorizers place on fully funding aip and f&e . the provisions are seen by some as helping shore - up support for the overall authorization legislation while the bills work their way through the legislative process . proponents also argue that unexpended trust fund balances could no longer be used to mask the size of the federal budget deficit . opponents of off - budget proposals often argue that trust fund revenues should not be separated from overall national needs and fiscal policies . also , as mentioned earlier in regard with the aviation trust fund , the uncommitted balance has been much reduced in recent years and some are now more concerned about the trust fund going into deficit . the trust fund's revenues in and of themselves are not sufficient to cover all of the faa's needs . this increases the likelihood that an off - budget aviation trust fund would not assure full funding for faa capital programs .