subpart a of 34 c.f.r . part 300 discusses the purpose and applicability of the regulations and includes definitions ; subpart b contains provisions relating to state eligibility and includes requirements for fape , the least restrictive environment , private schools , state complaint procedures and department of education procedures ; subpart c contains provisions for local educational agency eligibility ; subpart d contains provisions on evaluations , eligibility determinations , individualized education programs ( ieps ) , and educational placements ; subpart e contains the applicable procedural safeguards , including discipline procedures ; subpart f contains provisions on monitoring and enforcement , confidentiality and program information ; subpart g contains provisions on the grants , allotment , use of funds and authorization of appropriations ; and subpart h contains provisions on preschool grants for children with disabilities . 108-446 includes a provision relating to regulations that was added to idea by p.l . 98-199 in 1983 in response to attempts at regulatory reform by the reagan administration . this subsection prohibits certain changes in the idea regulations which would procedurally or substantively lessen the protections provided to children with disabilities under this act , as embodied in regulations in effect on july 20 , 1983 ( particularly as such protections related to parental consent to initial evaluation or initial placement in special education , least restrictive environment , related services , timelines , attendance of evaluation personnel at individualized education program meetings , or qualifications of personnel ) except to the extent that such regulation reflects the clear and unequivocal intent of congress in legislation . this listing of areas in the statute is helpful in determining what changes congress might have interpreted as lessening the protections available to children with disabilities but it is not determinative as the list is illustrative , not limiting . it is worth noting as the regulations are examined , that some of the provisions carried over from prior regulations are included due to the requirements of this section . in addition , in at least one situation , an argument by a commenter that a proposed section of the regulations would violate this statutory requirement led ed to remove the section . ed issued additional regulations "to clarify and strengthen current regulations"on december 1 , 2008 . the areas covered by this addition to the idea regulations include ( 1 ) parental revocation of consent after consenting to the initial provision of services ; ( 2 ) a state's or local educational agency's ( lea's ) obligation to make positive efforts to employ qualified individuals with disabilities ; ( 3 ) representation of parents by non - attorneys in due process hearings ; ( 4 ) state monitoring , technical assistance , and enforcement of the part b program ; and ( 5 ) the allocation of funds , under sections 611 and 619 of the act , to leas that are not serving any children with disabilities . these regulations took effect on december 31 , 2008 . on april 9 , 2007 , ed published final regulations regarding flexibility for determining adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) under nclb .