finally , it discusses the project's implementation status . in the spring of 2004 , omb launched a series of interagency task forces to determine if services commonly found in numerous agencies , called lines of business , might be provided in a more efficient manner . he cautioned , however , that the benefits of shared services might not be realized if agency leadership and staff are not "involved and fully invested" in the initiative . additionally , he questioned whether sufficient attention had been paid to the need for the fmlob to connect with other lines of business , particularly the human resources line of business ( hrlob ) , where travel systems will need to interface with financial systems . if poor planning caused the government to change its requirements during implementation , soloway said , then the costs of the initiative might rise . pricewaterhousecooper partner joe kull also testified at the march 2006 hearings . kull , a former omb deputy controller , said agencies should not be required to meet an "arbitrary timeframe" for implementation , asserting that government projects like fmlob have often failed because agencies had not invested sufficient resources in educating , training , and communicating with employees about the initiative . kull also said that it was "critical" for agencies to improve their internal controls prior to migration — even though those improvements might take several years — because core systems are only as good as the data flowing into them . agency financial systems would thus continue to be limited by weak internal controls even after migration , and presumably those problems would be more difficult to correct when core functions were hosted by a third party . one union , the american federation of government employees ( afge ) , strongly criticized the initiative , largely over omb's policy on the application of circular a - 76 to migration competitions . as previously discussed , agencies are only required to follow the provisions of a - 76 when migrating more than 10 full - time positions to an ssp , and a - 76 is optional when 10 or fewer full - time employees are involved . in hearings on the fmlob held in june 2006 , the afge argued that by making a - 76 optional in some cases , agencies were , in effect , authorized to transfer federal jobs to private contractors without giving agency employees the opportunity to compete for them , a practice called "direct conversion. an omb official said the afge had misinterpreted the policy , stating that while a - 76 is optional in some instances , a public - private competition is required for every migration , regardless of the number of employees involved . omb's migration planning guidance , released three months after the hearings , clarifies this point , explicitly stating that direct conversions are not authorized . overall respondents said that they wanted more evidence of the capabilities of potential ssps , more guidance on agency recourse should an ssp fail to meet performance expectations , and more time to consider their options before migrating .