the future of usaid is unclear at this juncture . those who believe in usaid's traditional mission of promoting long - term development fear that the agency will be relegated to a position of solely implementing programs rather than shaping development policy . secretary rice and other senior administration officials , however , contend that the reconfiguration will strengthen usaid's role and status . since the dfa will also serve as usaid administrator , they argue , usaid will more likely participate in the policy and budget decision - making process to a greater extent than at present . at his confirmation hearing , ambassador tobias noted that a difficulty faced by his predecessor at usaid , andrew natsios , was the time consumed negotiating with state department officials over whom the administrator had no authority . this would no longer be the case , he argued , since the dfa would have such authority . during the state department's 2005 review of foreign aid reforms , a number of other policy options were considered , but either dropped or deferred until later . it appears that the department seriously considered creating a more formalized position of either a deputy secretary of state or undersecretary for foreign aid . also planned but eventually dropped was a proposal to restructure the current appropriation accounts . this option would have required extensive review and ultimate approval by congress . administration officials have said that the current restructuring effort is only the first step in a more expansive reform of foreign aid , suggesting that issues considered but dropped may be part of subsequent initiative , perhaps in the 110 th congress . but a number of observers note that a piecemeal approach to comprehensively reorienting u.s. foreign aid is particularly difficult , especially in the final two years of an administration . they argue that the state department should have aimed for a much broader plan , consulted with congress throughout the review process , and presented a complete legislative package for congressional approval this year . even previous to the current aid restructuring , some observers have asserted that congressional earmarks hamper the administration's flexibility to respond to changing world events and to prioritize aid objectives . congress regularly exercises its prerogative to direct funds to certain countries and for certain objectives in the annual foreign operations appropriation bills that in many cases differ from the administration's budget request . because the initial framework is being implemented within existing appropriation accounts , and without legislation that would restructure foreign aid in general , it is possible that congressional priorities may not completely correspond to the strategic framework as developed by the dfa . for example , the fy2007 foreign operations bill reported by the senate appropriations committee ( s.rept . 109-277 ) contains numerous directives with regard to the level of funding for programs and activities , as well as recipient countries . the senate bill restructures some accounts , consolidating several programs into a $1 billion democracy fund , and putting all health related programs into the child survival and health account . the house - passed bill ( h.r . the need to balance these often competing objectives will be challenging .