specifically . crs report rs21754 , military forces: what is the appropriate size for the united states ? , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl34549 , a brief history of veterans ' education benefits and their value , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl32476 , u.s. army ' s modular redesign: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . management of the army's commissioned officer corps is a dynamic , highly visible and complex system that is significantly influenced by law and policy . a number of parameters frame and define the challenges of managing the army's officer corps: multiple commissioning sources . army officers are commissioned by three primary sources: the u.s. military academy ( usma ) at west point , n.y. ; the reserve officer training corps ( rotc ) located on 272 college and university campuses ; and the officer candidate school ( ocs ) program at fort benning , ga. usma and rotc are generally four - year programs that result in a baccalaureate degree and commission followed by attendance at a basic branch course . ocs is a much shorter program — 12 weeks — which is also followed by attendance at a branch basic course . historically , usma and rotc have been the primary sources of army officers , with ocs providing a "surge" capability and advancement opportunity for talented enlisted personnel . while a college degree is not a prerequisite for ocs , by policy all officers must possess a degree to be eligible for promotion to captain . however , nearly 80% of recent ocs graduates have already earned a baccalaureate degree . obligated service . officers enter active duty for an initial period of obligated service based on their source of commission . usma graduates incur a five - year active duty service obligation ( adso ) while rotc scholarship graduates have a four - year obligation and rotc non - scholarship and ocs graduates incur a three - year obligation . upon completion of this obligation , an officer may apply for voluntary separation or continue on active duty . additional service obligations , of varying lengths , are required for certain reassignments and civil / military schools. year group " ( yg ) centric officer cohorts . all officers accessed to active duty during a fiscal year constitute a year group that will compete for promotion , school and command opportunities within the cohort as it progresses through a 30-year military career . for example , year group 2006 will enter active duty between october 1 , 2005 and september 30 , 2006 . of note for the discussion of officer shortages , a yg can be reduced after it is accessed , but it is difficult to enlarge it under the current system . figure a - 1 graphically depicts ideal or optimal year group management . each of the vertical bars in figure a - 1 represents the projected strength of that year group with the shading indicating the proportion of the year group in a given rank . the sloping solid line represents the total number of officers required from each year group .