population. in addition to stockpiling existing antiviral drugs , the u.s. government is promoting the development of new antiviral drugs to combat influenza . for example , the federal government in january 2007 awarded a four - year contract of over $100 million for the development of a new influenza antiviral drug that may be quickly administered to treat persons with severe influenza . the threat of compulsory licensing ( or imposing other legal limitations on roche's patent rights ) may have played a role in persuading roche to enter into the sublicensing agreements with third parties to produce tamiflu in greater quantities . while the concern over the then - limited supply of tamiflu has largely been addressed by roche's substantial manufacturing expansion , the issue of intellectual property rights potentially conflicting with public health needs may again arise in the future . therefore , this report will now examine the ways in which a patented drug's production may be increased , either without a patent holder's consent or with the patent holder's cooperation . the primary legal mechanisms to accomplish permissible encroachment upon a patent right include ( 1 ) compulsory licenses under a government's statutory authority to issue them ; ( 2 ) compulsory licenses pursuant to an international treaty that grants this right ; and ( 3 ) voluntary licensing agreements negotiated between the patent owner ( or patent licensee ) and third parties . this report addresses each of these options in turn . should the h5n1 virus , or some other avian influenza strain , cause a human pandemic , antiviral drugs will likely play a critical role to help prevent infection and to relieve the flu symptoms of those infected . the tamiflu supply shortage in 2005 had sparked public debate concerning the practicality and morality of protecting intellectual property rights during a possible health crisis , which can directly affect the availability and affordability of medicine for populations in dire need of it . however , because roche has since reached sublicensing agreements with several manufacturing partners that have significantly increased production of tamiflu to satisfy global demand for the drug , the concern about intellectual property rights hindering preparations for pandemic influenza has largely subsided . the report explained: it is impossible to know whether the currently circulating h5n1 virus will cause a human pandemic . the widespread nature of h5n1 in birds and the likelihood of mutations over time raise our concerns that the virus will become transmissible between humans , with potentially catastrophic consequences . if this does not happen with the current h5n1 strain , history suggests that a different influenza virus will emerge and result in the next pandemic . this fear of a global flu pandemic has compelled many countries to prepare for the threat by stockpiling antiviral drugs and attempting to develop vaccines against the disease . according to the bush administration , these countermeasures are "the foundation of our [influenza virus] infection control strategy. the president's plan proposes to spend $1 billion to build a national reserve of antiviral medications such as tamiflu and relenza to help contain or suppress a pandemic outbreak .