we are now litigating that issue in the korean courts . our korean counsel advised us that our automatic stay would not be recognized and that attachment is holding up a very large sum of money which we are due to receive under a sale of assets , but we need to clear up the attachment first . harmonizing substantive bankruptcy law on a global , or even regional scale , would be very difficult . although the europeans did not implement the european union regulation on insolvency until may 2002 , their dual - approach of harmonizing international procedures while acknowledging differences in individual nation's substantive laws inspired three other multilateral initiatives to harmonize bankruptcy laws: ( 1 ) the american law institute ( ali ) 's transnational insolvency project , in conjunction with nafta ; ( 2 ) the international bar association's committee j cross - border insolvency concordat ; and ( 3 ) the united nations conference on international trade and investment's ( uncitral's ) model law of cross - border insolvency . were the three entities banks or corporations under u.s. law ? confusion arose because the foreign banks' structure did not clearly correspond to u.s. forms of business organization ( eg , corporation , partnership ) . the central issue in all three cases was whether the foreign bank was covered by or exempt from the predecessor to the 1978 bankruptcy code , the bankruptcy act of 1898 . if the banks were subject to the 1898 act , then they would be entitled to file a petition for voluntary bankruptcy , just like any other corporation , and benefit from the fact that certain claims made against their assets within four months prior to filing would be voidable preferences under u.s. law . voiding transactions made within four months prior to the debtor's filing was intended to promote equity among all creditors , rather than favoring those creditors who first sensed that the debtor was going to declare bankruptcy . hence , the working group focused on harmonizing procedural rather than substantive law . the working group opted for a model law rather than a convention because the former offers greater flexibility . a nation can incorporate sections of a model law and tailor it to complement its existing law , whereas ratifying and executing treaties tends to be a more formal and rigid process . the issue of automatic stays illustrates the difficulties encountered and compromises reached in harmonizing the ground rules . it was noted that the main purpose of the stay of individual action was to prevent the debtor'sâ assets from being dispersed through enforcement measures ordered in individual actions . while there was general support for the need to stay all individual actions that could lead to such a situation , different views were expressed as to how the scope of the stay ... should be defined . the 1898 act , as amended , was silent regarding congress' intended coverage of foreign banks . if the foreign banks were "banking corporations" under u.s. law , then they would be exempt from coverage under the 1898 act and would be subject to the separate regime for insolvent banks .