the discussion will proceed as follows . after an examination of the nature and scope of the supreme court's ruling in clinton v. city of new york , the bills will be described and compared with the line item veto act of 1996 , and the current process for dealing with rescissions and deferrals under the impoundment control act of 1974 , as amended . the discussion continues with an assessment of the legal and practical effect of the proposed suspension provision , and includes taking into account past and present legislative , executive and judicial precedents and practices with respect to impoundments , rescissions , deferrals and other efforts at budget and spending controls . that examination suggests that , in light of the clinton ruling and analogous structural separation of powers decisions , a reviewing court might view the proposed suspension authority to be vested in the president as , in effect , a power to cancel appropriations akin to that proscribed in clinton . the discussion concludes with a review and assessment of subsequent modifications of the administration's proposal in the house and senate that indicates that constitutional issues may still remain unresolved . the supreme court's ruling in clinton v. new york city presents a formidable but not insurmountable legal obstacles to vesting the president with a form of line item veto authority . while the court's opinion does not appear to limit providing the president with some form of line item veto influence by any means other than constitutional amendment , its rationale seems to require that the statutory vesting of such effective influence must be carefully circumscribed to prevent even the potential vesting in the executive a cancellation power . structural separation of powers jurisprudence indicates that the courts will exercise heightened scrutiny of line item veto schemes . as a matter of caution and prudence a scheme that provides authority for the president to submit proposals for cancellation of targetable items within a very short time after enactment of the law that contains them and that provides for automatic deferrals or suspensions that coincide and end with the conclusion of the period of expedited congressional consideration , is most likely to pass constitutional muster . the validity of vestment in the executive of any further indicia of authority or control is uncertain . the so - called fast - track process is an exercise of the constitutionally - based authority of each house to establish its own rules of internal procedure . in comments accompanying the proposal it was asserted that "the president's proposal is fully consistent with the constitution . under the proposal , the president is given discretionary power to suspend covered spending and tax provisions for up to 180 days , and perhaps more , even if congress rejects a proposed rescission within that period . this is unlike the current rescission process under the impoundment control act , which requires the obligation of funds if congress fails to approve the president's rescission proposal within 45 days of continuous session after submission of a rescission proposal , or the provision in the rejected line veto act of 1996 which required expenditure of canceled authorities immediately upon the enactment of a joint resolution of disapproval .