all of it is grant assistance . while most funds were appropriated to a special iraq relief and reconstruction fund ( irrf , $21 billion ) and an iraq security forces fund ( $10.4 billion ) , additional sums from the budgets of dod , usaid , and other agencies have been used for reconstruction purposes . the departments of state and defense as well as usaid are the key entities responsible for implementing iraq assistance programs . about one - third of total funding , roughly $11.8 billion , has been aimed at restoring economically critical infrastructure , including airports , roads , bridges , railroads , seaports , electric power , water and sanitation , telecommunications , and essential buildings . another $8.3 billion , representing about 23% of total aid , has been allocated to assist democratization ( including civil society ) , education and health and the expansion of the private sector . a small amount of emergency relief and food aid was provided , especially in the early stages of the post - u.s. invasion period . together , the infrastructure reconstruction assistance — which best corresponds to the bulk of aid provided to germany and japan — and the social , economic , and political development aid — which is more characteristic of current u.s. assistance around the world — make up nearly more than one - half of total iraq funding for economic and political reconstruction to date . the remaining $15.5 billion in aid , nearly 44% of the total , is targeted at bolstering iraqi security . most of it provides training and equipment to the various security forces , including police and army , but funds are also used to provide facilities for security and law enforcement . while the total amount of aid to iraq — roughly $36 billion — now appears to be almost a fifth higher than that spent during the occupation of germany and somewhat more than double that during the occupation of japan , the total amounts and percentages of u.s. assistance targeted specifically at economic infrastructure reconstruction for germany and japan over the fy1949-fy1952 period appear to be lower than the amounts and percentages currently directed at such reconstruction in iraq . in constant 2005 dollars , u.s. aid targeted at economic infrastructure reconstruction was some $9.3 billion in germany , or about one - third of total u.s. assistance to that country , and some $5.2 billion in japan , or a little under 40% of total u.s. assistance there . if one were to consider food aid for japanese workers as part of assistance for reconstruction there in order to make it more comparable with marshall plan reconstruction aid to germany , the japan figure would be considerably higher ( about $13.1 billion in constant 2005 dollars ) . the amount and proportion of assistance for roughly equivalent infrastructure reconstruction in iraq appears higher , probably about $11.8 billion . this would indicate that the actual ( adjusted ) dollar amounts of u.s. aid for economic infrastructure reconstruction in iraq thus far is roughly a third greater than that provided to germany and perhaps more than double that provided to japan .