the other provisions of p.l . 111-87 are discussed below in the sections of this report on the various parts of the ryan white program . the patient protection and affordable care act of 2010 ( aca , p.l . 111-148 , as amended ) contains general provisions to increase access to health insurance and which , therefore , should increase coverage for people living with hiv / aids . figure 1 . in addition , at state option , medicaid eligibility will be broadened to include single adults , and aca phases out the medicare part d so - called doughnut hole for hiv / aids individuals who are medicare eligible . the long - range impact of the health care law on hrsa's ryan white program ( meaning the replacement of health and treatment services provided under ryan white with access to such services through health coverage via aca ) remains to be determined . ryan white funding , fy2012total = $2.4 billionsource: hrsa , fy2013 justification of estimates for appropriations committees , p. 238-271 . 111-87 provided specific authorization levels for parts a , b , c , d , and f for each fiscal year through fy2013 , resulting in a four - year reauthorization for the ryan white program . 111-87 required that the secretary establish a national hiv / aids testing goal of 5 million tests annually through programs administered by hrsa and cdc . the secretary is required to submit an annual report to congress on the progress made in achieving the testing goal , including any barriers to meeting the goal , the amount of funding necessary to meet the goal , and the most cost - effective strategies for identifying individuals who are unaware of their hiv status . the secretary is also required to review each of the programs and activities conducted by cdc as part of the domestic hiv / aids prevention activities . they include prohibitions on the cancellation of coverage by an insurer due to a preexisting condition , elimination of lifetime caps on insurance benefits and annual limits on coverage , and eligibility for tax subsidies to assist low - and middle - income individuals in the purchase of coverage from health insurance exchanges . as mentioned previously , aca ( p.l . 111-148 , as amended ) contains general provisions to increase access to health insurance for the u.s. population as well as coverage for people living with hiv / aids . obtaining private health insurance has been difficult for individuals with hiv / aids and others living with serious preexisting medical conditions . a 2011 institute of medicine ( iom ) report estimated that in urban areas , only about 13% of hiv patients in 2010 had private health insurance ; most hiv patients were covered by medicaid ( 36% ) , medicare ( 12% ) , or a combination of these two programs ( 6% ) . the remaining individuals were either uninsured and obtained their coverage through the ryan white program ( 24% ) , or their insurance coverage information was missing or unknown ( 8% ) . 111-87 provided authority for ryan white parts a , b , c , d , and f through fy2013 .