launch is scheduled for 2009 . sbirs - high will eventually replace the dod's defense support program series of early warning satellites that alert the national command authority to foreign missile launches ; however , the program has encountered significant schedule delays and cost growth , breaching "nunn - mccurdy" cost - growth limits several times . the may 2003 report of the defense science board and air force scientific advisory board criticized early program management of sbirs - high and took a cautious attitude concerning whether the restructured program would succeed . an october 2003 gao report concluded the program remained at "substantial risk of cost and schedule increases. even though test delays and technical difficulties have become commonplace within sbirs - high , congress has continued to acknowledge the program's importance , and has therefore maintained high levels of funding . the president's fy2008 budget request of $1.07 billion represents a total increase of $400.9 million from fy2007 , with $587 million reserved for rdt&e and $483 million for procurement . the proposal provides for the continued assembly , integration , and testing of the first two sbirs geosynchronous ( geo ) satellites as well as to the procurement of one sbirs geo satellite and two highly elliptical orbit ( heo ) satellite payloads . first launch is expected in 2009 . the transformational communications satellite program is planned to be a follow - on to the advanced extremely high frequency ( aehf ) program , which , in turn , is a follow - on to the current series of milstar satellites . aehf itself is controversial because of cost overruns and changing satellite and constellation specifications . tsat is expected to "transform" dod communications by providing vastly greater capacity than is available today by operating at much higher ( optical ) frequencies . for fy2008 , the president has requested a budget for research and development of $963.6 million — an increase of nearly $234 million over fy2007 funding levels . the total appropriation of $729.9 million in 2007 was a net increase of 43% from fy2006 . the first tsat was planned to launch in late 2014 , but the air force pushed that date to early 2016 . space radar is planned to consist of a yet - to - be - determined number of satellites that would track mobile targets ( as opposed to fixed targets ) on the ground . as of january 2007 , the air force had not yet decided on the final design of the satellites or the final architecture of the constellation . the house appropriations committee has sharply criticized the program for the past several years due to ongoing cost overruns and missed r&d milestones .