in this approach , profit is measured indollars . profit is seemingly a simple concept . total cost is subtracted from totalrevenue , leaving a residual , total profit . for the oil industry , the simple total revenue minus total cost approach iscomplicated by the difficulty in neatly separating the revenue - generating outputs ofthe firms from the cost - creating production inputs . an important factor in analyzing profit data is that in many cases it is moreinformative to use comparative analysis . comparisons can be made over time , withother companies in the same industry , or with other companies that bear the samelevel of risk . time - based comparative profit analysis may be helpful because it suggeststhe direction the company is heading , or the direction of market trends . a particularrate of profit might be viewed as favorable if it was embedded in a trend of risingprofit rates , or unfavorable if embedded in a trend of falling profit rates . time trendsmight also help to identify correlations between profit and other factors whichinfluence profits . in addition , key lags that affect profit are also more likely to beidentified in a time trend . standing alone , any rate of profit might be difficult to evaluate . comparisonscan be drawn with other firms in the same , or closely related , lines of business todetermine whether a particular firm is a profit leader , average , or a low profit earnerwithin its industry cohort . barring special circumstances , which should be clearlyreported in the company's financial statements , if two firms in the same line ofbusiness , with approximately the same asset base , report very different profit rates,it is possible that this differential might suggest that one or the other firm'smanagement strategy is superior . looking at profit rates of different sized firmswithin the same industry allows the analyst to assess whether growth of the firm toa larger scale may imply any advantage or disadvantage with respect to profit . in some cases , particularly for investment decisions , the most relevantcomparison is with firms with a comparable level of risk , independent of the line of business in which the firms are engaged . ( 25 ) this approach is appropriate for prospectiveinvestors because they may have less interest in what business activity a firmundertakes , than the results of that activity in terms of profits earned and risk borne . in many cases , profits can be expressed in comparison to an index of firms designedto show average , or market , returns and risk . ( 24 ) thismeasure is especially interesting to investors who might plan to buy shares of stockin the business . while this profit measure may be revealing to potential investors,care should be exercised in its use . if two businesses have the same asset value andthe same level of profits , differences in return on net worth can arise solely as a resultof the amount of debt financing on the firm's balance sheet , a difference purely offinancial structure , unrelated to a firm's ability to efficiently produce goods and earnrevenues from selling goods .