the purpose of the mission is the stabilization and reconstruction of afghanistan . although nato has undertaken stabilization and reconstruction missions before , for example in kosovo , the scope of the undertaking in afghanistan is considerably more difficult . 1883 , on september 23 , 2008 . in may 2007 , the eu accepted a request by nato to take the lead in training afghanistan's police . the european police ( eupol ) training mission began in june 2007 with an initial mandate of three years . the eom was established on july 13 , 2009 . by election day , the eu had close to 200 observers participating in the eom in various regions of afghanistan . the eu also contributed €35m to the united nations fund for electoral support to be used for the afghan elections . the effort has faltered thus far for several reasons , including delays in recruiting qualified personnel and strained relations with nato . the mission , headquartered in kabul , consists of 177 international and 91 local staff . however , as recently as the fall 2008 , observers complained that up to half the personnel allocated to the mission had yet to be deployed , and no afghan police personnel had been trained . eu officials have expressed their intention to continue to grow the mission , suggesting that the eupol training team could be doubled . in terms of coordination with nato , turkey had reportedly blocked any provision by nato of intelligence to the eu and the afghan police because ( greek ) cyprus and malta , both in the eu , are not nato members and do not have security agreements with nato . turkey had also blocked any agreement for nato to provide protection to police who come under attack by the taliban . turkey's actions seemed to be a side effect of its dispute with the eu over a range of issues . a bipartisan consensus continues to support the afghanistan mission in the 111 th congress , although there are signs of growing discontent among a growing number of members who are concerned over the growing number of u.s. troops being committed to afghanistan and the rising costs associated with the new military build - up . the afghan freedom support act of 2002 ( p.l . 107 - 327 ) , as amended , authorizes u.s. aid for reconstruction , military operations , counter - narcotics efforts , election reform , and human rights assistance . a succession of appropriations bills has met or exceeded authorization targets . since the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks on the united states , congress has appropriated over $200 billion for afghanistan . in hearings during the 110 th congress , administration officials told members that the united states spends approximately $2 billion a month in afghanistan on troops and reconstruction . that figure continued to rise as the president's initial commitment of 17,000 troops began arriving in afghanistan in 2009 and will continue to rise in 2010 as the first contingent of the 30,000 new troops begins to arrive in country .