the populationfrom mexico tends to be younger and more heavily male . a smaller proportion of the mexicannoncitizen population is not in the labor force because of disability and their labor force participationrates are higher . mexican persons in the u.s. labor force tend to have more dependents in their u.s.households . because mexican workers may have lower lifetime earnings , they may receive a higherreplacement rate in social security benefits than workers with higher lifetime earnings . the fact thatmexican noncitizens tend to spend more years in the labor force does not mean that they contributemore to the social security system than noncitizens from totalization countries who have , onaverage , higher incomes . the analysis in this report is based on data from the march 2004 currentpopulation survey ( cps ) . the current population survey ( cps ) is a householdsurvey conducted by the u.s. bureau of the census for the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) of the u.s. department of labor . thus , some of the respondents in thenoncitizens category who have never had authorization to work in the united stateswould be ineligible for social security benefits , barring future changes toimmigration or social security policy . the comparisons discussed in this report are statistically significant at the95% confidence level , unless stated otherwise . estimates based on survey responsesfrom a sample of households have two kinds of error: nonsampling error andsampling error . examples of nonsampling error include information that ismisreported and errors made in processing collected information . sampling erroroccurs because a sample , and not the entire population , of households is surveyed . the monthly cps is the main source oflabor force data for the nation , including estimates of the monthly unemploymentrate . the cps collects a wide range of demographic , social , and labor marketinformation . currently , approximately 57,000 households are interviewed eachmonth . the monthly cps sample is representative of the civilian noninstitutionalpopulation ; it does not include persons on active military duty . ( 48 ) eachmarch , the cps asks additional questions about earnings for the previous year . ( 49 ) the bls defines the labor force as the sum of employed and unemployedpersons . unemployed persons are individuals who are not working but who areavailable and looking for work . employed persons are individuals who are workingfor a private or public employer , are self - employed , or who work 15 hours or morea week as unpaid workers on a family farm or business . also counted as employedare persons who are temporarily absent from work because of illness , bad weather,vacation , job training , labor - management disputes , childcare problems , maternity orpaternity leave , or other family or personal reasons . the cps uses five categories to define citizenship: ( 1 ) born in the unitedstates ; ( 2 ) born in puerto rico or another outlying area of the united states ; ( 3 ) bornabroad of u.s. citizen parents ; ( 4 ) naturalized citizens ; and ( 5 ) noncitizens . for theanalysis in this report , the first three categories were combined and defined as"citizens. the group of u.s. citizens excludes naturalized citizens from mexico andthe current totalization countries .