these topics represent relatively technical aspectsof the patent law . they are nonetheless subjects that have been the subject of legislativereform over the past two decades , and that are of undoubted importance to collaborativeresearch . cooperation may benefit firmsby allowing them to share risks and costs . high technology research is often expensive , and manyfirms have found limited associations with other entities more cost effective than hiring neededexpertise on a permanent basis . coupled with reported declines in public financing , cost increaseshave also encouraged academic researchers to find new sources of financial support . ( 14 ) the extreme complexity of many modern technologies has also led to the growingspecialization of individual researchers . because few persons are able to master numeroussophisticated and ever - advancing scientific fields , breakthroughs at the frontiers of scientificknowledge increasingly depend upon interdisciplinary research . ( 15 ) trends for individualresearchers are also reflected within the institutions in which they operate . even elite , multinationalenterprises may lack the expertise to perform cutting - edge research on their own . they may insteadturn to government laboratories , universities , or other entities in order to gain access to expertise andequipment not readily available elsewhere . although amendments to the patent statute have clarified rules pertaining tocooperative research and development endeavors , concerns about the standards of jointinventorship and joint ownership persist . although legislation currently before the 109th congress proposes many reforms tothe patent statute , ( 116 ) this proposal would retain rather than refine existingrules with respect to joint inventorship and joint ownership . as technologies and marketscontinue to advance , striking a balance between encouraging cooperation among researchers,while maintaining sufficient patent - based exclusivities to encourage innovation in the firstinstance , will continue to be in the public interest . ( 16 ) congress has also endeavored to create an environment conducive to research associationsbetween and among public , private , and non - profit entities . among the legislative initiatives in thisarea is the national cooperative research act , ( 17 ) which aimed to encourage companies to undertake joint researchthrough clarifications of the antitrust laws . the bayh - dole act allowed universities , nonprofitinstitutions , and small businesses to obtain title to patents on inventions resulting fromgovernment - funded research . ( 18 ) the stevenson - wydler act contained provisions concerningassignment of title to inventions arising from collaborative work between federal laboratories andoutside cooperating parties where no direct federal funding is involved . ( 19 ) in addition , congress hasprovided tax and other incentives to stimulate joint research projects . ( 20 ) although supporters of collaborative research cite its numerous potential advantages , someobservers have voiced concerns over this trend . first , collaboration may effectively reduce thenumber of researchers working on a particular problem . in the manner of an anticompetitivecorporate merger , a joint venture may potentially slow the pace of industrial research . ( 21 ) second , experience demonstrates that joint ventures may be employed to facilitate cartels andother collusive behavior . in particular , as a collaborative research and development project may callfor close , continuing cooperation between two firms , such an arrangement may ultimately decreasethe participants' willingness to act as vigorous rivals in the marketplace .