supreme court . in lockhart v. fretwell ( 115 ) the court refined the strickland test to require that notonly would a different trial result be probable because of attorney performance , but that thetrial result which did occur was fundamentally unfair or unreliable . ( 116 ) in 1999 , the court granted certiorari in williams v. taylor ( 117 ) on the questionof the standard to be applied by federal courts in granting a habeas petition following thepassage of the anti - terrorism and effective death penalty act of 1996 ( aedpa ) ( 118 ) , and on thefourth circuit's application of the strickland standard in a capital case . ( 119 ) finding that thevirginia supreme court's decision rejecting williams' ineffective assistance claim was both"contrary to" and an "unreasonable application of" doctrine well - established in strickland ,the court believed that williams was eligible for habeas relief . generally , when "...a defendant alleg[es] a sixth amendment violation , [he / she] mustdemonstrate `a reasonable probability that , but for counsel's unprofessional errors , the resultsof the proceeding would have been different.' is the death penalty consistent with the eighth amendment's prohibition against theimposition of cruel and unusual punishments ? the supreme court considered various applicationsof the death penalty in the 1930s , 40s and 50s . ( 1 ) in each case , it upheld the state's action without addressing thebroader issue of the constitutionality of the death penalty . in a 5-4 decision in 1972 , furman v. georgia , ( 2 ) the supreme court invalidated federal and state capital punishmentlaws which permitted wide discretion in the application of the death penalty . with one justicecharacterizing the death penalty laws as "capricious," ( 3 ) the majority ruled that they constituted cruel and unusualpunishment in violation of the eighth amendment and the due process guarantees of the fourteenthamendment based upon the inherent arbitrariness of their application particularly in the case ofracial minorities and the poor . ( 4 ) the hundreds of inmates on death row who had been sentenced to die between 1967 and1972 had their death sentences commuted as a result of furman , ( 5 ) but those numbers began tochange again as states enacted revised legislation tailored to satisfy the supreme court's objectionsto arbitrary and capricious decisions which permitted the application of the death sentence . on july2 , 1976 , the supreme court reviewed the post - furman capital punishment statutes of five states ( 6 ) in a series of five cases . therevised laws were of two major types: the first type provided for guided discretion which wasupheld by the supreme court in three cases . ( 7 ) the second type consisted of those statutes which provided for amandatory death sentence for specific crimes , and allowed no judicial or jury discretion beyond thedetermination of guilt . these statutes were held to be unconstitutional . ( 8 ) in sum , what may be gleanedfrom these five cases suggest that while the sentencing authority may possess some discretion , itcannot be the unbridled discretion which was found impermissible in furman . the discretion mustbe limited and directed in order to minimize the potential for arbitrary and capricious actions .