these issues are discussed below . the regional greenhouse gas initiative ( rggi ) and the climate change developments in california raise several issues that may be of interest to congress . this section discusses some of the potential effects of these actions by states , the limitations of these actions , and legal challenges that may hinder or halt implementation of the emission reduction programs . from a global perspective , many u.s. states emit significant amounts of ghgs . state programs can inform federal policymakers in other ways . the political process by which states create climate change policy can be enlightening and perhaps adaptable on the federal level . for instance , by examining the development and passage of state legislation , federal policymakers may better understand the motivations of different stakeholders and learn how best to frame the issues . the mandatory emission reduction programs in california and rggi will likely have economic effects on consumers , businesses and manufacturers , and possibly interstate commerce . the most immediate effects of the emissions programs ( at least the ones furthest along in development ) will be on the automotive manufacturing and electricity generation sectors . for automotive manufacturers , the california motor vehicle regulations — which at least 12 states plan to implement — will likely have the effect of dividing the market , potentially requiring the manufacture of a different class of cars to meet the new standards ( scheduled to apply in 2009 ) . for automotive companies , this raises the issues of the technical means of meeting the standard , marketing , ensuring compliance , and pricing . depending on how the emission limits are to be met , they may also influence fueling infrastructure . state governments will need resources to enforce the standards . consumers in regulated states may face higher prices for vehicles . for the electric generating sector , the california and rggi requirements will likely promote generation from low carbon - intensive fuels , while curtailing generation from high carbon - intensive fuels , such as coal . california's ghg performance standards will reach into neighboring states as well , effectively barring electricity imports generated by conventional coal - fired power plants . as coal - fired plants tend to produce lower - cost electricity , the result of these requirements may be to increase electricity prices within the states that limit emissions , and possibly lower prices in states without such emission standards . if the ghg limitations on motor vehicles and electricity increase prices in the regulated states , businesses and manufacturers may factor this cost into location decisions . there is some concern that regulated industries will have a financial incentive to move ( and thus transfer jobs ) to states ( or nations , such as mexico or canada ) that do not limit ghg emissions . others fear that emission limits will raise the cost of living and doing business within those states , although in theory such effects can be at least partially addressed through the design of the emissions reduction program . if individual u.s. states were classified as sovereign nations , 18 u.s. states would rank in the top 50 for nations that annually emit the primary ghg: carbon dioxide .