although h.r . 4772 has previous incarnations , the current congressional interest in the bill largely stems from the supreme court's 2005 decision in kelo v. city of new london . that decision dealt with a related , but very different matter . although h.r . 4772 seeks to facilitate takings lawsuits by land owners aggrieved by government interference , kelo addressed the permissible public purposes underlying direct condemnation suits by governments seeking to acquire land . yet to be sure , both supreme court decision and bill speak to property rights and aspects of the fifth amendment takings clause's protection of property rights , and public concerns about property rights kindled by the decision plainly have enhanced interest in the bill . this report comments only on the legal and legally related policy issues raised by h.r . 4772 's process features , as noted , seek to facilitate access to the federal courts by property owners with certain federal constitutional claims . the process features do not affect the property owner's access to state courts for adjudicating those federal claims , which courts remain generally available . rather , they offer the property owner a second forum for federal claims . the key process features of the bill are as follows: 1. section 2 : in an action under 28 u.s.c . ยง 1343 in which the facts concern the uses of real property , limits when a federal district can abstain from deciding the action , requires that the court exercise jurisdiction even if the plaintiff has not first pursued his state - court remedies , and limits when the court can " certify " a related question of state law to the state courts ( asking the state court to clarify a point of state law and report back to the federal court ) , and 2. sections 2-4 : provides that takings actions brought under 42 u.s.c . ยง 1983 ( against political subdivisions of states ) or under the tucker acts ( against the united states ) shall be ripe for adjudication upon a " final decision , " which exists if ( a ) the government makes a definitive decision as to the permissible uses of the property , and ( b ) one meaningful application to use the property has been denied and the property owner has applied for but been denied one waiver and one appeal , unless unavailable or futile . these process features closely track approaches used in the earlier bills . there are a host of small changes , however . for example , h.r . 1534 ( 105 th congress ) defines "final decision" to require the property owner to seek , but be denied , one waiver or one appeal . in contrast , h.r . 2372 ( 106 th congress ) and h.r . 4772 require one waiver and one appeal , seemingly a more demanding ripeness standard . 4772 's substantive features are as follows: 1. sections 5-6 : takings actions brought under 42 u.s.c .