these are discussed below . the united states shares jurisdiction over its coastal waters with the coastal states . the 1953 submerged lands act ( sla ) gave coastal states jurisdiction over the submerged lands , waters , and natural resources ( eg , oil deposits ) located , in most cases , within 3 nautical miles off the coastline . the waters , seabed , and natural resources beyond the states' waters are exclusively federal , and extend to the edge of the exclusive economic zone ( 200 nautical miles from shore ) . however , the federal government maintains the authority to regulate commerce , navigation , national defense , power production , and international affairs within state waters . the oil spill legal framework involves implementation by multiple federal agencies . agency responsibilities can be divided into two categories: ( 1 ) oil spill response and cleanup and ( 2 ) oil spill prevention / preparedness . as mentioned above , the national oil and hazardous substances pollution contingency plan ( ncp ) contains the federal government's framework and operative requirements for responding to an oil spill ( and releases of hazardous substances ) . although first developed through administrative processes in 1968 , subsequent laws have amended the ncp , including the clean water act in 1972 ; the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla or superfund ) in 1980 ; and the oil pollution act ( opa ) in 1990 . oil spill response actions required under the regulations of the ncp are binding and enforceable , per these enforcement authorities . the ncp establishes the national response system ( nrs ) , a multi - tiered and coordinated national response strategy for addressing oil spills and releases of hazardous substances . the ncp provisions specific to oil spill response are codified in 40 c.f.r . part 300 , subpart d. key components of the nrs include the following: national response team ( nrt ) : composed of representatives from the federal departments and agencies assigned roles in responding to oil spills . the u.s. coast guard chairs the nrt when a response is being mounted to a spill in a coastal region . regional response teams ( rrts ) : composed of regional representatives of each nrt member agency , state governments , and local governments . the coast guard leads the relevant rrt during responses to oil spills in coastal waters . area committees ( acs ) : composed of qualified personnel from federal , state , and local agencies . the primary function of each ac is to prepare an area contingency plan ( acp ) for its designated area . on - scene coordinator ( osc ) : who directs the response efforts and coordinates all other efforts at the scene . oil spill response authority is determined by the location of the spill: the coast guard has response authority in the coastal zone , and the epa covers the inland zone . the osc has the ultimate authority to ensure that an oil spill is effectively removed and actions are taken to prevent further discharge from the source .