although h.r . 6 offers lessees the option to renegotiate their leases and does not force them to do so , the final analysis of whether the legislation ( or similar legislation ) effectively breaches the lease may be a factual analysis dependent upon the resulting hardship to individual lessees , and thus it is difficult to predict how a court might rule on this issue . finally , it should be noted that there is a potential non - legislative fix for the missing royalty price thresholds in the 1998 / 1999 leases . the leases could be challenged based on a theory of unilateral mistake or of mutual mistake . for such a claim to succeed ( resulting in reformation or voiding of the leases ) , the party challenging the lease provisions would have to demonstrate , among other things , that one or both parties thought it was including the royalty price thresholds when the leases were signed . furthermore , an interested party would have to be willing to litigate the matter . thus far , no party has initiated litigation to amend or void the leases . with regard to section 204 of h.r . 6 , one taking argument might be that it interferes with some property right to receive such new leases . searching the outer continental shelf lands act and its implementing regulations , however , we find no legal support for a property right to receive new ocs leases , whether or not one is an existing dwrra leaseholder . to obtain registration , the pesticide manufacturer had to submit data supporting the pesticide's safety and effectiveness — data that often included trade secrets . the statute had promised protection from disclosure prior to 1978 , but statutory amendments adopted in 1978 limited those protections . plaintiff claimed that the data registration and limited data disclosure provisions of the statute effected a taking of a property right , namely , their trade secrets . the court recognized that the plaintiff's trade secrets were a legitimate property interest , but held that the voluntary submission of trade secrets post - 1978 in exchange for the economic advantages of a registration " can hardly be called a taking. the court reasoned that during this period , monsanto had voluntarily submitted its trade secret data with full knowledge of the legal possibility that epa would use the data in ways that diminished their trade secret value , and thus could not complain when the agency actually did so . the ruckelshaus holding that voluntary compromise of a property right in exchange for an economic benefit is not a taking suggests that a court might reach the same conclusion with respect to a takings challenge to section 204 . as with the statute at issue in ruckelshaus , section 204 would not require any action , but would instead offer a choice: compromise a property right ( exemption from payment of royalties ) in exchange for a possible economic benefit ( receipt of new ocs leases ) . another argument that courts would be unlikely to discern a taking in section 204 draws on the underlying purpose of the takings clause .