[searches are] going to be disproportionate . it is going to be young men , not exclusively , but it may be disproportionate when it comes to ethnic groups. the government quickly distanced itself from this remark noting that intelligence - led stop and searches should be utilized rather than stereotyping ethnic minorities because "tackling terrorism is absolutely dependent on the confidence of these communities to feel that they can come forward , give information and be part of the fight against this threat. in the united states as noted earlier , the fourth amendment permits parolees to be stopped and searched without warrant or suspicion . and law enforcement officers may conduct a brief investigative stop when given the circumstances they have "a particularized and objective basis for suspecting" that criminal activity is afoot . nevertheless invidious racial , ethnic , or religious discrimination in law enforcement is unlawful , and the consideration of such factors standing alone "and sometimes even in tandem with other factors , does not generate reasonable suspicion for a stop. police powers in the uk under the terrorism act 2000 are wide - ranging and there are concerns over opportunities for abuse . the act permits investigations into the resources of proscribed organizations and the commission , preparation , or instigation of acts that are offenses under the act . police can arrest individuals without a warrant based on a reasonable suspicion that they have been involved in the preparation , instigation , or commission of acts of terrorism , regardless of whether police believe the suspect is committing or has committed a crime . the government justified this "pre - emptive power of arrest" by stating that the delay in collecting sufficient information for an arrest warrant would , in some cases , be too late to prevent the terrorist act . there are no federal statutory provisions in the united states comparable to the british authority to arrest suspected terrorists . under the fourth amendment , the hallmarks of a reasonable arrest are probable cause and a warrant issued by a neutral magistrate . the amendment does allow warrantless arrests based on probable cause under some circumstances and permits brief investigative stops and border inspections without a warrant and less than probable cause , but there is nothing the equivalent of a "pre - emptive power of arrest. the government in the uk has faced the difficult task of balancing the rights of individuals , which now have extensive statutory protection under the human rights act 1998 , with the security of the state . the incorporation of the european convention on human rights [the echr] into the domestic law of the uk by the human rights act 1998 altered the legal climate of the uk and resulted in the specific prohibition of detention for the sole purpose of preventing a crime being specifically prohibited , save in certain circumstances prescribed by law . while the echr is not a new doctrine of law , but merely sets out the rights that individuals in britain have long enjoyed under the common law , the impact of the echr on the domestic laws of the uk is evident . cases challenging british laws are noticeable and ever increasing in number .