voter confidence . one of the arguments used in favor of vvpat by some observers is that it is necessary to help restore voter confidence in the u.s. election process . however , there is little evidence that confidence of the average voter is affected by this issue . even if the adoption of vvpat does increase confidence in the electoral process , if that confidence is false — as might be the case if voters mistakenly believe that a paper - ballot requirement is a "magic bullet" security measure — that could itself pose a risk to the integrity of elections . congress may wish to examine the extent and causes of any decline in voter confidence , and the impact of various possible measures on it , in considering whether to enact legislation relating to this matter . impacts on innovation . questions in each of those categories are addressed in turn below . as of the end of 2006 , most states required paper ballot records . however , neither maryland nor georgia , which use dres statewide , had enacted such requirements , opting instead to focus on other security approaches . as vvpat is used by more states , and more studies of its effectiveness are done , more will be known about the cost , performance , and any limitations of vvpat in normal use . misperceptions about dres could have important policy implications as states , and possibly congress , consider proposals to require vvpat for all electronic voting machines . in particular , the following issues may be worth considering: lack of information . there remains considerable uncertainty about the relative security of dres in comparison to other voting systems ; how security measures such as vvpat may impact other important goals such as accuracy , reliability , usability , and accessibility ; and the effectiveness of those security measures . congress could direct the eac to fill those information gaps through appropriate research as states move to implement vvpat and other security measures . potential conflicts with hava requirements . to the extent that states require paper - based ballots , they may be perceived to be in violation of the accessibility requirements of hava , unless their paper - based systems can be made sufficiently accessible . congress might be asked to resolve any such conflicts through changes to hava . while the mandating of security requirements such as vvpat can result in innovation with respect to those requirements , there is a risk that the requirements will be written in such a way that other kinds of innovation , such as potentially superior security measures not using vvpat , will be difficult to implement without additional legislation . for example , any law requiring paper ballots would have to be changed before an alternative independent - verification or software - independent system , such as those discussed in the vvsg , could be implemented . congress may wish to consider ways to ensure that the federal and state regulatory environment for voting systems does not inhibit such innovation . dres are the most technologically advanced of current voting systems . they and other forms of electronic voting offer substantial promise for improving elections for both voters and election officials .