former u.s . ambassador paul cellucci notably said in 2003 that "security trumps trade" in the u.s. - canada relationship . this realization has led to many border initiatives described above . the security and prosperity partnership ( spp ) , contains many initiatives that could lead to some measure of regulatory harmonization among the united states , canada , and mexico . in addition to calling for implementation of common border security strategies , the spp initiates cooperation in energy , the transportation network , financial services , and standards harmonization . ten ministerial working groups were formed and were required to report after 90 days , and semi - annually thereafter . generally , talk of monetary union north of the border is strongest during times of relative weakness of the loonie vis - a - vis the u.s. dollar . the recent strength of the loonie has diminished such discussion , although the idea still has some proponents . those who support monetary union argue that it would force canada to make the necessary structural adjustments that would make it more competitive with the united states . in other words , dollarization or a currency union would remove the ability to cushion adverse economic conditions through depreciation of the currency . by tying the loonie to the u.s. dollar or by adopting the dollar outright , canada would be making the unmistakable commitment to converge with u.s. macroeconomic policy . then canada would be able to reap the benefits of u.s. policy , which traditionally have been lower inflation , lower interest rates , and higher levels of growth than canada has experienced . in addition , the savings in trade transaction costs would be significant for the volume of trade the two nations conduct . canadian opponents of monetary union contend that it would lead to an unacceptable loss of political and economic sovereignty . monetary policy would be dependent on ( or tied to ) actions of the u.s. federal reserve . thus , the canadian government would be left with fewer levers to combat inflation or fight recession . in a monetary union in which macroeconomic convergence is reached , this point may not be important . to opponents of monetary union , however , the two economies respond differently to events , and thus need to utilize different adjustment mechanisms . furthermore , with a population and economy smaller than some federal reserve districts , canada's ability to influence u.s. monetary policy in a monetary union likely would be small . reportedly , the scope of spp activity is in the realm of regulatory changes , actions that do not require legislative activity . the initial report was released on june 27 , 2005 . the prosperity component of the spp intends to enhance competitiveness by developing proposals to streamline regulatory processes among the three partners , enhance detection and prevention of counterfeiting and piracy , and liberalize rules of origin . sectoral initiatives on steel , autos , energy , air transport , and e - commerce are also envisioned . quality of life cooperative initiatives on pollution , agriculture and food supply , and health issues were also launched .