the senate version of h.r . 5252 would have prohibited television broadcast stations from using the broadcast video flag "to limit the redistribution of news and public affairs programming the primary commercial value of which depends on timeliness. however , the bill expressly allowed each broadcaster or broadcasting network to make the determination as to whether the primary commercial value of a particular news program depends on timeliness . the bill also authorized the fcc to "review any such determination by a broadcaster or broadcasting network if it receives bona fide complaints alleging , or otherwise has reason to believe , that particular broadcast digital television content has violated" this limitation concerning timeliness and commercial value . the analog spectrum will in turn be auctioned for other commercial and public interests . content providers , fearing widespread piracy that would endanger aftermarket sales ( such as cable re - broadcast and dvd sales ) , urged the fcc to provide for a means to protect their assets . meanwhile , consumer electronics and information technologists , as well as consumer rights groups , came together in an effort to minimize the possible negative outcome that a wide - scale regulation might have imposed . in addition , the senate version of h.r . 5252 clarified that nothing in the bill shall "be construed to affect rights , remedies , limitations , or defenses to copyright infringement , including fair use," under the copyright act . s. 2686 did not contain a similar provision with regard to the broadcast video flag . the technical specifications behind the broadcast video flag were a compromise measure , premised on an understanding that more restrictive approaches ( such as encrypted signals created at the source of transmission ) imposed economically or technologically infeasible conditions . the compromise came after a consortium of content providers and consumer electronics and information technology groups came together , forming the broadcast protection discussion group ( bpdg ) . the result of this consortium was a final report published in june 2002 , which was delivered to representative billy tauzin , then - chairman of the house committee on energy and commerce . the report suggested a set of "robustness and compliance" rules for devices capable of demodulating digital television signals , which would require that such devices protect "flagged" content from being recorded by unauthorized devices . however , the flag itself would not require that all machines recognize it , and would act only as a means to halt unauthorized use in machines capable of detecting it . in november 2003 , the fcc published a report and order that required all digital devices capable of receiving digital broadcast over the air , and sold after july 1 , 2005 , to incorporate a standard content - protection technology that would recognize the broadcast video flag and limit redistribution when the flag is recognized . the fcc's regulations apply the flag mark to all devices and receivers capable of receiving digital content . such devices include , but are not limited to , televisions , computers , digital video - recorders ( eg , tivo ) , and dvd players .