bush . congressional action approving the continuing appropriations act for fy2009 ( p.l . 110 - 329 , enacted september 30 , 2008 ) , continued the funding of government activities through march 6 , 2009 , or until a regular appropriations bill is enacted , omitted language that provided for the congressional ocs moratoria along the atlantic and pacific coasts . the permanent appropriations law ( p.l . 111-8 ) does not contain the ocs moratoria . those areas may now be made available for preleasing , leasing , and related activity that could lead to oil and gas development . the moratorium , however , is still in place for most of the eastern gulf of mexico which was placed off - limits statutorily until 2022 under the gulf of mexico energy security act of 2006 ( gomesa ) ( p.l . there are some indications in the 111 th congress that a total ocs ban is unlikely , but the question may be , how much of the ocs remains open and available for oil and gas drilling . separate legislation ( h.r . 1696 ) has been introduced to place mms planning areas in the north atlantic and mid - atlantic permanently off - limits to oil and gas leasing and development . further , the administration began planning its next five - year leasing program in august 2008 that would , if approved , be implemented as early as 2010 - two years ahead of schedule . the proposed new five - year program , introduced in january 2009 , would supersede the current five - year leasing program from 2007-2012 . a new five - year lease program , beginning in 2010 , would allow the newly opened ocs areas to be offered in a lease sale sooner than if they remained on their current schedule . the obama administration extended the comment period on the proposed five - year leasing program 180 days beyond its required 60 days to assess the information they have on the ocs for energy development , including renewable energy development . there are some in congress , along with interest groups ( eg , environmentalists ) , however , that oppose keeping open many of the offshore areas previously offlimits . they argue that there are still several million acres leased onshore and offshore but not yet producing and that production from these areas could increase u.s. oil and gas supply . at the end of the 109 th congress , provisions contained in s. 3711 were attached to a broad tax relief measure ( h.r . 6111 ) , which passed the house and senate and was signed into law ( p.l . areas where preleasing and leasing activity would be excluded under the bill and placed under moratorium until 2022 , would be east of the military mission line ( about 230 miles from florida's west coast ) , within 125 miles of florida in the new eastern gulf of mexico planning area , and within 100 miles of the state of florida in the new central gulf of mexico planning area .