resolutions. thus , it appears to incorporate resolutions concerning iraq that may be adopted by the security council in the future as well as those already adopted . the authority also appears to extend beyond compelling iraq's disarmament to implementing the full range of concerns expressed in those resolutions . the president's exercise of the authority granted is not dependent upon a finding that iraq was complicit in the attacks of september 11 , 2001 . moreover , the authority conferred can be used for the purpose of defending "the national security of the united states against the continuing threat posed by iraq. on march 19 , 2003 , president bush used the authority granted in p.l . more recent copies of these presidential reports may be found in the daily compilation of presidential documents at http: / / www.gpo.gov / fdsys / browse / collection.action ? they are also found in public papers section of the american presidency project at http: / / www.presidency.ucsb.edu / ws / #axzz1dzdn7pmm . ( 112 ) on january 22 , 2004 , the president reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that the united states was continuing to deploy combat equipped military personnel in bosnia and herzegovina in support of nato's stabilization force ( sfor ) and its peacekeeping efforts in this country . about 1,800 u.s. personnel are participating . ( 113 ) on february 25 , 2004 , the president reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that , on february 23 , he had sent a combat - equipped "security force" of about "55 u.s. military personnel from the u.s. joint forces command" to port - au - prince , haiti , to augment the u.s. embassy security forces there and to protect american citizens and property in light of the instability created by the armed rebellion in haiti . ( 114 ) on march 2 , 2004 , the president reported to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution" that on february 29 he had sent about "200 additional u.s. combat - equipped , military personnel from the u.s. joint forces command" to port - au - prince , haiti , for a variety of purposes , including preparing the way for a u.n . multinational interim force , and otherwise supporting u.n. security council resolution 1529 ( 2004 ) . ( 115 ) on march 20 , 2004 , the president sent to congress "consistent with the war powers resolution," a consolidated report giving details of multiple ongoing united states military deployments and operations "in support of the global war on terrorism ( including in afghanistan ) ," as well as operations in bosnia and herzegovina , kosovo , and haiti . in this report , the president noted that u.s. anti - terror related activities were underway in georgia , djibouti , kenya , ethiopia , yemen , and eritrea . he further noted that u.s. combat - equipped military personnel continued to be deployed in kosovo as part of the nato - led kfor ( 1,900 personnel ) ; in bosnia and herzegovina as part of the nato - led sfor ( about 1,100 personnel ) ; and approximately 1,800 military personnel were deployed in haiti as part of the u.n .