appendix a . 2017 trust fund operations appendix b . key dates projected for the social security trust fund . these scenarios are only two of a wide range of possibilities . when congress last addressed social security's solvency in 1983 , lawmakers employed a combination of tax increases and benefit reductions to improve the financial condition of the combined trust funds . under current law , the social security trust funds will almost certainly become insolvent . the sooner changes are made to the program , the smaller and less abrupt the changes would need to be to maintain solvency . prompt action would also allow congress to gradually phase in changes , rather than abruptly cutting benefits or raising taxes , thus allowing workers to plan in advance for their retirements . workers obtain insurance protection by working for a sufficient number of years in jobs covered by social security . one option would be to pay full benefits on a delayed schedule ; another would be to make timely but reduced payments . in 2018 , an estimated 174 million people ( or about 94% of all workers ) will work in paid employment or self - employment covered by social security . social security benefits are based on a worker's career - average earnings in jobs covered by social security and designed to replace a portion of the income lost to a family due to the worker's retirement , disability , or death . in may 2018 , the social security administration ( ssa ) authorized benefit payments for 62.5 million beneficiaries , including 43.0 million retired workers , 8.6 million disabled workers , 4.8 million dependents of retired or disabled workers , and 6.0 million survivors of deceased insured workers . the average benefit payment issued that month was $1,412 for retired workers , $1,198 for disabled workers , $596 for dependents of retired or disabled workers , and $1,153 for survivors for deceased insured workers . there are many options to restore social security solvency , which could be combined or targeted in a variety of ways . for example , congress could decrease social security benefits . benefit cuts could be applied proportionately to all beneficiaries or structured to protect certain people , such as disabled or low - income beneficiaries . congress could also increase social security's income by raising payroll or other taxes or by transferring funds from the treasury's general fund . payroll tax increases could be applied proportionately to all workers or targeted to certain workers , such as those who earn more than the taxable maximum ( $128,400 in 2018 ) . it also analyzes two scenarios that assume congress waits until the moment of insolvency to act , showing the magnitude of benefit cuts or tax increases needed and how such changes would affect beneficiaries . old - age , survivors , and disability insurance , commonly known as social security , is a work - related social insurance program authorized under title ii of the social security act that provides monthly cash benefits to retired or disabled workers and their eligible dependents and to eligible survivors of deceased insured workers .