terminal operators ( a.k.a . stevedores ) contract with longshoremen unions to provide cargo handling services on the docks . longshoremen are hired by and report directly to a union hiring hall . terminal operators also employ a management team who are hired by and report directly to the terminal operating company . longshoremen , called "dockworkers," operate cranes that physically move the cargo from ship to dock and vice versa . c - tpat depends on the cooperation of overseas manufacturers and overland carriers to protect u.s. bound shipments from terrorist infiltration . isps relies on the cooperation of foreign governments and foreign - flag carriers to enforce port and vessel security codes . as one maritime industry spokesperson stated: this is an international business with an international problem . the only way it's going to be addressed effectively is through international efforts , which means the u.s. isn't going to do it all , nor can it do it all . while the dp world issue spotlighted the role of terminal operators in port security , the initial debate about who should be operating u.s. ports quickly broadened into a debate about whether u.s. ports are secure . the dp world controversy refueled debate about whether the nation is doing enough , doing it with enough urgency , and spending enough on u.s. port and maritime security . members of congress have referred to ports as the "soft underbelly" in u.s. homeland security , to the shipping container as a modern day "trojan horse," and have argued that there are still "massive blind spots" in the maritime security regime . while no one asserts that enough has already been done to strengthen security , post - 9 / 11 initiatives like csi , ats , c - tpat , mtsa , and isps have , most acknowledge , created a framework for building a maritime security regime . an issue of likely interest to congress is the effectiveness of these maritime security initiatives . gao has issued a number of reports addressing post - 9 / 11 security initiatives . gao has reported several factors limiting csi , including staffing imbalances and lack of technical requirements for nii equipment used at foreign ports . a number of concerns have also been raised by gao regarding the c - tpat program including the scope of effort and level of rigor applied to the validation process ; how many and the types of validations that are necessary to manage security risk ; and various staffing issues . the ats system and cbp's targeting strategy more generally have been scrutinized by gao in reports that criticize the strategy for not incorporating all the key elements of a risk management framework , and not being entirely consistent with recognized modeling practices . also , the dhs inspector general published the results of an audit of cbp's targeting procedures , and concluded that improvements were needed regarding the data used by ats , examination results should be used to refine ats targeting rules , and physical controls over containers could be improved . the dhs inspector general has also raised concerns about the effectiveness of port security grants .