each has some advantages and some drawbacks . these measures relate closely to one another , although each illustrates different aspects of the government's fiscal situation . the federal government faces serious fiscal imbalances in the coming decades . while each of the measures described in the previous section highlight particular aspects of the federal government's fiscal condition , together they point to the same conclusion: under any plausible scenario the misalignment of federal revenues and spending will continue before worsening as the costs of baby - boom retirement and health care fall due . estimates of each of the fiscal measures discussed above are presented in turn . the federal government faces large fiscal imbalances . a former chair of the president's council of economic advisers recently noted , the federal government's current budget deficit is , in a sense , only the tip of the iceberg of the fiscal problems to come . the federal budget is on an unsustainable path . when the baby - boom generation retires and becomes eligible for social security and medicare , all hell is going to break loose . the policy options aren't pretty — either large cuts in promised benefits or taxes vastly higher than anything ever experienced in u.s. history . if the yearly budget deficit is the tip of the iceberg , then finding a way to measure the iceberg itself , that is , the magnitude of the imbalance in long - term revenues and spending obligations , becomes important . as with icebergs , the largest and most dangerous parts of long - term fiscal imbalances are less visible . although all serious fiscal analysts acknowledge the magnitude of future fiscal imbalances , major legislative changes of the scale necessary to address these imbalances have not been enacted — or yet proposed . the political choices needed to reduce these imbalances in a significant way will be painful , which explains some of the reluctance of policy makers to tackle this issue . other reasons for the delay in confronting the issue of fiscal imbalances include the belief that economic growth will solve these problems , avoiding the need for difficult allocational decisions , and a belief that the costs of delay are relatively small . short - and medium - term budgetary measures , such as the current - year estimates and cbo's 10-year forecasts , are not useful tools in understanding the nature and magnitude of the federal government's long - term financial imbalances , although they are essential tools for managing federal operations and for effective congressional oversight . several measures of long - term financial fiscal stance developed in the recent past have become increasingly influential among budgeting experts , although so far they have had limited influence on wider public debates . any single summary indicator of the federal budgetary situation provides too little information , so a combination of short - and long - term measures is needed to understand the federal government's fiscal stance . recent estimates of future federal imbalances that were not constrained by cbo baseline assumptions and which were computed using different technical models , fall in a narrow range .