a comparison of provisions in p.l . 109-417 with preexisting law is provided in table 1 later in this report . for more information regarding provisions in p.l . 107-188 , see crs report rl31263 , public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act ( p.l . 107-188 ) : provisions and changes to preexisting law , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] . for more information regarding project bioshield , see crs report rs21507 , project bioshield: purposes and authorities , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl33907 , project bioshield: appropriations , acquisitions , and policy implementation issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] . for more information regarding public health preparedness and response authorities and programs in general , and in the context of specific threats , see: crs report rs22602 , public health and medical preparedness and response: issues in the 110th congress , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33579 , the public health and medical response to disasters: federal authority and funding , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl31719 , an overview of the u.s. public health system in the context of emergency preparedness , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33096 , 2005 gulf coast hurricanes: the public health and medical response , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33145 , pandemic influenza: domestic preparedness efforts , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33738 , gulf coast hurricanes: addressing survivors' mental health and substance abuse treatment needs , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] . for more information regarding the stafford act and related preparedness and response planning activities in dhs , see: crs report rl33729 , federal emergency management policy changes after hurricane katrina: a summary of statutory provisions , by [author name scrubbed] et al . crs report rl33053 , federal stafford act disaster assistance: presidential declarations , eligible activities , and funding , by [author name scrubbed] . the 110 th congress will likely be interested in the implementation of provisions in p.l . 109-417 , and in the continued evolution of relationships between hhs , dhs , the states , and others among whom coordination is essential in a time of heightened concern about national security . members of the 110 th congress may wish to consider legislation to address additional expiring public health authorities , such as the select agent program to control access to pathogens that could be used for bioterrorism , which expires at the end of fy2007 . congress may also wish to examine certain permanent emergency response and funding authorities of the secretary of hhs . this report discusses some key provisions in the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act ( p.l . 109-417 ) , and provides a history of prior public health and medical preparedness and response legislation . the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act effected the second comprehensive reauthorization of federal programs designed to improve the nation's readiness for public health threats such as bioterrorism or pandemic influenza .