appendix a . calculation of the value of the lihtc as described in the body of the report , the annual lihtc rate is set by the treasury department ( as required by statute ) so that the discounted present value of the 10-year stream of credits is 70% of the project's cost . the discount rate used in the treasury's calculation is the after - tax average of mid - and long - term applicable federal interest rates ; the assumed tax rate is 28% . in other words pv credits = 70% q where q is the cost of the project . does the lihtc address the affordable housing problem ? and is the lihtc efficient , or can it be improved ? despite the significance of the tax credit in housing finance markets , these questions are not definitively answered in economics literature . is the lack of affordable housing a result of a housing - market failure ? this report , where possible , attempts to answer these questions . the principal conclusions of this report are as follows: the perceived lack of affordable housing , while of concern to policymakers , the press , and to some degree , the general public , is not necessarily caused by a housing - market failure . there is insufficient empirical evidence to determine what is causing the affordable housing "crisis. the evidence is unclear that the lihtc actually helps to solve the affordable housing problem , and there is some evidence that it may actually crowd out ( replace ) other affordable housing development rather than increase the number of housing units . where it is not possible to answer the policy questions , this report draws attention to the information , actions , or both , necessary to obtain the answers . the lihtc has a complicated system of delivery that may increase costs relative to the benefits it provides . moreover , it may be less efficient than other affordable housing programs . after discussing how affordable housing is defined , this report examines whether a housing - market failure exists , whether the lihtc program is efficient , and whether the lihtc is cost effective relative to other programs ; and concludes with a discussion of several policy options . there is a growing consensus among policymakers and the general public that the nation faces a shortage of affordable housing , particularly rental housing . the 2002 bipartisan , congressionally mandated millennial housing commission's final report confirmed and defined the shortage as a "crisis. the harvard joint center for housing studies' 2006 state of the nation's housing report identified housing affordability as one of the key challenges facing the nation . but is the "affordability crisis" the result of a housing market failure , warranting government intervention in housing markets ? to answer that question , we start by defining the concept of affordable housing . the term "affordable housing" is widely used and generally refers to housing of standard , decent quality , and that a family can afford without compromising their ability to meet other needs .