appendix a . chronology of key events appendix b . legislation ( h.r . 4775 , and s. 2696 ) already had been introduced in the 109 th congress to extend the 2002 farm bill by one year . the american farm bureau , at its 2007 annual meeting just concluded , endorsed "the concepts of the 2002 farm bill" for its farm safety net features ( i.e. , the set of direct payments and price - related commodity support ) . the united states must still meet obligations under existing wto agricultural agreements , which limit its trade - distorting spending to $19.1 billion annually . some trade analysts think that there could be an increase in litigation by wto member countries that allege they are harmed by u.s. farm subsidies . the expiration of the "peace clause" ( article 13 of the 1994 uruguay round agreement on agriculture ) means that wto member countries are no longer bound by an agreement to refrain from challenging each other's agricultural subsidy programs so long as commitments under the agreement are being met . brazil's successful challenges of u.s. cotton subsidies and eu sugar subsidies in wto dispute settlement are cited as illustrations of the possible kinds of legal actions that wto members might take . canada's recent challenge to u.s. corn and other farm subsidies appears aimed at influencing the next farm bill . another consequence of the suspension of doha round negotiations is that the united states may pursue more aggressively bilateral and regional free trade agreements ( ftas ) . 107-171 ) on september 30 , 2007 . discussions have been particularly intense between the united states and the eu . the u.s. president has met with the president of the european commission , and there have been several meetings between the u.s. trade representative and the eu commissioner for trade . while u.s. and eu negotiators have not changed their official positions since suspension of negotiations as described below , there have been suggestions that each could show more flexibility: the united states might offer a greater percentage reduction in domestic support if the eu offered to reduce tariffs further and limit the number of import - sensitive products . however , new offers on domestic support and market access by the united states and the eu are constrained by domestic political considerations . neither u.s. nor eu farmers have professed a willingness to support further concessions on subsidies or tariffs . no clear idea has yet emerged as to how much tariff reduction would be needed to match domestic subsidy cuts or vice versa to satisfy u.s. or eu farm interests . while u.s. and eu agreement is a necessary condition for successfully concluding a doha round agreement , it is not sufficient . the 1994 uruguay round was concluded due in large part to a u.s. - eu agreement on the major issues . in doha round negotiations , however , developing countries are playing a major , even decisive , role .