the fy2006 ndaa ( p.l . 108-136 , 117 stat . 1392 , authorized "combat related special compensation" ( crsc ) . this provision extended eligibility to all who have been rated as 100% unemployable ( regardless of their disability rating ) by the va and made their eligibility for concurrent receipt retroactive to december 31 , 2004 . however , this new benefit will not begin until october 1 , 2008 . 107-314 ; 116 stat . 2458 ) , as amended by the fy2004 ndaa section 642 , p.l . military retirees with at least 20 years of service and who meet either of the following two criteria are eligible for crsc: a disability that is "attributable to an injury for which the member was awarded the purple heart," and is not rated as less than a 10% disability by dod or the va ; or a disability rating from either dod or the va , incurred due to involvement in "armed conflict," "hazardous service," "duty simulating war," and "through an instrumentality of war. this appears , in lay terms , to encompass combat with any kind of hostile force ; hazardous duty such as diving , parachuting , using dangerous materials such as explosives , and the like ; individual training and unit training and exercises and maneuvers in the field ; and "instrumentalities of war," such as accidents in combat vehicles or , if due to training - related activities , aboard naval vessels or military aircraft , and accidental injuries due to occurrences , such as munitions explosions , injuries from gases or vapors related to training for combat , and the like . ( the 2003 legislation limited the latter criterion to retirees with at least a 60% disability ; the 2004 legislation repealed the 60% limit. ) crsc payments will be equal to the amount of va disability compensation to which the retiree is entitled , but the new legislation does not end the requirement that the retiree's military retired pay be reduced by whatever va compensation to which the retiree is entitled . therefore , crsc beneficiaries will receive the financial equivalence of concurrent receipt , but in legal and statutory terms it will not constitute concurrent receipt , and the statute also states that it explicitly is not retired pay per se . for online applications and information , see https: / / www.dod.mil / prhome / mppcrsc.html . retirees may also phone the retirement services offices of their service for the necessary information . servicemembers with a permanent disability rating of 30% or greater may be retired and receive retired pay prior to completing 20 years of service . these retirees are generally referred to as "chapter 61" retirees , a reference to chapter 61 , title 10 which governs their retirement . the original concurrent receipt legislation excluded those who retired with less than 20 years of service . however , the fy2008 ndaa ( p.l . 110-181 ) expanded combat related special compensation ( crsc ) to include chapter 61 retirees effective january 1 , 2008 . eligibility is not based on a minimum number of years of service or a minimum disability rating other than the 30% noted above for disability retirement .