like h.r . 6327 would have enabled eligible unauthorized students to adjust to lpr status in the united states through the cancellation of removal procedure . aliens could have applied for cancellation of removal without first being placed in removal proceedings , and there would have been no limit on the number of aliens who could be granted cancellation of removal / adjustment of status . to be eligible for cancellation of removal / adjustment of status under h.r . various states have attempted to do this . for example , a california law passed in 2001 makes unauthorized aliens eligible for in - state tuition at state community colleges and california state university campuses . the measure , however , bases eligibility on criteria that do not explicitly include state residency . the requirements to qualify for in - state tuition under the california law include attendance at a california high school for at least three years and either graduation from a california high school "or attainment of the equivalent thereof. in addition , the law requires an unauthorized alien student to file an affidavit stating that he or she either has filed an application to legalize his or her status or will file such an application as soon as he or she is eligible . california officials have argued that by using eligibility criteria other than state residency , the law does not violate the section 505 prohibition on conferring educational benefits on the basis of state residency . in november 2010 , the california supreme court upheld the california law . at least one federal court also has considered whether state laws that authorize in - state tuition for unauthorized students violate section 505 . on june 15 , 2012 , in the absence of congressional action on dream act bills , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) issued a memorandum announcing that certain individuals who were brought to the united states as children and meet other criteria would be considered for deferred action for two years , subject to renewal . the eligibility criteria for deferred action for childhood arrivals , or daca , as the initiative is known , are similar to those for relief in dream act bills . these criteria include the following: ( 1 ) under age 16 at time of entry into the united states ; ( 2 ) continuous residence in the united states for at least five years before june 15 , 2012 ( that is , since june 15 , 2007 ) ; ( 3 ) in school , graduated from high school or obtained general education development certificate , or honorably discharged from the armed forces ; ( 4 ) not convicted of a felony , a significant misdemeanor , or three or more misdemeanors , and not otherwise a threat to national security or public safety ; and ( 5 ) below age 31 on june 15 , 2012 . consideration for daca is limited to individuals who entered the united states without inspection or whose lawful immigration status expired as of june 15 , 2012 . aliens granted deferred action can apply for employment authorization . the daca program , however , provides no pathway to a legal immigration status .