ethnic and religious strife have been common in nigeria . tens of thousands of nigerians have been killed in sectarian and intercommunal clashes in the past two decades . ethnic , regional , and sectarian divisions often stem from issues related to access to land , jobs , and socioeconomic development , and are sometimes fueled by politicians . the violent islamist group boko haram has contributed to a major deterioration of security conditions in the northeast since 2009 . it espouses a salafist interpretation of islam and seeks to capitalize on local frustrations , discredit the government , and establish an islamic state in the region . the insurgency has claimed thousands of lives and exacerbated an already - dire humanitarian emergency in the impoverished lake chad basin region , comprising nigeria , niger , chad , and cameroon . nigeria now has one of the largest displaced populations in the world — an estimated 2 million people — most of whom have fled boko haram - related violence . in late 2013 , the state department designated boko haram and a splinter group , ansaru , as foreign terrorist organizations ( ftos ) . boko haram's 2015 pledge of allegiance to the islamic state raised its profile , though the extent of operational ties between the two groups remains unclear . a boko haram leadership dispute led , in 2016 , to the emergence of a splinter group , the islamic state - west africa ( is - wa ) . he and other u.s. officials have stressed the importance of free , fair , transparent , and peaceful elections in 2019 . the united states and like - minded donors expressed concern with reported intimidation , interference , and vote - buying during gubernatorial elections in 2018 . the united states maintains an embassy in abuja and a consulate in lagos . the state department also maintains "american corners" in libraries throughout the country to share information on the culture and values of the united states . the state department's travel advisory for u.s. citizens regarding travel to nigeria notes the risks of armed attacks in the niger delta and the northeast as well as the threat of piracy in the gulf of guinea , and it warns against travel to borno , yobe , and northern adamawa states . nigeria has played a significant role in peace and stability operations across africa , and the united states has provided the country with security assistance focused on enhancing its peacekeeping capabilities . given nigeria's strategic position along the coast of the gulf of guinea , the united states has also coordinated with nigeria through various regional forums and maritime security initiatives . nigeria's waters have been named the most dangerous in the world for maritime piracy and armed robbery at sea . nigeria is also considered a transshipment hub for narcotics trafficking , and several nigerian criminal organizations have been implicated in the trade . the u.s. navy has increased its operations in the gulf of guinea and in 2007 launched the african partnership station ( aps ) there . aps deployments have included port visits to nigeria and joint exercises between u.s. , nigerian , european , and other regional navies .