some changes in h.r . 4890 as passed by the house and in s. 3521 as ordered to be reported may generate new concerns . both versions appear to narrow the range ofpossible targeted tax benefits that may be proposed for cancellation when compared to theadministration's proposal . 4890 / s. 2381 , as introduced , along withprovisions in p.l . 104-130 , would have covered revenue - losing measures affecting 100 or fewerbeneficiaries . the house - passed version of h.r . 4890 would apply only to arevenue - losing provision affecting a single beneficiary , ( 11 ) whereas s. 3521 , as ordered to be reported , definestargeted tax benefits as affecting a particular or limited group of taxpayers ( thereby placing its scopesomewhere between the administration's proposal and the house - passed version ) . also , the senatebudget committee version and the 1996 act would require the joint committee on taxation toidentify the targeted tax benefits ; the house - passed version would require the chairmen of the waysand means and finance committees to identify such provisions . the president could only proposea rescission of such identified tax benefits . 2381 as introducedwould allow the president to propose any targeted tax benefit that he identified . another change in the house - passed version of interest is its relationship to the impoundmentcontrol act of 1974 ( known as ica , title x of p.l . the version approved by the housewould repeal the ica , except for section 1013 ( deferral authority for the president ) and section 1016 ( suits by the comptroller general ) . h.r 4890 / s. 2381 , as introduced , and s. 3521 , as ordered to be reported , would amend title x of the ica by striking part c ( line item veto act of 1996 ) and inserting the text of the bill . at issue is whether the frameworkfor expedited rescissions in the current bills would augment , or replace , rescission authority accordedthe president under the ica to propose rescissions at any time , but with the release of funds after 45legislative days absent congressional approval . there were no further substantive changes to h.r . 4890 , as amended , duringfloor consideration . a manager's amendment offered by representative paul ryan was adopted aspart of the special rule for consideration , however . in response to apparent concerns raised by thehouse transportation and infrastructure committee , the amendment added clarifying language thatany amount cancelled that came from a trust fund or special fund would be returned to the fund fromwhich it originally derived , rather than revert to the general fund for deficit reduction . ( 12 ) with this exception , allof the changes in h.r . 4890 , as approved by the house , occurred during committeemarkups . with respect to s. 3521 as ordered to be reported , a manager's amendmentoffered by senator gregg at markup and approved by voice vote made changes in title i regardingthe legislative line item veto , among other things .