— search of air cargo . in contrast to the detailed procedures set out in resolution 1874 for searching sea - borne cargo , the resolution is vague in how its provisions for searches of air cargo are to be implemented . many experts believe that north korea uses air traffic much more than sea traffic in order to transfer and exchange wmd , wmd technology , and wmd scientists and technicians . many believe that the key to inspections of north korea's air cargo is the air traffic between north korea and iran . north korea and iran have engaged in extensive collaboration in the development of ballistic missiles , and there are numerous reports since 2003 indicating collaboration in the development of nuclear warheads that could be mounted on missiles . the u.s. - based institute for foreign policy analysis estimated in 2009 that north korea earns about $1.5 billion annually from sales of missiles to other countries . it appears that much of this comes from missile sales and collaboration with iran in missile development ; north korea currently has only three major foreign customers for missiles: iran , syria , and possibly burma . iran and north korea reportedly use the pyongyang - tehran air route for the transfer of missiles , wmd technology , and mutual visits of nuclear and missile officials , scientists , and technicians . north korea and iran reportedly emphasized air travel and traffic after 2002 in response to the bush administration's announcement of a proliferation security initiative and the spanish navy's search of a north korean ship bound for yemen . aircraft use chinese air space and reportedly refuel at chinese airports . china would have the prime responsibility for searches of aircraft on the pyongyang - tehran air route . the resolution authorizes the seizure of banned items . the resolution prohibits "bunkering services" such as refueling or servicing of a ship with suspected cargo . enforcement of this provision lies in part with the u.s. navy , but it also will require the cooperation of china and southeast asian states such as singapore , malaysia , and indonesia . many north korean ships stop at chinese ports . ships bound for burma , south asia , or the middle east must pass through the singapore and malacca straits connecting the pacific and indian oceans . obama administration officials indicated that ambassador goldberg raised the air traffic issue with chinese officials during his visit to china in early july 2009 , but they did not indicate how chinese officials responded . chinese officials have urged caution in searching possible north korea - related cargos ; they have stressed that there must be evidence of weapons and wmds before undertaking searches . 10 / 9 / 06 — north korea announced that it has carried out an underground nuclear test . 2 / 13 / 07 — the six party governments negotiating over north korea's nuclear programs announced an agreement for a freeze and disablement of north korea's nuclear facilities accompanied by energy and diplomatic benefits to north korea .