the act is enforced by the eeoc . for more information on the eeoa , see crs report rs22544 , title ix and single sex education: a legal analysis , by [author name scrubbed] . the age discrimination act prohibits discrimination on the basis of age in federally funded programs or activities . individuals who believe they are victims of discrimination may file a complaint with the federal agency that provides education funds to a recipient , or they may file a lawsuit in federal court . as with title vi and title ix , each federal agency is responsible for enforcing age discrimination act compliance with respect to its funding recipients , but the department of health and human services ( hhs ) plays a role in coordinating federal activities . the civil service reform act ( csra ) prohibits discrimination in federal employment on the basis of race , color , national origin , religion , sex , age , disability , marital status , or political affiliation . the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) prohibits discrimination based on disability in employment , public services , public accommodations , transportation , and telecommunications . the ada's employment discrimination provisions , which apply to employers with 15 or more employees , are enforced by the eeoc , while the public services and public accommodations provisions are administered by doj . individuals may also sue in federal court for violations of the ada , although they must first file a complaint with the eeoc before filing an employment discrimination claim in federal court . for more information on the ada , see crs report 98-921 , the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) : statutory language and recent issues , by cynthia brougher and [author name scrubbed] . in addition , see the crs website for multiple short reports on specific issues and cases that have arisen under the ada . the uniformed services employment and reemployment rights act of 1994 ( userra ) , which provides military servicemembers with the right to reemployment under certain circumstances , prohibits employment discrimination against individuals who serve in the armed services , including individuals who are members of , apply to be members of , perform , have performed , apply to perform , or have an obligation to perform in the military . the prohibition on discrimination covers a wide array of employment activities , including denial of employment , reemployment , retention of employment , promotion , and benefits . the statute is enforced by the department of labor ( dol ) . the congressional accountability act ( caa ) applies several existing civil rights , labor , and workplace laws to employees of the legislative branch of the federal government . specifically , with regard to civil rights laws , the act applies title vii of the cra , the americans with disabilities act , the age discrimination in employment act , and the rehabilitation act to the legislative branch . the act is administered by the office of compliance . for more information on the caa , see crs report rl33668 , the speech or debate clause: recent developments , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ( available upon request ) .