military operations in afghanistan . economists consider this inefficient . commanders have some control over civilian dod employees , yet it is not in the same way as control over military members . amendments were proposed to accompany h.r . 878 to extend the combat zone exclusion benefits to dod civilians working in a combat zone . current legislation proposes extending the combat zone income tax exclusion to civilian dod personnel , but other proposals have been made in the past that would also extend the exclusion to civilian contractors . thus , the analysis in this section includes both civilian dod employees and civilian contractors . the combat zone income exclusion is a federal subsidy that treats income earned by personnel serving in combat favorably compared to other income . typically , this kind of subsidy can influence how economic actors behave and how the economy's resources are employed . yet the rationale for this military tax benefit was based on a desire to reduce the tax burdens of military personnel during wartime , rather than an incentive to encourage taxpayers to be employed in a combat zone . generally , tax incentives are used to encourage more activity than would otherwise be undertaken . according to economic theory , in most cases an economy best satisfies the wants and needs of its participants if markets operate free from distortions by taxes and other factors . market failures , however , may occur in some instances , and economic efficiency may actually be improved by tax distortions . market failures occur when a market , left on its own , fails to allocate resources efficiently . in particular , market transactions are inefficient when the marginal benefits are less than the marginal costs . market failures may be due to a variety of circumstances , including the presence of externalities and common resources , public goods , imperfect competition , and / or asymmetric or incomplete information . if there is a market failure and a tax subsidy remedies that failure , then there is economic justification for the subsidy because of its efficiency gains . but a tax benefit lowers efficiency if it distorts behavior in the absence of a market failure . the combat zone income tax exclusion does not address a market failure , and as such , does not improve economic efficiency . at the same time , the exclusion is unlikely to distort behavior and thus may not lower efficiency . economic theory suggests that the efficiency of most tax incentives can be determined by examining their success in causing an intended response , or degree of response , by recipients of the tax incentive . yet , the combat zone income tax exclusion is not designed to cause a response , such as encouraging more individuals to serve in combat . instead , the provision is simply an additional benefit received by members of the armed forces . in the case of extending an exclusion to federal civilian employees or civilian contract employees serving in a combat zone , the primary issues revolve around the purpose of the extension , which has not been stated by proponents .