blanchard et al . estimate that stabilizing the net - debt - to - gdp ratio at 2003 levels would require the dollar to immediately depreciate by 56% and the ca deficit to decline to 0.75% of gdp . however , assuming foreigners desire to maintain holdings of u.s. assets at their current share , their model predicts that the depreciation would be stretched over a few decades , depreciating by 2.7% a year , at most . if foreigners decided to reduce their holding of u.s. assets , the model predicts a larger , but still gradual , depreciation . is a scenario where the dollar crashes a likely one ? economic theory typically assumes that financial market participants act rationally . if the rationality assumption is a good one , then the potential for a sudden decline is slim . after all , foreigners would be demanding high rates of return to buy u.s. assets today if they could foresee that the foreign currency value of these assets is likely to fall sharply in the near future . of course , financial markets do not always seem driven by rational behavior in practice , but as a result , theory has little predictive power of the timing or likelihood of a "sudden stop. given the traditional role the united states has played as an investment safe haven , sudden capital outflows seem unlikely . on the contrary , investment might be attracted to u.s. assets in a liquidity crisis because the u.s. offers more liquid financial markets ( eg , u.s. treasury bond markets ) than do most foreign counterparts . as discussed above , a destabilizing interruption in the financing of the ca deficit would likely be triggered by some sudden change in investor sentiment about u.s. assets . the financial crisis , beginning in august 2007 with the illiquidity of the u.s. subprime mortgage market and deepening in september 2008 , would seem to be a good test case for how a large change in investor sentiment would affect the ca deficit . overall , the ca to gdp ratio declined by about half between 2007 and 2009 , but this did not lead to sharp changes or negative effects for the dollar or interest rates that could be harmful to the economy . the dollar continued its long and gradual downward trend until april 2008 , before it started rising — through the worst of the crisis — until march 2009 . interest rates on u.s. treasuries fell to extremely low levels during the crisis despite the large increase in the budget deficit , as u.s. treasuries continued to be seen as a desirable destination during the "flight to quality. other interest rates generally fell along with u.s. treasury yields , although risk premiums on private assets rose and some private borrowers were shut out of credit markets entirely because of the crisis . problems recently experienced in u.s. financial markets have been widely viewed as "once in a lifetime" events . if these events failed to cause a sudden flight from u.s. assets and an inability to finance the ca deficit , it is hard to imagine what would .