this report may be updated . what investments have yielded the highest rate of return ? what is the risk profile of each grant recipient moving forward ? how are their existing capabilities measured against extant risk ? what capabilities gaps exist , and how can resources best be targeted to address those gaps ? there are at least two possible precursors to the drafting of such an impact assessment: ( 1 ) a defensible methodology that can ( a ) reasonably define and measure risk , ( b ) provide a means for measuring how developing capabilities are reducing that risk , and ( c ) illustrate how to identify specific capability gaps which might serve as an input for future allocation of homeland security grants ; and ( 2 ) articulation of this methodology , including the data necessary to conduct such an assessment , to grant recipients . with the results of such an assessment , federal , state , local , and regional authorities might arguably be in a better position to understand the most effective and efficient way to target relatively scarce homeland security resources . while safeguarding the intelligence , law enforcement , and other sensitive information weighted and analyzed through dhs's risk methodology , disclosure of the mathematical equation used to determine threat , vulnerability , and consequence may allow all applicants and stakeholders to understand and have a basis to confirm or challenge the results prior to funds being allocated . it could be argued that providing this level of detail regarding the methodology and underlying equation may allow those who would seek to attack u.s. facilities to reverse - engineer the formula , thus increasing the probability of a successful terrorist attack . others might maintain that allowing the risk formula equations to be revealed would encourage state and municipalities to manipulate the data provided to dhs , thus increasing their chances of receiving additional funding without a sufficient risk - based justification . homeland security observers could counter these arguments by suggesting that though there may be the potential for those wishing to take advantage of the transparency of the system , the positives include possible increases in information sharing between dhs and state and local governments due to an understanding of how data is used and as such result in increased confidence in the other entity . some could argue more transparency would allow dhs to more confidently allocate resources , as enhanced transparency may reduce the surprised outcries that seem to arise with each cycle's award announcements . this argument is based on the assumption that grant applicants that are comfortable with the risk assessment process and familiar with the data streams used to calculate risk . as a result , the applicants may be less likely to be surprised by their jurisdiction's ranking and awards . since the establishment of dhs in march of 2003 , the department's risk formula has evolved . though it could be argued that these changes are indicative of a maturing organization and process , it is possible that the lack of a coherent , long - term , overarching risk strategy , which forms the foundation of departmental activities , could have negative repercussions for buying down risk .