dollars ) . appendix d. u.s . the ranges of tariff rates are similar . in malaysian sectors where the government is fostering the growth of industry , however , the rates are particularly high . for transport equipment , the average malaysia tariff of 25.6% is more than ten times the u.s. rate of 2.5% . for non - electrical machinery , a sector in which both countries currently export to each other , the malaysia tariff rate at 6.3% is over four times the u.s. rate of 1.4% . below is a summary of key aspects of these factors . table 1 provides a summary of malaysia's key economic indicators . malaysia has been one of the fastest growing economies in the world over the last few years . early in 2008 , malaysia experienced a sharp rise in inflation , but the inflationary pressures subsided as the impact of the u.s. and e.u . economic slowdown affected malaysia's exports . malaysia's gdp and average per capita income make it a market considerably larger than most of the countries that have recently negotiated free trade agreements with the united states . at official exchange rates , the per capita income in 2007 was $6,724 , but its purchasing power parity was estimated by the world bank at $13,570 – higher than argentina , chile , and mexico . according to malaysia's ministry of finance , the united states is its largest trading partner and largest foreign investor . according to u.s. trade figures , malaysia was the tenth largest trading partner of the united states in 2007 . the united states exported more to malaysia in the first 11 months of 2008 than it did to colombia or peru , two other nations with pending ftas with the united states . for the first 10 months of 2008 , u.s. investment in malaysia totaled $1.8 billion — the second greatest source of foreign investment in malaysia , after australia . ftas usually have several distinct effects on trade flows . they tend to divert export and import trade toward the countries involved , but they also can create more trade overall by lowering tariffs and other trade barriers . ftas also can cause a substitution effect as imports are substituted for domestic production . in that case , import - competing industries may suffer and may request assistance to adjust to increased competition from imports . when the talks began , the ustr's goal was to have the u.s. - malaysia fta implementing bill considered by congress under "fast track" expedited procedures of the bipartisan trade promotion authority ( tpa ) act of 2002 ( p.l . however , the statute requires the president to notify congress of his intention to enter into the agreement at least 90 calendar days before entering into the trade agreement . since the president's trade promotion authority expired on july 1 , 2007 , and the president did not notify the congress by the april 2 , 2007 deadline , the u.s. - malaysia fta became ineligible to be considered under the 2002 tpa . as a result , there are several possible scenarios under which a proposed fta with malaysia might be considered by congress .