all democratsvoted against both bills . one republican voted with the minority on each bill: representative chrisshays voted with the minority on h.r . 5766 , and representative todd platts did likewiseon h.r . 3282 favorably to the house . 5766 , as amended,was favorably reported by a vote of 15-12 . both votes were largely along party lines . ( 6 ) supporters of the measures suggest that there are too many overlapping and ineffectivefederal programs that contribute to the growing federal deficit , that congress lacks time for thoroughoversight of all existing agencies and programs , and that the commissions would assist congress inperforming its oversight function , thereby reducing fraud , waste , and abuse . critics of the measurescounter that the bills would cede too much power to the executive branch and the majority politicalparty , would burden congress with a tremendous workload with mandatory reauthorization of everyagency and program , and would facilitate elimination of federal programs that provide a safety netfor the most vulnerable in society . 3282 would create a federal agency sunset commission ( fasc ) toreview the efficiency of and public need for federal agencies and provide for the abolishment ofagencies for which a public need does not exist . the fasc would consist of 12 members appointedby the speaker of the house and the senate majority leader . of the six members appointed by theleaders of the respective chambers , four would be members of congress , with not more than twofrom the same political party . within one year after its establishment , the commission would submitto congress a schedule for the review of all federal agencies and advisory committees by thecommission , at least once every 12 years , and for the abolishment of each agency following thereview absent congressional reauthorization . agencies performing similar or related functions wouldbe scheduled for review at the same time . then the commission would commence its annual reviews,utilizing the 19 criteria specified in the bill in reviewing and evaluating the efficiency and publicneed for each agency . by september 1 of each subsequent year , the commission would report to the president andcongress , and recommend whether each agency reviewed that year should be abolished orreorganized and whether functions of other agencies should be consolidated , transferred , orreorganized . this means that followingcongressional approval of a reauthorization bill , the measure would have to go to the president inorder to be signed into law . if the president were to veto the bill , a two - thirds majority in bothchambers would be necessary to override the veto and extend the life of the program or agency . thepossibility of a popular program or agency being eliminated by a president , with the support of onethird of the house and senate , arguably represents a significant transfer of power from congress tothe executive branch . the bill would allow the deadline for abolishing an agency to be extended for an additionaltwo years by legislation enacted by a super majority of the house of representatives and the senate.the commission also would report to congress on all legislation introduced that would establisha new agency or a new program to be carried out by an existing agency .