other factors also are at work . these include a general reluctance by most members of congress to address controversial environmental issues in view of the slim majorities held by political parties in the house and the senate ; lack of presidential initiatives on clean water issues ( neither the clinton nor the bush administration proposed cwa legislation ) ; and , since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , more prominent congressional focus on security , terrorism , and iraq war issues than on many other topics , including environmental protection . as a result of the 2006 mid - term elections and changed congressional leadership , many observers anticipated that the 110 th congress would pursue oversight of clean water and other environmental programs . a particular legislative focus is water infrastructure financing legislation , specifically reauthorization of the act's financial aid program . also on the congressional agenda was consideration of the geographic reach of the clean water act over the nation's waters and wetlands , in light of court rulings — including two supreme court decisions — that have narrowed the law's regulatory jurisdiction , but in ways that are somewhat unclear . a number of other issues of interest included implementation of current programs to manage stormwater discharges and nonpoint sources of pollution , as these are major contributors to water quality impairments across the country ; implementation of rules governing discharges of wastes from large animal feeding operations ; and implications of a number of court rulings concerning the scope of the act's discharge permit requirements . clean water funding questions continue to arise and be addressed by congress in the context of appropriations . the president's fy2008 budget request was presented to congress on february 5 , 2007 . the budget requested $687.6 million for clean water srf grants , the same amount requested for fy2007 . the budget sought reduced funding for several other water quality programs below levels enacted for fy2007 in p.l . 110-5 , including nonpoint pollution management grants ( proposed 5% cut ) , grant funding for states for watershed protection ( proposed to be eliminated ) , and funds for the national estuary program ( proposed 28% cut ) . other water quality programs would receive increased funding under the proposal , including cleanup of contaminated sediments in the great lakes ( proposed 21% increase ) , funds for the chesapeake bay program ( 30% increase ) , and grants to states for water quality monitoring ( 3% increase ) . on june 27 the house passed h.r . 2643 , providing fy2008 appropriations for epa . this bill included $1.125 billion for clean water srf grants , plus $175.5 million for 143 congressionally designated water infrastructure project grants . it also included increases above the administration's request for nonpoint pollution management grants , targeted watershed protection grants , and the national estuary program , as well as great lakes and chesapeake bay programs . the senate appropriations committee approved companion legislation ( s. 1696 ) that similarly included higher funding levels for several water quality programs .