for example . the victim has the right to confer with the government concerning any critical stage or disposition of the case . the right , however , is not limited to these examples . i ask the senator if he concurs in this intent . mr. kyl . yes . the intent of this section is just as the senator says . this right to confer does not give the crime victim any right to direct the prosecution . its sponsors suggested than the right was aimed at scheduling delays particularly: i would like to move on to section 2 , ( a ) ( 7 ) , which provides crime victims with a right to proceedings free from unreasonable delay . this provision does not curtail the government's need for reasonable time to organize and prosecute its case . prosecutors should consider it part of their profession to be available to consult with crime victims about the concerns the victims may have which are pertinent to the case , case proceedings or dispositions . too often , however , delays in criminal proceedings occur for the mere convenience of the parties and those delays reach beyond the time needed for defendant's due process or the government's need to prepare . the result of such delays is that victims cannot begin to put the crime behind them and they continue to be victimized . it is not right to hold crime victims under the stress and pressure of future court proceedings merely because it is convenient for the parties or the court . this provision should be interpreted so that the any decision to continue a criminal case should include reasonable consideration of the rights under this section . the case law indicates that the courts are sensitive to victims' interest in delay avoidance ; that in some instances delay may be in the interest of at least some victims ; and that the provision "appears to add little if anything substantive to existing law ... except that it does appear to confer ... the right to object to delay and ask the court to hold both government and defendant to what the speedy trial act already requires. the right to be treated with fairness and with respect for the victim's dignity and privacy . this right rarely found explicit expression in the proposed constitutional amendments , although it clearly lies at the heart of all of them . the same language appears in the earlier federal "best efforts" statute , and a similar right is featured in many of the state constitutional and statutory victims' rights provisions . unlike other rights drafted to apply only with respect to public proceedings , the right to be treated fairly and with respect for a victim's dignity and privacy applies throughout the criminal justice process . it does not , however , bar the government or a defendant from advancing legitimate arguments simply because they might offend the victim . a trial court's sealing of the record — thereby preventing the victim from determining whether his rights had been honored and then failing to act upon his motion to open the record — is inconsistent with the victim's right to fair treatment and respect for his dignity .