the sites need not be contiguous . sites financed through section 523 may only be sold to families who are building homes by the mutual self - help method . the homes are usually financed through the section 502 program . tenants may use the voucher at their current property or any other rental unit that passes housing and urban development ( hud ) housing quality standards , and where usda vouchers are accepted . use of the vouchers is prohibited at hud section 8 or other federally assisted public housing projects . in november 2004 , usda released a report on the section 515 program . the purpose of the report was to assess the status of the section 515 portfolio in terms of prepayment options and long - term rehabilitation needs . while few health and safety issues were found , the report found that no properties had adequate reserves or sufficient cash flow to do needed repairs and for adequate maintenance over time . the report concluded that the usda portfolio of section 515 projects represented a federal investment of nearly $12 billion ; that the projects serve some of the poorest and most underserved families in rural communities ; and that the location , physical condition , and tenant profile of the properties suggest that the public interest is best served by revitalizing most of the housing for long - term use by low - and moderate - income tenants . the report recommended a revitalization program for usda multi - family housing . in response to the report , the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act of 2006 , p.l . 109-97 , included a provision that created a demonstration program for the preservation and revitalization of multi - family rental housing properties . the program is referred to as the multi - family housing preservation and revitalization ( mpr ) program . the purpose of the mpr program is to preserve section 515 and section 514 / 516 projects in order to provide safe and affordable housing for low - income residents . expectations are that properties selected to participate will be able to be revitalized and extend affordable use without displacing or impacting tenants because of increased rents . under mpr , the usda has authority to use funds to restructure existing loans using such tools as reducing or eliminating interest ; deferring loan payments ; subordinating , reducing , or re - amortizing loan debt ; and making loan advances . in its fy2011 budget for usda , the administration proposed no funding for the mpr program . the administration argues that the program has been operating since 2006 , that the most cost - effective and justified repairs have been achieved , and that continued funding could be seen as over - subsidizing multi - family property owners . instead , the administration proposed an increase in funding for the section 515 program to $95 million instead of the $70 million approved for fy2010 . title viii of the housing preservation and tenant protection act of 2010 , h.r . 4868 , would authorize continuing finding for the mpr program .