thereafter. the usfs has included such expenditures as authorized activities in its state fire assistance program . however , congress has not appropriated funds explicitly for this program . protecting private lands and structures from wildfires continues to garner congressional attention , as the threat of wildfire persists . how to assist private landowners and communities , how to combine this assistance with other assistance and incentive programs , and how to fund such assistance could be debated in the farm bill context . invasive species — non - native plants and animals that are displacing native ones — are becoming recognized as a substantial problem . in a speech to the idaho environmental forum on january 16 , 2004 , then - usfs chief dale bosworth identified invasive species as one of the four major threats to the nation's forests and rangelands . the usfs's forest health management program has evolved from a mechanism to survey and control insects and diseases , to a program to address all forest pests , including invasive species . several times , the bush administration proposed an emerging pests and pathogens fund to address rapidly developing problems of invasive species , but the appropriations committees rejected the request both years . in its deliberations over a future farm bill , congress could address the structure and financing of programs to prevent and control invasive species on federal , state , and private forests . the economies of many rural communities have evolved around the use — finding , extracting , processing , and selling — of natural resources . in some of these areas , one resource ( eg , timber , minerals , livestock ) has traditionally dominated the local economy , but the economies of such areas can be devastated when that resource is depleted or when its markets are depressed ( permanently or even temporarily ) . many communities have sought approaches to diversifying their economies , to mitigate the economic and social disruption that can occur when a dominant economic sector is depressed . the national forest - dependent rural communities economic diversification act of 1990 was enacted in §§ 2372-2379 of the 1990 farm bill to authorize forestry and economic diversification technical assistance to "economically disadvantaged" rural communities . under the title economic action program , funding rose from $14 million in fy1996 to $54 million in fy2001 , but has declined since , and president bush has proposed terminating the program in several budget requests . in its future farm bill deliberations , congress might consider ways to perpetuate economic assistance programs for traditional wood products - dependent communities , either as a continued usfs program or as part of other usda rural assistance programs . forests provide a broad array of environmental services — clean air and water , wildlife habitats , pleasant scenery , and more — for which private landowners are generally not compensated , because these services are typically not bought and sold in a marketplace . a variety of interests have examined the possibilities of finding ways to compensate landowners for continuing to provide ecosystem services .