note: p.l . the basic rules now are as follows . nonimmigrants ( those admitted temporarily for a limited purpose such as students , visitors , and temporary workers ) are ineligible for all major benefits , as are unauthorized ( "illegal" ) aliens who are in the u.s. in violation of immigration law and for whom no legal relief or recognition has been extended . legal permanent residents with a substantial ( generally , 10-year ) work history documented by social security and those with a military connection ( legally present active duty military personnel , honorably discharged veterans , and their immediate families ) are eligible for all major benefits . in the case of food stamps , legal permanent residents without a substantial work history are eligible after five years lawful residence following entry . however , this five - year ineligibility period does not apply to ( 1 ) persons lawfully resident in the u.s. as of august 22 , 1996 ( the date of enactment of the welfare reform law ) , and age 65+ at the time , ( 2 ) persons receiving government disability benefits , and ( 3 ) children under age 18 . in the case of ssi , legal permanent residents without a substantial work history are eligible only if they are ( 1 ) persons who were receiving ssi benefits as of august 22 , 1996 , or ( 2 ) individuals lawfully resident in the u.s. as of august 22 , 1996 , who are now disabled . [ note: pre - 1996 ssi law barred eligibility for those with temporary or illegal status. in the case of tanf , legal permanent residents without a substantial work history are ( 1 ) eligible , at state option , if lawfully resident in the u.s. as of august 22 , 1996 , and ( 2 ) for post - august - 1996 entrants , eligible , at state option , five years after entry . in the case of medicaid , eligibility rules for legal permanent residents without a substantial work history are the same as for tanf , except that coverage is required for ssi recipients . in the case of section 8 housing assistance , legal permanent residents are eligible ( with no time , work history , or age restrictions ) , as are noncitizens who were receiving benefits as of august 22 , 1996 . [ note : pre - 1996 housing law barred eligibility for those with temporary or illegal status.