this version is still in effect . arguably in response to the concerns of domestic manufacturers of import - competing products and many in congress , the bush administration took steps , beginning in late 2006 , to deal with china's alleged subsidies of exports . first , the ita initiated and completed a cvd investigation on a product from china . second , consultations were initiated in the wto on china's subsidy regime . despite the ita's affirmative determination that it is able to identify the existence of subsidies in china , some in congressindicated that they intended to move forward with legislation to "ensure we are combating all unfair trade — whether it is dumping or subsidies — that puts american workers , farmers and businesses at a disadvantage. congress may want to consider some of the following issues as it continues to address application of trade remedies to china . first , the ita's decision that it can identify subsidies in china has no effect on china's standing as a nonmarket economy country or on the nme designations of other countries . it also does not affect ita's determination that it is unable to find subsidies in nme countries other than china . therefore , congress may want to consider legislation ensuring that the cvd laws and actions specifically apply to other nme countries as well as china . vietnam , another u.s. trading partner of increasing significance , is also an nme country . however , the amount of trade with the other remaining nme countries ( armenia , azerbaijan , belarus , georgia , kyrgyz republic , moldova , tajikistan , turkmenistan , and uzbekistan ) is not particularly significant at present , and to date , there are no outstanding ad orders or other significant trade disputes with these countries . second , there are currently no specific factors to consider or methodologies provided in the trade remedy laws for administrative authorities to use when identifying subsidies in nonmarket economies . in contrast , the antidumping statute does provide a methodology for determining normal value in nme countries — including the authority to calculate expenses using inputs and factors of production in a market economy country "considered appropriate to the administering authority. third,it is important to note that making cvd procedures available to u.s. industries is not without its trade - offs . ad duties tend to be higher than countervailing duties in general , and ad duties on imports from nonmarket economy countries tend to be even higher , in part due to the use of the third - country data methodology to calculate the amount of dumping . if china retained its nme status and subsidies were found on targeted merchandise for which ad duties were already in place , some of the companion ad duties might have to be revised downward in order to avoid "double counting"―or the possible inclusion of export subsidy amounts in certain ad duty calculations ) . in a june 2005 report , the government accountability office ( gao ) stated that this consideration "introduces a level of uncertainty about the magnitude of the total level of protection that would be applied to chinese products," and "may result in combined rates that are lower than might be expected.