some of the testimony on h.r . 445 in the 113 th congress , which would have authorized appropriations for nhas for a period of 25 years , addressed such concerns . as part of its annual budget justification , the administration submits to congress its desired funding level for the nps heritage partnership program . appropriations for heritage areas typically have been provided in the annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations laws . in general , the laws establishing nhas require a 1:1 match in funding by the managing entities . nhas can use funds for varied purposes including staffing , planning , and implementing projects . in recent years , congress has provided direction to the nps as to how the total appropriation should be allocated among nhas . the nps has indicated that since fy2009 , funds have been allocated to heritage areas using formula - based criteria . for fy2016 , the total appropriation for heritage areas was $19.8 million . in its explanatory statement on fy2016 appropriations , congress allocated this funding to nhas under a three - tier system . this included $150,000 for each authorized area that is developing its management plan , known as tier i areas ; $300,000 for tier ii areas , which are those with recently approved management plans ; and fy2015 funding levels for "longstanding areas. the total fy2016 appropriation for heritage areas was $0.5 million ( 2% ) less than the fy2015 appropriation of $20.3 million . during the five - year period from fy2012 through fy2016 , funding for the nps for national heritage areas rose and fell but ended up $2.4 million ( 14% ) higher ( in current dollars ) . during this period , no new nhas were created . the administration had sought a reduction to $10.0 million for the nps for heritage areas for fy2016 . the fy2016 budget request provided little explanation of the proposed cut , while noting that the nps continued to work with heritage areas on sustainability efforts such as development of fundraising and financial resource plans . prior obama administration requests also often called for reduced nha funding . in its explanatory statement on fy2016 interior appropriations , congress directed the nps to submit a plan that provides alternatives to implement proposed funding allocation changes in future fiscal years so as to minimize impacts on existing heritage areas . the attributes of each nha are set out in its establishing law . because they are based on distinctive cultural attributes , nhas vary in appearance and expression . the evaluation would assess the progress in achieving the purposes in the establishing law and the goals and objectives in the management plan , determine the leverage and impact of investments in the area , and identify the components for sustaining the area . the report is to include recommendations on the future role of the nps , including whether federal funding should be continued or eliminated . the obama administration has expressed support for developing systemic nha program legislation that would establish criteria for evaluating areas for heritage designation and set out processes for designating and administering heritage areas . for instance , in testimony on systemic nha legislation ( h.r .