sec . 305 prohibits the u.s. government from enforcing any regulations , proposals , or actions establishing any carbon dioxide or greenhouse gas emissions reductions until a certification is made that russia and others have enforced such measures . a similar bill , s. 17 , was introduced may 8 , 2013 , and referred to the committee on natural resources , and in addition to the committees on energy and commerce , transportation and infrastructure , and the judiciary . 893 ( ros - lehtinen ) . iran , north korea , and syria nonproliferation accountability act of 2013 . introduced february 28 , 2013 ; referred to the to the committee on foreign affairs , and in addition to the committees on oversight and government reform , the judiciary , science , space , and technology , financial services , and transportation and infrastructure . directs the president to impose sanctions on any foreign person , entity , or country that engaged in a uranium - related joint venture with iran , north korea , or syria , or with its agents . prohibits the u.s. government transfer of extraordinary payments to russia in connection with the international space station unless the president reports to congress that it is russian policy to oppose the proliferation to or from iran , north korea , and syria of weapons of mass destruction and missile delivery systems and transfers that could contribute to iran's nuclear , biological , chemical weapons , or missile programs . authorizes some payments under certain conditions . 1128 ( brooks ) . protecting u.s. missile defense information act of 2013 . introduced march 13 , 2013 ; referred to the committee on armed services , and in addition to the committee on foreign affairs . requires the president to submit a semi - annual report on any discussions on missile defense between the u.s. government and the russian government . prohibits the use of certain fy2014 funds for missile defense cooperation with russia . directs the president to encourage russia to disclose any support provided for the ballistic missile programs of china , syria , iran , or north korea . 1692 ( mcgovern ) . sudan peace , security , and accountability act of 2013 . introduced april 24 , 2013 ; referred to the committee on foreign affairs , and in addition to the committees on financial services , oversight and government reform , and the judiciary . requires a semi - annual report that includes a description of efforts to work with russia and other governments and persons that have significant influence or interests related to sudan to engage the government of sudan in achieving a comprehensive agreement for democratic reform . 1793 ( connolly ) . global partnerships act of 2013 . introduced april 26 , 2013 ; referred to the committee on foreign affairs , and in addition to the committees on oversight and government reform , rules , and ways and means . sec . 4384 calls for a congressional review period for licenses for export of commercial communications satellites for launch from russia . 2281 ( mike rogers ) / s. 1111 ( ron johnson ) . cyber economic espionage accountability act .