of justice . ( 73 ) in soltane , a nonprofit religious organization that provided services to mentally disabledyoung adults sought review of the denial of its visa petition on behalf of an alien employee . the inaprovides that aliens who qualify as "special immigrants," including those engaged in a "religiousoccupation or vocation" on behalf of a religious organization , be granted preference visas . ( 74 ) immigration authoritieshad denied the organization's visa petition in part because the sponsored alien's proposed positionas a houseparent was deemed not to be a "religious occupation or vocation," as that term was definedunder regulation . ( 75 ) among other things , immigration authorities characterized the proposed position's houseparentduties as having "a wholly secular function , even if the facility is operated by a charitableorganization founded on religious principles. ( 76 ) in a unanimous panel opinion written by judge alito , the court held that the denial of the visapetition was not supported by the record , because this denial was based on ( 1 ) an impermissiblereading of the pertinent regulation defining "religious occupation" as excluding religious occupationswith a secular component ; and / or ( 2 ) a factual determination of the secular nature of the houseparentposition which was not supported by substantial evidence in the record . the circuit panel held thata job could qualify as a "religious occupation" under the regulatory definition of that term so longas it had "some religious significance," and noted that the pertinent regulation listed a number ofoccupations with secular components , such as "religious translator" and "religious counselor," asexamples of jobs falling under the definition of "religious occupation. ( 77 ) the panel also chargedthese immigration authorities with describing the alien's job duties in a manner that "excluded anymention of the religious component of her duties" found in the administrative record , including herresponsibilities to teach and lecture mentally disabled young adults on religious values . ( 78 ) accordingly , the circuitpanel vacated and remanded the lower court's decision upholding immigration authorities' denial ofthe visa petition . a significant portion of immigration cases dealt with by judge alito have involved denialsof applications for asylum . asylum is a discretionary form of relief from removal available to aneligible alien who is unwilling to return to his or her native country because of a well - founded fearof persecution on account of one of five characteristics: ( 1 ) race , ( 2 ) religion , ( 3 ) nationality , ( 4 ) membership in a particular social group , or ( 5 ) political opinion . ( 34 ) the ina specifies thatforced abortion or sterilization pursuant to a coercive population control program or resistance toundergoing such forced procedures constitutes persecution on account of political opinion . ( 35 ) although a few third circuit opinions involving asylum claims have been discussed in othersections of this report , this section discusses some notable opinions by judge alito that have focusedprimarily on issues relating to the substantive grounds for asylum eligibility .