sec . the deduction of qualified mortgage insurance premiums generally applies to amounts paid or accrued only during tax years 2007 through 2010 , with respect to contracts issued during those years ; the provision terminates for premiums paid or accrued after december 31 , 2010 . this deduction is also subject to a phaseout . for every $1,000 , or fraction thereof , by which the taxpayer's adjusted gross income exceeds $100,000 , the amount of deductible mortgage insurance premiums is reduced ( but not below zero ) by 10% . in the case of a married taxpayer filing separately , the amounts are lowered to $500 and $50,000 . the purpose of this phaseout is to prevent taxpayers with adjusted gross incomes greater than $109,000 ( $54,500 for a married taxpayer filing separately ) from claiming this tax benefit . prepaid mortgage insurance amounts that are allocable to periods beyond the year in which they are paid are attributed to a capital account and treated as paid in the allocable year ( contracts issued by the va or rha are excluded from this provision ) . if the mortgage is paid off before the end of its term , a deduction is not allowed for the unamortized balance of the capital account . several tax reform proposals were introduced , most of which proposed to enact fundamental tax reform by changing the tax base from income to consumption . 25 , the fair tax act of 2005 , and its companion bill , s. 25 , proposed a national sales tax that would have eliminated the current federal income tax system including the mortgage interest deduction . s. 812 , the flat tax act of 2005 , proposed to replace the current federal income tax system with a flat rate consumption tax ( also known as a modified value - added tax ) . the flat tax rate would have been 20% of taxable earned income . the bill defined taxable earned income as the excess of earned income ( wages , salaries , professional fees ) over a standard deduction , a deduction for cash charitable contributions , and a deduction for home mortgage interest . the deductions the bill proposed to allow were consistent with the previously mentioned mandate given by president bush to the tax reform panel . 1040 , the freedom flat tax act , proposed to allow taxpayers to choose an election to be subject to a flat tax , in lieu of the existing income tax . the rate would have been 19% of wages for the first two years after an election was made , and 17% thereafter . the bill proposed to allow a basic standard deduction and an additional standard deduction for each dependent in the household but made no mention of allowing the mortgage interest deduction . s. 1099 , the tax simplification act of 2005 , proposed a similar flat tax structure , with a 19% tax rate on wages for the first two years that would then have been reduced to 17% thereafter . the nine - member panel appointed by president bush produced a report in the fall of 2005 that included a proposal to change the mortgage interest deduction .