figure 1 . ukrainesources: map created by crs . map information generated by hannah fischer using data from the national geospatial intelligence agency ( 2016 ) , department of state ( 2015 ) , esri ( 2014 ) , and delorme ( 2014 ) . ukraine was the center of the first eastern slavic state , kyivan rus , which during the 10 th and 11 th centuries was one of the largest and most powerful states in europe . eventually , kyivan rus was incorporated into the grand duchy of lithuania and into the polish - lithuanian commonwealth . during the latter part of the 18 th century , most ukrainian territory was absorbed by the russian empire . following the collapse of czarist russia in 1917 , ukraine achieved a short - lived period of independence ( 1917-1920 ) but was reconquered and incorporated into the former soviet union . today , ukraine — comparable in size and population to france — is a large , important , european state . occupying the sensitive position between russia and north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) member states poland , slovakia , hungary , and romania , ukraine has played a prominent role in the geopolitical competition between the west and russia . ethnic russians make up approximately 17% of ukraine's population and are concentrated in the southern and eastern parts of the country . they form a majority in the crimea , where they make up close to 60% of the population . in the crimean city of sevastopol , the home base of russia's black sea fleet , approximately 72% of the population is russian . in addition , ethnic ukrainians in the east and south also tend to be russian - speaking , have generally been suspicious of ukrainian nationalism , and have supported close ties with russia . many russian politicians , as well as ordinary citizens , have never been fully reconciled to ukraine's independence from the soviet union in 1991 and feel that the country belongs in russia's political and economic orbit . this historical sense of "ownership" was witnessed in the strong russian support for the 2014 annexation of crimea . it has been reported that in 2008 , russian president putin told u.s. president george w. bush that ukraine was not a state and that while the western part of the country may belong to eastern europe , eastern ukraine was russia's . on the other hand , the u.s. and european view ( particularly in central and eastern europe ) is that a strong , independent ukraine is an important part of building a europe that is whole , free , and at peace . since achieving its independence in 1991 , ukraine's political scene has been largely dominated by a powerful political elite and politically well - connected businessmen , or "oligarchs," who regularly manipulated the government for their own security and profit . ukraine's recent political unrest involved , for the most part , former president viktor yanukovych . in the early 2000s , yanukovych served as prime minister . he was elected president in 2004 through questionable elections and was ousted from power that year by the "orange revolution. he was reelected president in february 2010 .