109-280 on august 17 , 2006 . the pension protection act is the most comprehensive reform of the nation's pension laws since the enactment of the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa , p.l . it establishes new funding requirements for defined benefit pensions and includes reforms that will affect cash balance pension plans , defined contribution plans , and deferred compensation plans for executives and highly compensated employees . prompted by the default in recent years of several large defined benefit pension plans and the increasing deficit of pension benefit guaranty corporation ( pbgc ) , the bush administration in january 2005 advanced a proposal for pension funding reform , which was designed to increase the minimum funding requirements for pension plans and strengthen the pension insurance system . in the senate , senator charles grassley , chairman of the finance committee , introduced s. 1783 , the pension security and transparency act . in the house , representative john boehner , then chairman of the committee on education and the workforce , introduced h.r . 2830 , the pension protection act , which subsequently was renumbered as h.r . the legislation ultimately passed by the house and senate and signed into law by the president on august 17 , 2006 , was based mainly on these two bills , with the final version being the result of conference negotiations between the house and senate that began in march 2006 and continued through july . this report summarizes the main provisions of the pension protection act ( ppa ) as they affect single - employer defined benefit plans , multiemployer defined benefit plans , and defined contribution plans . since the passage of the employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) in 1974 , federal law has required companies that sponsor defined benefit pension plans for their employees to prefund the pension benefits that the plan participants earn each year . if a plan is underfunded , the plan sponsor must amortize ( pay off with interest ) this unfunded liability over a period of years . the pension protection act ( ppa ) establishes new rules for determining whether a defined benefit pension plan is fully funded , the contribution needed to fund the benefits that plan participants will earn in the current year , and the contribution to the plan that is required if previously earned benefits are not fully funded . in general , the new rules become effective in 2008 , but many provisions of the law will be phased in over several years . multiemployer plans are collectively bargained plans maintained by several employers , usually within the same industry , and a labor union . multiemployer defined benefit plans are subject to funding requirements that differ from those for single - employer plans . most of the funding requirements for multiemployer plans that were in effect before enactment of the ppa remain in effect under the new law . these new requirements will remain in effect through 2014 . the ppa establishes new requirements for multiemployer plans that are seriously underfunded .