the jury sentenced the defendant to death . the california supreme court , on direct appeal , set aside two of the four "special circumstances": the burglary - murder special circumstance under state merger law , and the "heinous , atrocious , or cruel" special circumstance because it had previously found this standard unconstitutionally vague . however , it affirmed the death sentence , referring to the supreme court's decision in zant v. stephens to uphold a death sentence decision despite the invalidation of two of several aggravating factors . the supreme court denied cert on direct appeal . such rules are widely accepted and are not challenged here . in gregory , the south carolina supreme court adopted and applied a rule intended to be of this type . in gay and this case , however , that court radically changed and extended the gregory rule by holding that , where there is strong evidence of a defendant's guilt , especially strong forensic evidence , proffered evidence about a third party's alleged guilt may ( or perhaps must ) be excluded . under this rule , the trial judge does not focus on the probative value or the potential adverse effects of admitting the defense evidence of third - party guilt . instead , the critical inquiry concerns the strength of the prosecution's case: if the prosecution's case is strong enough , the evidence of third - party guilt is excluded even if that evidence , if viewed independently , would have great probative value and even if it would not pose an undue risk of harassment , prejudice , or confusion of the issues . furthermore , as applied below , the rule seems to call for little , if any , examination of the credibility of the prosecution's witnesses or the reliability of its evidence . [the point of this is that] by evaluating the strength of only one party's evidence , no logical conclusion can be reached regarding the strength of contrary evidence offered by the other side to rebut or cast doubt . because the rule applied below did not heed this point , the rule is 'arbitrary' in the sense that it does not rationally serve the end that the gregory rule and other similar third - party guilt rules were designed to further . nor has the state identified any other legitimate end served by the rule . thus , the rule violates a criminal defendant's right to have a meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense . justice alito was guided by a string of supreme court decisions which were used as precedent to set up a balancing test to weigh and determine the opportunity for the defendant to present a complete defense . in a situation where south carolina's rule was that if the state had put on strong forensic evidence of the defendant's guilt , the defendant could be prohibited from raising an alternative theory of a third - party's guilt . under these circumstances , the court concluded that holmes did not have a meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense .