the folsom dam is an important component in this flood protection . recently , the federal government has authorized three major flood protection improvement projects in the sacramento area . these include improvements to folsom dam's operational rules , improvements to the american and sacramento rivers and natomas basin levees , as well as modifications to folsom dam's flood gates and a raise of the dam itself . some of the federally authorized improvements involving fortification of the american and sacramento river levees are under construction or completed , while others are undergoing reevaluation . other plans , which would increase the capacity and flow levels at folsom dam and improve its ability to provide flood protection , remain in the pre - construction engineering and design stage , and have encountered setbacks to construction because of high cost estimates . the city's location puts it among the u.s. cities most vulnerable to significant flooding . potential flood losses grow as development in the area places more lives and properties in harm's way . as illustrated by disasters like hurricane katrina , flood damage reduction infrastructure cannot protect all areas , control all floods , and be completely reliable . to reduce flooding risks in sacramento , local , state , and federal entities have built dams , levees , and other structures , including the federally constructed folsom dam on the american river . these entities currently are studying and pursuing ways to improve the reliability , capacity , and operations of the existing infrastructure as well as construction activities to modify and build flood damage reduction infrastructure . whether and how to combine nonstructural methods ( eg , building restrictions and codes , insurance premiums ) and structural methods ( eg , levee strengthening , dam modification , new dam construction ) for managing flood risks is the subject of some dispute among stakeholders . following a significant flood threat in 1986 , congress in 1987 authorized the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) to study additional flood damage reduction measures ( eg , dam and levee improvements , construction of new structures , adoption of operational improvements ) . since then , congress has authorized and appropriated funding for studies and construction of specific flood damage reduction measures . this report outlines the status of these studies and measures , with particular attention to measures at folsom dam . following the 1986 storm , the corps , the california reclamation board , and the sacramento area flood control agency ( safca ) formed a partnership to find ways to reduce flood vulnerability and losses . since 1992 , congress has authorized construction of physical modification projects to improve flood protection around sacramento and folsom dam , including ( 1 ) the common features project that consists of levee improvements on the american and sacramento rivers ; ( 2 ) the folsom dam modification that entails changes to the flood gates and spillway of folsom dam ; and ( 3 ) the folsom dam raise that elevates the concrete and earth portions of the dam , provides for the construction of a permanent bridge , and authorizes other related measures .