president in six years . in a speech preceding his trip , the president called india a "naturalpartner for the united states" and identified five broad areas of bilateral cooperation: counterterrorism , democracy promotion , trade promotion , health and environmental protections , andenergy initiatives . on march 2 , the president and prime minister singh issued a statementexpressing their mutual satisfaction with the "great progress" made in advancing the u.s. - india"strategic partnership. the statement , which reviewed bilateral efforts to expand ties in a numberof key areas and called for further such efforts , notably announced "successful completion of india's[nuclear facility] separation plan," a reference to ongoing and complex negotiations related topresident bush's july 2005 vow to achieve "full civilian nuclear energy cooperation with india. onmarch 9 , the administration informally submitted to key congressional committee chairman aproposal for adjusting u.s. laws relevant to nuclear commerce . as president bush was in newdelhi , the pentagon issued a statement lauding bilateral military relations with india and anticipatingpossibly major arms sales to that country . ( 1 ) in the wake of major u - s. - india bilateral agreements signed in the summer of 2005 , congressheld four relevant hearings in the latter months of that year . on september 8 , october 26 , andnovember 16 , the house international relations committee ( hirc ) considered the perspectives ofstate department officials and nongovernmental experts on the progress and meaning of increasinglywarm u.s. - india relations and relevant agreements . similar panels testified before the senateforeign relations committee on november 2 . this senate hearing , along with the october househearing , was focused specifically on what has become the most controversial aspect of the july 2005joint statement issued by president bush and prime minister manmohan singh: an intention toachieve full bilateral civilian nuclear energy cooperation . in mid - october 2005 , the chairs and ranking members of the senate foreign relations andhouse international relations committees sent a letter to secretary of state rice requesting that theadministration begin "substantive discussion" with their committees on possible legislativeproposals related to envisaged civil nuclear cooperation with india . during the october 26 hirchearing , committee chairman henry hyde called "strange and unusual" the administration'sminimal consultation with congress on the details of such plans and said he was "troubled" by publicstatements from the administration suggesting that congressional support for such cooperation wasbroad and virtually guaranteed . ( 2 ) in a november letter which echoed much of the analysis ofnongovernmental hearing witnesses , a group of 18 experts , scholars , and former u.s. governmentofficials urged members of the congress to "critically examine" the proposed nuclear cooperationagreement , saying it "poses far - reaching and potentially adverse implications for u.s. nuclearnonproliferation objectives" and is unlikely to bring india "into closer alignment with other u.s.strategic objectives. ( 3 ) in late january , u.s . ambassador to india mulford caused a diplomatic stir when heexplicitly linked progress on the proposed nuclear deal with india's upcoming international atomicenergy agency ( iaea ) vote on iran , saying if india chose not to vote with the united states , hebelieved the u.s. - india initiative "will die in the congress.