unique to 2005 was the number and complexity of the recommendations . a description of the steps needed to satisfy the recommendation . a list of the dod organizations , including military units , that will have to be moved in order to fulfill the requirements of the commission's recommendation . a time - table for the movement of organizations listed above . where applicable , this will also include a schedule for installation closure . a description of the estimated costs and savings associated with moving each organization . details concerning military construction necessary as a result of brac actions . all required environmental studies at both the losing and gaining bases and the estimated costs for them . identification of land and permanent structures ( real property ) that will need to be sold , destroyed , or otherwise disposed of . a list of all dod agencies affected by the plan along with assurances that those agencies have participated in the plan's development and concur with its content . secretary wynne selected the term "business plan" based on the premise that the plans present the "business case" for the implementation of each recommendation . they outline financial estimates of costs and savings as well as describe movement plans throughout the brac implementation process . furthermore , use of the term "business" is consistent with terminology currently employed within dod . soon after taking over as secretary of defense , donald rumsfeld announced his intention to steer the department towards more cost effective operations by adopting commercial business models . a june 18 , 2001 , dod press release announced the creation of the senior executive committee to function as a "business board of directors for the department" and the business initiative council , created to "recommend good business practices and implement cost savings that could offset the funding requirements for personnel programs , infrastructure recapitalization , equipment modernization and transformation initiatives. secretary wynne adopted the practices of private enterprise to create these business plans . secretary wynne assigned each brac commission recommendation , in whole or in part , to a military department or defense agency . generally the entity that has the largest number of resources tied to the action is responsible for preparing and executing the corresponding business plan . when more than one service or defense agency is involved in a realignment , dod gave consideration to the location receiving resources as a result of the recommendation . dod reasoned that the receiving agency could best decide how to align additional personnel and facilities with their existing infrastructure . as an example , in commission recommendation #131 , which calls for the co - location of military criminal investigative agencies with the counter intelligence field agency and the defense security service at the united states marine corps base , quantico , virginia , responsibility for developing the business plan was assigned to the department of the navy . because they were intended to be internal resource allocation documents , these business plans were not intended to circulate outside dod . in their final report , the commission noted, "the 2005 brac recommendations exceeded the number considered by all prior brac commissions combined .