disability under the 11 u.s.c . ยง 109 ( h ) provision means that "the debtor is so physically impaired as to be unable , after reasonable effort , to receive credit counseling whether by participating in person , or via telephone or internet briefing. bapcpa also amends the bankruptcy code to deny a discharge to chapter 7 and chapter 13 debtors who fail to complete a personal financial management instructional course . this requirement does not apply if the debtor resides in a district where the u.s. trustee has determined that the approved instructional courses in that district are not adequate . such determination must be reviewed annually by the u.s. trustee . in addition , these provisions do not apply to a debtor who the court determines , after notice and a hearing , is unable to complete this requirement because of incapacity , disability , or active military duty in a military combat zone . section 106 ( e ) adds section 111 to the bankruptcy code . under section 111 ( a ) , the clerk is required to maintain a publicly available list of approved credit counseling agencies and personal financial management instructional courses . section 111 ( b ) discusses the determinations that must be made by a u.s. trustee before a credit counseling agency or a personal financial management course can be approved . under section 111 ( b ) ( 1 ) , the u.s. trustee must undertake a thorough review of the qualifications of the credit counseling agency or personal financial management instructional course to ensure that the counseling services or course meets the standards set forth in section 111 . the section also allows a u.s. trustee to require that the credit counseling agency or course provider provide information with respect to this review . if , prior to approval by the u.s. trustee , a credit counseling agency or instructional course did not appear on the list required under section 111 ( a ) , then approval shall be allowed for a probationary period not to exceed six months . a u.s. trustee may grant subsequent approvals for successive one - year periods thereafter if the counseling agency or instructional course has met the requirements under section 111 for the preceding period and can satisfy these standards in the future . under prior law , credit counseling organizations were eligible for a federal income tax exemption under internal revenue code section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) or 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) . section 1220 of the pension protection act of 2006 ( p.l . 109-280 ) amends the internal revenue code and establishes the following additional requirements that credit counseling organizations must meet to claim this income tax exemption: the organization must provide credit counseling services tailored to the specific needs and circumstances of consumers . the organization does not make loans to debtors ( other than loans with no fees or interest ) and does not negotiate the making of loans on behalf of debtors . the organization must provide services for the purpose of improving a consumer's credit record , credit history , or credit rating only to the extent that such services are incidental to providing credit counseling services .