b . see also congressional budget office , cost estimate for h.r . 3824 , available at http: / / www.cbo.gov / showdoc.cfm ? since conservation banks and tax incentives are addressed only in s. 2110 , they will be discussed outside the table to conserve space . provisions related to conservation banks will be paraphrased and crs comments arein italics . the conservation bank definition includes habitat "not necessarilycontiguous," which suggests that a bank could consist of segments of habitat ratherthan a block . given the importance and benefits of habitat continuity for speciessurvival , some might argue that banks consisting of fragmented portions would haveless value than banks with contiguous habitats . this definition also mentions an"appropriate period" as an alternative to in perpetuity when referring to the lifetimeof the bank . the bill does not identify who will make the determination of anappropriate period or what criteria will be used . credit is defined as the "unit of currency" of a conservation bank generatedby preserving or restoring habitat in an agreement , and quantified through theconservation values of a species or habitat . conservation values are to be determinedby the secretary for each bank and converted into a fixed number of credits ( pp.31-32 ) . the definition of credit is written in a way that appears to allow alternativesto money that could be exchanged to pay for the values being purchased out of thebank . there is no indication what those alternatives might be . there is littleguidance on how the secretary will determine or measure conservation value , andhow much "value" will equal a credit . due to the changing nature of habitat and thepotential for habitat improvement or degradation , conservation values may changewithin banks . there do not appear to be any provisions that allow the secretary toreassign values to conservation banks . on the other hand , allowing the secretaryto determine the value and credits for each bank , has the potential to insure thatthere will be consistency among banks . this may be helpful , since a credit programfor species could involve a wide range of habitat values . a service area is an area identified in a conservation bank agreement . itincludes a soil type , watershed , habitat type , political boundary , or an area in afederally recognized conservation plan , among others , in which a credit may be usedto offset the effects of a project ( p. 32 ) . the scope of a service area may vary broadly under this definition , whichcould allow the secretary to create areas that fit desired biological criteria . because person under the esa includes federal agencies , and page 32 includes a referenceto federally recognized conservation plans , the provisions on conservation bankingmay apply to federal agencies ; it is unclear if this was intended . conservation banks may be established by any private landowner who appliesand demonstrates that the affected area is managed under an enforceable legalinstrument and contributes to the conservation of a listed species , a candidate species,or a species of special concern ( pp . secretary shall approve or disapprove abank within 180 days after the application is submitted ( p. 33 ) .