senate . select committee on intelligence . report of the select committee on intelligence on the u.s. intelligence community's prewar intelligence assessments on iraq . july 9 , 2004 . why was information about a protest considered credible at the time ? based on new information , should analysts have corrected their assessment earlier than september 20 ? did analysts display "anchoring bias" — the tendency to give greater weight to early information and assessments ? u.s. counterterrorism efforts in iraq , afghanistan , pakistan , and in other areas have been heavily dependent upon the use of unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) or unmanned aerial systems ( uas ) , referred to as "drones" in the media , for intelligence collection , often in real time . they provide important substitutes for , or supplements to , other intelligence platforms such as satellites and manned aircraft . in addition , some uavs have been modified to launch weapons at designated targets . operated remotely from ground stations in the region or even from the united states , armed uavs can avoid the need to introduce u.s. personnel into direct combat , a significant advantage . their use can also avoid the diplomatic complications of a ground - based u.s. military presence . uavs are operated both by the military services and intelligence agencies depending on a number of operational and statutory considerations . use by the military forces would be undertaken consistent with title 10 authorities . 413b provides statutory authorities for the dni to undertake covert actions at presidential direction . many have expressed concern about reports of expanded use of uavs in targeted attacks . some observers suggest that some individuals may not be legitimate targets as envisioned by the 2001 authorization for the use of force ( p.l . 107-40 ) , or believe that targeted attacks in countries where the united states is not otherwise engaged in armed conflict might violate international law . since the september 2011 targeted killing of anwar al - awlaki , an american who fled to yemen and became a senior leader within al - qaeda in the arabian peninsula , many have questioned the legal basis of such a strike against a u.s. citizen . still others question the effectiveness of the program over the long term and warn that drone attacks inside foreign countries such as pakistan will encourage opposition to overall u.s. policy goals by engendering negative perceptions that ultimately bolster al - qaeda's ranks . former dni blair has stated: "in pakistan , news media accounts of heavy civilian casualties are widely believed . our reliance on high - tech strikes that pose no risk to our soldiers is bitterly resented in a country that cannot duplicate such feats of warfare without cost to its own troops. congress is expected to maintain close oversight of the use of uavs in the counterterrorism effort . in the wake of the september 2001 attacks , the fbi was strongly criticized for failing to focus on the terrorist threat , for failing to collect and strategically analyze intelligence , and for failing to share intelligence with other intelligence agencies ( as well as among various fbi components ) .