figure 5 . monthly average u.s. fuel price . during september 2005 , usda announced that it was initiating several activities to helpalleviate the grain transport congestion described below . on september 7 , 2005 , usda announcedchanges to its marketing assistance loan program to help alleviate the urgency of marketing grainat distress - level prices . ( 28 ) usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) is implementingchanges to allow producers to obtain loans for "on - farm" storage on grain stored on the ground inaddition to grain bins and other normally approved structures . this action was designed to alleviateshort - term logistical problems and support local cash prices above the distressed levels that haveresulted from the slowdown of barge traffic on the mississippi river . on september 20 , 2005 , secretary of agriculture , mike johanns , announced that usda wastaking four additional steps to alleviate the grain transport congestion . ( 29 ) first , usda , actingthrough the ccc , was providing temporary incentives to facilitate the immediate movement of 140barges of damaged corn ( over 7 million bushels ) from new orleans to up - river locations foroff - loading . once unloaded , the barges can return to duty moving new - crop commodities . second,usda was providing incentives for alternative grain storage . ( 30 ) under this activity , theccc would provide special , one - time assistance to operators to help with the costs associated withstoring corn and wheat in alternative storage facilities . up to 50 million bushels of corn or wheatcould be eligible for this activity . third , usda was encouraging alternative shipping patternsthrough regions other than the central gulf by providing for a transportation differential incentiveon the movement of up to 200,000 metric tons of corn , wheat or soybeans . fourth , for thoseproducers with farm - stored commodities under loan to usda whose loans mature at the end ofseptember and october and who would otherwise forfeit those commodities to usda , usda wouldallow such producers to buy back the grain at the posted county price . normally , these producerswould be required to move the forfeited grain to commercial warehouses . this offer is being madeon a state - by - state basis . usda has at its disposal three major ongoing programs designed to help crop producersrecover from the financial effects of any natural disaster: federal crop insurance , non - insured assistance program ( nap ) payments , and emergency disaster loans . all three of these programs have permanent authorization and available funding . forbackground information on these and other farm disaster programs , see crs report rs21212 , agricultural disaster assistance , by [author name scrubbed] . for the 2005 crop year , alabama , mississippi , and louisiana crop producers purchased justover $1 billion in crop insurance coverage , with nearly 70% of the value of coverage being forcotton , soybeans , and rice . according to preliminary reports from usda , the three - state region hasrelatively high participation rates in the crop insurance program . however , much of that coverageis at the catastrophic level , which provides an indemnity payment only on losses in excess of 50%of normal production .