these are discussed below . on july 27 , 2005 , the united states announced formation of a six - nation asia - pacific partnership on clean development and climate ( commonly denoted by the acronym 'app' ) , which would work on cooperatively reducing greenhouse gas intensity of their economies . this partnership agreement included three of the world's largest emitters of greenhouse gases: the united states , china , and india , plus japan , australia , and south korea . of the three developed country nations in the partnership — the united states , australia , and japan — only japan has ratified the kyoto protocol . the participants described the focus of the partnership as technology development and reduction of greenhouse gas intensity , on a voluntary basis . no specific targets were announced . the members of the partnership indicated that their goal was to "complement , but not replace the kyoto protocol. however , concerns have been raised by some observers as to whether this partnership and its approach would in fact reinforce the resistance of the two largest developing country greenhouse gas emitters — china and india — to taking on mandatory emissions commitments in the next phase of the kyoto protocol . the purposes identified by partnership members include to "create a voluntary , non - legally binding framework for international cooperation to facilitate the development , diffusion , deployment , and transfer of existing , emerging and longer - term cost - effective , cleaner , more efficient technologies and practices among the partners through concrete and substantial cooperation so as to achieve practical results. task forces focused on eight industrial or business sectors were established to review the status of their sectors with regard to clean development and climate , to identify cost and performance objectives and realistic goals , and report on recommended actions within their sectors . the eight task forces are: ( 1 ) cleaner fossil energy , ( 2 ) renewable energy and distributed generation , ( 3 ) power generation and transmission , ( 4 ) steel , ( 5 ) aluminum , ( 6 ) cement , ( 7 ) coal mining , and ( 8 ) buildings and construction . the task force reports , termed action plans , are now complete and can be accessed on the partnership website . the executive summary of the task force action plans describes the projects to be undertaken , which include sectoral assessments , identifying best practices , capacity building , and technology research and demonstration . these activities are described as "a significant first step toward a more comprehensive set of actions to address clean development and climate goals . the remaining questions include the degree to which funding and investment will be forthcoming for the work plan goals . also unclear is the degree to which the developing country partners will undertake activities in addition to those receiving outside funding .