all jordanians stand with me on jerusalem. these types of steps for appeasing an increasingly restive public arguably are vital for the government of jordan , which has limited financial options for addressing discontent . although the government has continued to work with the international monetary fund ( imf ) on fiscal reforms , public debt has ballooned to 95% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , and most of the government's budget is dedicated to salaries , pensions , and debt servicing , leaving few additional options to fund public sector job programs . king abdullah ii recently traveled to the united kingdom , where uk officials pledged to partially guarantee a $1.9 billion world bank loan to jordan . in summer 2018 , gulf countries pledged $2.5 billion to jordan in combined grants and loans . although the united states and jordan have never been linked by a formal treaty , they have cooperated on a number of regional and international issues for decades . jordan's small size and lack of major economic resources have made it dependent on aid from western and various arab sources . u.s. support , in particular , has helped jordan deal with serious vulnerabilities , both internal and external . jordan's geographic position , wedged between israel , syria , iraq , and saudi arabia , has made it vulnerable to the strategic designs of its powerful neighbors , but has also given jordan an important role as a buffer between these countries in their largely adversarial relations with one another . jordan , created by colonial powers after world war i , initially consisted of desert or semidesert territory east of the jordan river , inhabited largely by people of bedouin tribal background . the establishment of the state of israel in 1948 brought large numbers of palestinian refugees to jordan , which subsequently unilaterally annexed a palestinian enclave west of the jordan river known as the west bank . the government also has withdrawn controversial amendments to the 2015 cybercrime law . according to jordanian activists and international nongovernmental organizations , the amendments would have seriously curtailed freedom of expression online . jordan may be addressing public discontent and bolstering nationalist sentiment at home by stoking tensions with israel in support of the palestinian cause . in late 2018 , the king announced ( via twitter ) that his government would not renew a provision in its 1994 peace treaty with israel that allowed israel access to the jordanian territories of baqoura and al ghumar , which are agricultural areas in northern and southern jordan , respectively . according to one jordanian commentator , "domestically , the king's decision is a much - needed shot in the arm for the government at a time when it is facing public pressure over its unpopular economic policies. according to usaid , u.s. humanitarian assistance funds are enabling unicef to provide health assistance for around 40,000 syrians sheltering at the informal rukban and hadalat settlements along the syria - jordan border berm , including water trucking , the rehabilitation of a water borehole , and installation of a water treatment unit in hadalat . u.s. - jordanian military cooperation is a key component in bilateral relations .