table 1 . u.s. commercial petroleum stocks afterkatrina ( million barrels ) source: eia weekly petroleum status report , table 3 . table 1 shows that the major categories of petroleum inventories have experienced declinessince katrina , with the exception of gasoline . total stocks have declined at a rate of about 750,000bd . how these figures might be interpreted is a matter of some debate - - the obvious facts are thatthey have declined , and that there is some level below which spot shortages and distributionalproblems begin to appear . prior to march 2003 , doe's weekly petroleum status report referred tothis as the "minimum operational inventory" ( moi ) . subsequent issues have dropped any referenceto moi because of differing views within the industry regarding what the minimum level might be.because of improvements and inventory management and logistics , industry had recommended usinglower figures than doe had previously been using . a doe - industry dialogue held by the national petroleum council in august 2004 failed toreach an agreement on moi , and it has not been referenced since it was dropped . when last shownon doe's charts of inventory levels , ( 8 ) these statistics were 185 million barrels for gasoline and 85 millionbarrels for distillates ( which includes both heating oil and diesel fuel ) . if these levels are a guide,there is about one day's worth of gasoline stocks available ( 10.7 million barrels of "extra" stockscompared to about 8.8 mbd of demand ) before run - outs would start to occur . a tight inventory situation might be expected to be cause for concern ; however , prices - - forthe moment at least - - are falling . at the pump , regular gasoline prices peaked at $3.06 ( an all - timehigh ) on september 5 ; they have steadily declined , falling to $2.70 in mid - october . wholesaleprices and gasoline traded on the new york mercantile exchange ( nymex ) fell similarly . the market does not appear to be responding to any shortage - related fears , but it may beresponding to concerns about "demand destruction" resulting from high prices . indeed , the data forthe four weeks ending october 14 show demand for gasoline and middle distillates each about200,000 bd below the year - ago period ( 9 ) distillate stocks are 37.7 million barrels above the old moi level ; demand is about 4.0 mbd,implying less than 10 days worth of supply cover . wholesale trading on the nymex has seendistillates decline from $2.13 per gallon at the end of september , to $1.85 in mid - october,suggesting few current concerns - - other than the level fo retail prices - - for the approaching heatingseason . eia's heating oil and propane update for october 10 shows a residential heating oil priceof $2.65 per gallon , down 4.4 cents from the prior week . doe has forecast that home heating costs will be much higher this winter than last . eiaadministrator caruso indicated heating oil was forecast to cost $2.54 per gallon , an increase fromthe 2004-05 heating season average price of $1.92 .