this process is called trade creation . tradecreation provides economic benefits as consumers have a wider choice of goods and servicesavailable at lower costs . trade creation also results in adjustment costs , however , usually in theform of domestic job losses as production shifts to another country . the drawback to rtas is that they may result in trade diversion because they are not fullyinclusive of all regional trading partners . trade diversion results when a country forms an rta andthen shifts the purchase of goods or services ( imports ) from a country that is not an rta partner toa country that is an rta partner . for example , if the united states was purchasing an item fromasia prior to nafta and then began to purchase this item from mexico after nafta was enforced,solely as a result of the trade agreement , even though the asian country was the lower - cost producer,then nafta would be associated with trade diversion . theeuropean union is the most prominent example of a common market . ( 62 ) another example ofconsolidation or expansion is the bilateral agreement between the united states and canada in the1980s , which helped to bring focus on the uruguay round of multilateral negotiations and theformation of nafta . however , some believe that this strategy is not the best course of action forthe united states . one of the reasons given is that the focus on bilaterals is distracting the unitedstates from its leadership role in energizing the ftaa negotiations . another reason given is thatthe bilateral agreements are doing little to resolve problems such as the trade issues related toagriculture , or strengthening the trade relationship between the united states and brazil . all the countries of the western hemisphere , with the exception of cuba , have been activeparticipants in the establishment of an ftaa . in august 2005 , senior representatives from all ftaacountries met in mexico . caribbean trade officials urged countries to hold an administrative meetingprior to the november 2005 summit of the americas to restart the stalled ftaa negotiations . theysuggested that negotiators look at the technical and political obstacles that are holding back the talksand restart the negotiations with a new "road map" that would guide negotiators toward a conclusionof the negotiations . ( 64 ) however , the recent summit of the americas , held in mar del plata , argentina , was not successfulin reactivating the trade talks . the majority of the 34 participating countries were in support of thetalks , while five countries , including brazil , argentina , and venezuela , were opposed to signing upfor the talks , mostly due to disagreements over agriculture and intellectual property rights . some observers are pessimistic about the near - term possibility of restarting the talks , butthere are many analysts who believe that pursuing multilateral talks would be advantageous for theregion . some have expressed hope that progress on agriculture at the wto and that the november2005 summit of the americas could help move the negotiations forward .