there are other approaches and factors . examples of risk factors could include threats , homeland security capabilities , population , critical infrastructure assets , and transportation assets . in order to accurately assess the risk factors , one would need to evaluate the threats to the population , critical infrastructure , transportation , and the like , and determine the consequences of threats . additionally , effectiveness factors such as the homeland security capabilities to prevent , respond to , and recover from terrorist attacks , and natural and technical disasters would need to be assessed . the methods of threat and vulnerability assessment suggest a variety of factors that might be used in devising risk - based funding approaches for allocating homeland security assistance to states and urban areas . timeliness—the currency of the data affects the quality of the discussion on potential risks . for example , population data from the u.s. census bureau are generally regarded as reliable and are used in a variety of formulas for allocating aid grants . for example , daily intelligence reports that provide information on current terrorist threats would be considered more timely than monthly or quarterly reports . availability—if the validity of a risk factor is to be widely accepted , data used in a formula as a variable may need to be readily and publicly available . intelligence information that has been classified by the federal government and not shared with state and local officials would fail to satisfy this criterion . additionally , dhs requires states and urban areas to identify first responder and emergency management capability enhancement and sustainment needs in the program and capability enhancement plan . the plan is part of their hsgp applications . as noted earlier , states and urban areas are required to submit investment justifications that detail how federal assistance would address identified homeland security needs and how the assistance would address state and urban area counter - terrorism - related capabilities . the investment justifications are then evaluated through a peer review process ( administered by booz allen hamilton ) . the peer review process , the justifications , and the identified effectiveness are not publically available . additionally , the effectiveness factors are not identified by dhs ; instead states and urban areas are required to determine their individual needs and display how federal assistance would meet the needs . dhs also has to rely on information from other agencies such as the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) and may not be able validate or confirm the information used in their state and urban area risk assessments . issue: how should the risk and effectiveness factors be evaluated ? issue: is dhs able to validate and confirm the reliability of asset types and geographic attributes it receives from other federal entities ? dhs has elected not to use a 100% risk - based formula for allocating the remainder of shsgp and letpp total appropriations , and not to use a 100% risk - based allocation for uasi . instead , dhs has developed a two - part approach to determining state and urban area allocations . this approach consists of a dhs risk assessment and the state's and urban area's justification of need for funding .