sec . none of the funds herein appropriated under this act may be expended to support directly or indirectly combat activities in or over cambodia , laos , north vietnam and south vietnam or off the shores of cambodia , laos , north vietnam and south vietnam by united states forces , and after august 15 , 1973 , no other funds heretofore appropriated under any other act may be expended for such purpose . department of state authorization , p.l . 7645 sec . notwithstanding any other provision of law , on or after august 15 , 1973 , no funds heretofore or hereafter appropriated may be obligated or expended to finance the involvement of united states military forces in hostilities in or over or from off the shores of north vietnam , south vietnam , laos , or cambodia , unless specifically authorized hereafter by the congress . notwithstanding any other provision of law , upon enactment of this act , no funds heretofore or hereafter appropriated may be obligated or expended for the purpose of providing assistance of any kind , directly or indirectly , to or on behalf of north vietnam , unless specifically authorized hereafter by the congress . foreign assistance act of 1974 , p.l . 93-559 , s. 3394 sec . it was rejected in june 1971 . table 2 describes eight proposals — including four that were enacted — which adopt a variety of non - funding restrictions considered by congress during the indochina conflict . several well - known amendments were introduced by senator mansfield including two that required the termination of u.s. military operations in indochina at "the earliest practicable date" as well as a withdrawal of all troops within either six or nine months . these versions ultimately did not pass ( entries 25 , and 27 ) . two other mansfield amendments provided for a "prompt and orderly withdrawal" at "the earliest practicable date," but did not set a time limit ( entries 24 and 26 ) . one amendment was a sense of the congress and the other stated that it was u.s. policy to terminate military operations and withdraw forces . although both of these amendments were enacted in the fall of 1971 , their practical effect is not clear since no deadline was set . all u.s. troops were withdrawn by march 1973 as required by the paris peace accords , almost a year and a half after passage of the first mansfield amendment . in other cases , such as somalia in 1993 , congress considered provisions requiring that the president remove forces by january 31 , 1994 , unless there is a declaration of war or specific congressional authorization ( entry 30 ) . congress also considered and passed a repeal of the august 10 , 1964 , gulf of tonkin resolution that gave congressional approval to "take all necessary measures" to repel an armed attack against the united states in january 1971 , but military operations continued in vietnam for another two years ( entry 22 ) . funding restrictions on military operations 1 . cooper - church amendment , p.l . 19911 sec .