enactment of p.l . 115-97 in december 2017 culminated a decades - long debate over whether to allow oil and gas development in anwr in northeastern alaska . the law established an oil and gas program for the refuge's coastal plain , with at least two oil and gas lease sales required in the next 10 years . development proponents contend that the sales will generate economic activity , contribute to u.s. energy security , and result in royalty revenues for both the federal government and the state of alaska , while opponents express concern that development will detrimentally impact the unique biological resources of the refuge . 115-97 requires the first anwr lease sale within four years of the law's enactment . activities preparatory to the lease sale include identifying lands to be leased , conducting sale - specific environmental reviews , issuing notices of sales , and other "prelease" activities . activities could also include new geological and geophysical ( g&g ) surveys to determine the extent and location of hydrocarbon resources . congress could potentially take additional action related to anwr oil and gas leasing , including through further legislation or through oversight of doi's implementation of the provisions of p.l . it is administered by fws within doi . §§1601 et seq .

 ) the plo withdrew the lands from "all forms of appropriation ... including mining but not the mineral leasing laws," thus leaving oil and natural gas development as a possibility . despite these withdrawals , not all of the refuge is owned by the federal government . the history of anwr ( and its energy development restrictions ) is intertwined with congressional efforts to settle land claims of native alaskans . , consists of 19 million acres in northeast alaska . development proponents view its 1.57-million - acre coastal plain — also known as the 1002 area — as a promising onshore oil prospect . according to the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) , the mean estimate of technically recoverable oil from multiple prospects on the federally owned land in the refuge is 7.7 billion barrels ( billion bbl ) ; there is a low probability that more than 11.8 billion bbl could be recovered on the federal lands over the life of the prospective fields . ( in comparison , the united states currently uses about 7.1 billion bbl per year ; see " oil resource potential ." the amount that can be recovered depends , in part , on the economics of the oil market . when oil prices are high , more oil will be economic to produce ; when oil prices are low , less oil will be economic to produce . since january 2014 , oil prices have dropped by almost 40% , going from an average of $94.60 / bbl to $60.37 / bbl in the beginning of january 2018 . for all of 2017 , nominal prices ranged from a high of $60.46 / bbl to a low of $42.48 / bbl .