for example , under 50 u.s.c . ยง 783 , the communication of classified information by a government employee is expressly punishable only if the discloser knows or has reason to believe the recipient is an agent or representative of a foreign government , but not , for example , if the recipient is an agent of an international terrorist organization . to close some perceived gaps , the 106 th congress passed a measure to criminalize all leaks of classified information ; however , president clinton vetoed the measure . the first amendment limits congress's ability to prohibit the publication of information of value to the public , especially with regard to pre - publication injunctions against non - government employees . that the publication of some information has the potential to damage u.s. national security interests is rarely denied , but an agreement on how to protect such information without harming the public's right to know what its government is doing may remain elusive . an identical measure was introduced late in the 109 th congress , but was not reported out of committee . the attorney general , in his report to the 108 th congress , concluded that [a]lthough there is no single statute that provides criminal penalties for all types of unauthorized disclosures of classified information , unauthorized disclosures of classified information fall within the scope of various current statutory criminal prohibitions . it must be acknowledged that there is no comprehensive statute that provides criminal penalties for the unauthorized disclosure of classified information irrespective of the type of information or recipient involved . given the nature of unauthorized disclosures of classified information that have occurred , however , i conclude that current statutes provide a legal basis to prosecute those who engage in unauthorized disclosures , if they can be identified . it may be that carefully drafted legislation specifically tailored to unauthorized disclosures of classified information generally , rather than to espionage , could enhance our investigative efforts . the extent to which such a provision would yield any practical additional benefits to the government in terms of improving our ability to identify those who engage in unauthorized disclosures of classified information or deterring such activity is unclear , however . opponents of any such legislation express concern regarding the possible consequences to freedom of the press and other first amendment values . the current laws for protecting classified information have been criticized as a patchwork of sometimes abstruse and antiquated provisions that are not consistent and do not cover all the information the government legitimately needs to protect . certain information is protected regardless of whether it belongs to the government or is subject to normal classification . information related to "the national defense" is protected even though no harm to the national security is intended or is likely to be caused through its disclosure . however , nonmilitary information with the potential to cause serious damage to the national security is only protected from willful disclosure with the requisite intent or knowledge regarding the potential harm .