the violent crime rate has generally decreased since then . however , since 1991 there were times when the violent crime rate increased for a year or two . prior to the most recent increase , the violent crime rate increased in both 2005 and 2006 , before declining most every year from 2007 to 2014 . while violent crime rates continue to remain at historic lows , it is too early to tell if the recent increase in the rate signals the reversal of a long - term declining trend . recent reports about a growing number of homicides and other violent crime in some cities might raise questions about whether grants to hire more police officers could be a way to assist cities facing crime problems . proponents of the cops program assert that cops hiring grants contributed to the decreasing crime rate in the 1990s . three studies identified by crs attempted to quantify the impact that cops grants had on crime rates from the mid - 1990s to 2001 . in general , the studies suggest that cops grants had a negative effect on crime rates , but the effect was not universal . the studies suggest that cops grants might not have been as effective at reducing crime in cities with populations of more than 250,000 people . proponents also believe that the federal government has a role to play in supporting local law enforcement because it is the federal government's responsibility to provide for the security of u.s. citizens , which includes protecting citizens from crime . while there might be a desire among some policymakers to assist state and local governments that are facing growing levels of violent crime , opponents of the cops program stress that state and local governments , not the federal government , should be responsible for providing funding for state and local police forces . they argue that the purported effect of cops hiring grants on crime rates in the 1990s is questionable . they maintain that it is not prudent to increase funding for the program at a time when crime is relatively low and the federal government is facing annual deficits . opponents might also argue that the cops hiring grants are duplicative of other programs , such as the edward byrne memorial justice assistance grant program . as discussed above , when congress reauthorized the cops program it was changed to a single - grant program whereby law enforcement agencies can apply for a "cops grant" that they can use for one or more of several programs outlined in current law . however , congress has continued to appropriate funding for specific grant programs under the cops account in the commerce , justice , science and related agencies ( cjs ) appropriations act ( see table a - 2 ) . appropriations for the cops account do not provide law enforcement agencies with the flexibility envisioned in the current authorizing legislation . instead of being able to apply for one grant to use for one or more programs , law enforcement agencies must apply for funding under several different programs . law enforcement agencies are also limited to using their grants for the programs specified by congress in the annual cjs appropriations act .