it is a representation or blueprint . the e - government act ( p.l . 107-347 ) , passed in 2002 , tasks the administrator of the office of e - government with overseeing the development of eas , both within and across agencies . the act defined enterprise architecture as ( a ) means — ( i ) a strategic information asset base , which defines the mission ; ( ii ) the information necessary to perform the mission ; ( iii ) the technologies necessary to perform the mission ; and ( iv ) the transitional processes for implementing new technologies in response to changing mission needs ; and ( b ) includes — ( i ) a baseline architecture ; ( ii ) a target architecture ; and ( iii ) a sequencing plan . the fea is a planning and management tool used to guide federal information technology investments , with a specific focus on improving efficiency and identifying common applications that can be used government - wide . it is designed to ensure that it investments support the functions of government , rather than allowing technology choices determine how the government carries out its operations . omb circular a - 11 , preparation and submission of budget estimates , last updated in june 2006 , requires federal departments and agencies to demonstrate that their information technology investments align with fea standards and guidelines in order to receive omb approval . as a whole , the fea is intended to "enable the federal government to identify opportunities to leverage technology to reduce redundancy ; facilitate horizontal ( cross - federal ) and vertical ( federal , state , and local ) information sharing ; establish a direct relationship between it and mission / program performance to support citizen - centered , customer - focused government ; and maximize it investments to better achieve mission outcomes. the fea is composed of five reference models: performance , business , service , data , and technical . each of the reference models represents specific aspects of the fea , and provides a framework , or a shared language , for departments and agencies to develop technology solutions that can be used by the federal government collectively . the reference models are updated as needed to reflect changes in applications and services . brief descriptions of the five reference models , drawn from the ea website , are as follows: performance reference model — a framework for measuring the output of major information technology investments and their contributions to program performance . business reference model — a framework for describing the federal government business operations independent of the agencies that perform them . service component reference model — a framework for identifying information technology service components ( applications ) used to support business and / or performance objectives . data reference model — a framework that , at an aggregate level , describes the data and information used to support government program delivery and business operations . technical reference model — a framework for describing the standards , specifications , and technologies that support and enable the delivery of service components ( applications ) and capabilities .