pursuant to p.l . 105-277 , a supplemental appropriations act passed in 1998 , the national commission on terrorism , headed by former ambassador l. paul bremer , was established to review the laws , regulations , directives , policies and practices for preventing and punishing international terrorism . the bremer commission's june 2000 report highlighted concerns about the inadequate sharing of terrorism - related information . it recommended the elimination of barriers to the aggressive collection of information on terrorists and suggested that the fbi suffered from bureaucratic and cultural obstacles to gathering terrorism information . it found that the "department of justice applies the statute governing electronic surveillance and physical searches of international terrorists in a cumbersome and overly cautious manner. although it noted that the fisa application process had been recently streamlined , it recommended that the justice department's office of intelligence policy review ( oipr ) should not require the inclusion of information in excess of that which was actually mandated by fisa . it also recommended that oipr be substantially expanded and that it be directed to cooperate with the fbi . the commission further concluded: law enforcement agencies are traditionally reluctant to share information outside of their circles so as not to jeopardize any potential prosecution . the fbi does promptly share information warning about specific terrorist threats with the cia and other agencies . but the fbi is far less likely to disseminate terrorist information that may not relate to an immediate threat even though this could be of immense long - term or cumulative value to the intelligence community . moreover , certain laws limit the sharing of law enforcement information , such as grand jury or criminal wiretap information , with the intelligence community . these laws are subject to different interpretations , so that in some cases it is unclear whether the restrictions apply. the commission did not indicate a need for immediate statutory changes , but recommended that the "attorney general should clarify what information can be shared and direct maximum dissemination of terrorist - related information to policymakers and intelligence analysts consistent with the law. members of congress did propose various approaches to address the lack of information sharing . s. 2089 as introduced in february 2000 by senator specter , would have required that the attorney general prescribe in regulations the circumstances under which information acquired pursuant to fisa "shall be disclosed for law enforcement purposes. the bill would also have required two reports addressing issues of information sharing . first , it would have tasked the director of the fbi to submit a report on "the feasibility of establishing within the bureau a comprehensive intelligence reporting function having the responsibility for disseminating among the elements of the intelligence community information collected and assembled by the bureau on international terrorism and other national security matters. secondly , the bill would have required the president to submit a report on the legal authorities that govern the sharing of criminal wiretap information with intelligence agencies and with recommendations to improve the capability of the justice department to share "foreign intelligence information or counterintelligence information with elements of the united states intelligence community on matters such as counterterrorism.