now japan is trying to catch up . economists still disagree about the merits of negotiating ftas on the grounds that discrimination may undermine the multilateral trading system while others believe that ftas promote multilateral deals in the long run . the concern is that ftas could lead to a "spaghetti bowl" of overlapping conflicting trading partnerships each with its own set of rules at the expense of a more unified and non - discriminatory set of multilateral rules . but domestic support in japan for an fta program appears strong . europe has been pursuing a similar course for years . china and six asean states ( thailand , malaysia , indonesia , philippines , singapore , and brunei ) are in the process of establishing an fta by 2010 . prime minister koizumi is firmly behind the approach , as well as the ruling ldp - komeito coalition . while the democratic party , the major opposition party , supports the general thrust of the policy , some members maintain that the united states and china should be considered as prospective fta partners . given its own aggressive fta program , the united states is hardly in a position to criticize japan's new policy orientation . but it has considerable interest in whether japan's policy evolves in a manner that is supportive of u.s. interests in asia — which include promoting a stable balance of power and insuring that u.s. trade and investment interests are not discriminated against in the region . japan's fta program has been motivated by a combination of economic and political objectives . the most important entail avoidance of becoming isolated as other major trading countries actively pursue ftas , energizing domestic economic activity , and promoting japanese influence in asia . japan's concern about the possible emergence of economic blocs in the americas and in europe goes back to the early 1990s . in 1994 the united states entered into the north america free trade agreement ( nafta ) and announced plans to create a free trade area of the americas . europe at the same time was busy entering into preferential trade agreements and subsequently has come to conduct trade relations on a multilateral or non - discriminatory basis with only a handful of trading partners , including japan and the united states . in 1999 the collapse of multilateral trade negotiations at the wto ministerial in seattle shook japanese confidence in the future of multilateralism . china's decision in 2001 to negotiate an fta with asean countries was also a seminal event , providing more ammunition for those in japan that were advocating a change of policy course . the case for developing an fta program was also driven by asian economic trends and opportunities . meti officials see east asia as the fastest growing region in the world and a region that is increasingly vital to japan's economic future . ftas and epas are viewed as one way to deepen economic ties with east asia and facilitate a new division of labor and production sharing .