2252a ( g ) . the list of penalty increases is comparable , if somewhat more extensive . serious violent crimes against children , 18 u.s.c . the new federal crimes include the following . murder in the course of a wider range of federal sex offenses , 18 u.s.c . the act serves four basic purposes . first , it reformulates the federal standards for sex offender registration in state , territorial and tribal sexual offender registries , and does so in a manner designed to make the system more uniform , more inclusive , more informative , and more readily available to the public online . second , it introduces a fairly extensive and diverse set of amendments to federal criminal law and procedure , featuring , among other things , a federal procedure for the civil commitment of convicted sex offenders upon their release from prison , a random search authority over sex offenders on probation or supervised release , and a number of new mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment for various new and existing federal sex offenses . third , it creates , amends , or revives several grant programs designed to reinforce private , state , local , tribal and territorial prevention ; law enforcement ; and treatment efforts in the case of crimes committed against children . finally , it calls for a variety of administrative or regulatory initiatives in the interest of child safety , such as the creation of the national child abuse registry . the act arrived on the president's desk as h.r . 4472 having been approved by the house on march 8 , 2006 and by the senate on july 20 , 2006 . each chamber had previously passed many of the same provisions in separate bills of their own . conscious of the legal and technical adjustments required , the walsh act anticipates that states and other jurisdictions may require three years or more to fully implement its modifications . as a consequence , for purposes of compliance by the states and other jurisdictions , the prior law remains in effect until the later of three years after enactment or one year after the necessary software for the new uniform , online system has become available . in the case of the house , the predecessor was h.r . the adam walsh child protection and safety act is focused , as its name implies , upon child protection and safety . its efforts involve the creation of new federal crimes , the enhancement of the penalties for preexisting federal crimes , and the amendment of federal criminal procedure . many of these efforts are child - specific ; some are more general . section 632 instructs the marshals service to establish and coordinate a fugitive safe surrender program in designated cities for the capture of fugitives from federal , state and local justice . it authorizes appropriations for that purpose in the amounts of $3 million ( for fy2007 ) , $5 million ( for fy2008 ) , and $8 million ( for fy2009 ) .