id . at 363-64 ( emphasis in the original ) . the stein district court initially deferred dismissing the indictments in the hopes that an alternative remedy would develop . when it took up the case again , it supplemented its earlier due process analysis with an assessment of whether the circumstances met the "shock" standard for substantive due process . it concluded that the "government's actions with respect to legal fees were at least deliberately indifferent to the rights of the defendants and others . in all the circumstances , this behavior shocks the conscience in the constitutional sense whether prosecutors were merely deliberately indifferent to the kpmg defendants' rights or acted more culpably. the court resolved the self - incrimination issue in a separate decision following defendants' suppression motions . here the government was a bit more successful , for , although the court found a violation in some instances , it declined to do so in others . as a general rule , statements secured under governmental threat of job termination are inadmissible in subsequent criminal proceedings . during the course of the stein case investigation , several employees had initially refused to talk to authorities . prosecutors then brought the matter to the attention of the firm's attorneys and employees were told to cooperate or payment of their attorneys' fees would be discontinued and if still employed they would be fired . in some cases , the coercion resulted in involuntary statements ; in others , the employees made voluntary statements for reasons of their own notwithstanding the pressure . to the government's argument that no fifth amendment consequences flowed from the conduct of the firm , a private non - governmental actor , the court found the firm's conduct attributable to the government . yet in the end , only two of the nine challenged statements were suppressed . on appeal , the second circuit found it unnecessary to address either fifth amendment issue because of its treatment of the assistance of counsel issue . the sixth amendment assures the criminally accused the right to assistance of counsel "in all criminal prosecutions. it is said the right generally attaches once "prosecution has been commenced , that is , at or after the initiation of adversary judicial criminal proceedings — whether by way of formal charge , preliminary hearing , indictment , information , or arraignment. once attached , the right includes the right to counsel of the defendant's choosing , subject to several limitations . among those limitations is the fact that an accused has no right to secure counsel of his choice using funds subject to confiscation , or as the supreme court stated , "[a] defendant has no sixth amendment right to spend another person's money for services rendered by an attorney , even if those funds are the only way that that defendant will be able to retain the attorney of his choice. the government contended that its conduct could not constitute a violation of the sixth amendment because ( 1 ) it had occurred before indictment and thus before the right to counsel had attached and ( 2 ) the employees had no sixth amendment right to pay for their counsel of choice with someone else's money .