but that is not the issue in the medical marijuana debate . botanical marijuana remains a plant substance , an herb , and its opponents say it cannot substitute for legitimate pharmaceuticals . the federal penalty for possessing one marijuana cigarette — even for medical use — is up to one year in prison and up to a $100,000 fine , and the penalty for growing a cannabis plant is up to five years and up to a $250,000 fine . that patients are willing to risk these severe penalties to obtain the relief that marijuana provides appears to present strong evidence for the substance's therapeutic effectiveness . although the supreme court ruled differently in raich , the argument persists that medical marijuana providers and patients are engaging in a class of activity totally different from those persons trafficking in marijuana for recreational use and that patients should not be arrested for using medical marijuana in accordance with the laws of the states in which they reside . with its position affirmed by raich , however , dea continues to investigate — and sometimes raid and shut down — medical marijuana distribution operations in california and other medical marijuana states . dea's position is that: [f]ederal law does not distinguish between crimes involving marijuana for claimed "medical" purposes and crimes involving marijuana for any other purpose . dea likewise does not so distinguish in carrying out its duty to enforce the csa and investigate possible violations of the act . rather , consistent with the agency's mandate , dea focuses on large - scale trafficking organizations and other criminal enterprises that warrant federal scrutiny . if investigating csa violations in this manner leads the agency to encounter persons engaged in criminal activities involving marijuana , dea does not alter its approach if such persons claim at some point their crimes are "medically" justified . to do so would be to give legal effect to an excuse considered by the text of federal law and the united states supreme court to be of no moment . because nearly all arrests and prosecutions for marijuana possession are handled by state and local law enforcement officers , patients and caregivers in the medical marijuana states can , as a practical matter , possess medical marijuana without fear of arrest and imprisonment . dea enforcement actions against medical marijuana dispensaries — as occurred in san francisco shortly after the raich decision was announced — can , however , make it more difficult for patients to obtain the drug . the situation that grinspoon and bakalar described in 1995 in the journal of the american medical association persists a decade later: "at present , the greatest danger in medical use of marihuana is its illegality , which imposes much anxiety and expense on suffering people , forces them to bargain with illicit drug dealers , and exposes them to the threat of criminal prosecution. doctors , not the federal government , know what ' s best for their patients . if a state decides to allow doctors to recommend proven treatments for their patients , then the federal government has no rightful place in the doctor ' s office .