5426 , as enacted by p.l . 798 / s. 400 ; and s. 239 effectively would have repealed the current restriction that ships entering cuba cannot enter a u.s. port for six months . this would allow such vessels to transport u.s. agricultural and medical shipments to cuba . some bills would have retained restrictions or prohibitions on agricultural / medical product exports to cuba to meet broader export control and national security objectives . in most of these bills , the referenced provisions were part of broader legislative efforts to modify or terminate some or all aspects of the u.s. embargo on cuba . among other recommendations offered to change u.s. policy toward cuba , the bipartisan house cuba working group on may 15 , 2002 , proposed ( 1 ) allowing the private financing of u.s. agricultural and medical exports , and ( 2 ) repealing the statutory ban on any ship that visits cuba from calling on an american port for 180 days . the bush administration "strongly opposed" the senate - passed farm bill provision ( section 355 of s. 1731 ) that would have repealed the prohibition on private u.s. financing of u.s. sales of agricultural commodities to cuba . the administration based its stance on its view that cuba continues to deny basic civil rights to its citizens and rejects global efforts to combat terrorism . reflecting this perspective , senator bob smith during floor debate offered an amendment to require the president to certify to congress that cuba's government is not involved in supporting acts of international terrorism before the cuba - specific prohibition is repealed . a second - degree amendment offered by senator torricelli to also require presidential certification that all convicted felons living in cuba have been returned to the united states before the prohibition is removed fell , when the senate on december 18 , 2001 tabled the smith amendment ( 61-33 ) . the senate provision was a contentious issue in the subsequent farm bill conference held to resolve differences with the house measure , which did not contain a comparable provision . 173 and section 335 of s. 1731 ( the senate agriculture committee's farm bill ) simply would have repealed the prohibition on private u.s. financing of agricultural sales to cuba . seven measures ( section 2 ( h ) of h.r . 797 / s. 402 ; section 3 ( f ) of h.r . 798 / s. 400 ; titles i and ii of h.r . 2138 / s. 1017 ; section 1 ( f ) of h.r . 2662 ; s. 171 ; and s. 239 ) were broader in their coverage , proposing to drop 3 provisions in tsra . these are ( 1 ) the requirement that eligible exports to cuba be licensed in advance , ( 2 ) the prohibitions on u.s. government assistance / financing of food and medical product sales and on private financing of agricultural sales to cuba , and ( 3 ) the prohibition on tourist travel to cuba .