appendix a . softwood lumber from canada: dumping margins appendix b . softwood lumber from canada: subsidy rate . the u.s. industry then withdrew its petition . in september 1991 , the canadian government announced that it would withdraw from the mou because most of the provinces had increased their stumpage fees . the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) responded by beginning a section 301 investigation , pending completion of a new cvd investigation by the doc and the itc . in march 1992 , the doc issued a preliminary subsidy finding of 14.48% ad valorem , with a final determination in may establishing a 6.51% ad valorem subsidy leading to a 6.51% ad valorem duty . in july 1992 , the itc issued a final determination that the u.s. industry had been materially injured by canadian lumber imports . the canadian federal government appealed both the doc and the itc final determinations to binational review panels established under chapter 19 of the united states - canada free trade agreement ( fta ) , which had entered into force on january 1 , 1989 . in may 1993 , the binational panel reviewing the subsidy determination remanded the doc finding for further analysis , and in september , the doc revised its finding to 11.54% ad valorem . in december , the binational subsidy panel again remanded the doc finding and ordered the doc to find no subsidies . in january 1994 , the doc complied with the order . using a provision of the fta , the ustr requested an extraordinary challenge committee ( ecc ) to review the binational panel decisions , but the ecc was dismissed in august 1994 for failing to meet fta standards . the doc then revoked the cvd , and in october , the ustr announced that it would terminate the section 301 action . two events in september of 1994 induced canada to negotiate restrictions on its lumber exports to the united states . first , the u.s. lumber industry filed a lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of the binational panel review process , now contained in the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) . the remaining $1 billion is being split between the members of the u.s . coalition for fair lumber imports ( $500 million ) , a proposed bilateral industry council charged with improving north american lumber markets ( $50 million ) , and jointly agreed "meritorious initiatives," including assistance for timber - reliant communities , low - income housing and disaster relief ( such as aid to victims of hurricane katrina ) , and promotion of sustainable forest management practices ( $450 million ) . on october 12 , 2006 , the ustr announced that the three meritorious initiatives would be the united states endowment for forestry and communities , inc. ( $200 million ) , habitat for humanity international ( $100 million ) , and the american forest foundation ( $150 million ) . second , the president submitted implementing legislation for the gatt uruguay round agreements , which explicitly approved the president's statement of administrative action ( saa ) accompanying the proposed legislation , the document containing language indicating that because of canadian practices , lumber imports from canada could be subject to a cvd .