760 was reported out of committee . s. 66 would have required the secretary of the army to validate claims by filipinos that they performed military service in the philippine islands during world war ii that would qualify them for benefits under u.s. law and issue a certificate of service . s. 1315 , as passed by the senate , incorporated provisions from s. 57 . s. 1315 would have altered current law to deem certain service with philippine forces during world war ii as active service and establish rates for the improved pension and the death pension for veterans who served with the philippine forces and their survivors living outside the united states . under the provisions of s. 1315 , single filipino veterans living outside the united states would receive $3,600 a year , married veterans would receive $4,500 a year , and veterans' survivors would receive $2,400 a year . however , under the bill , veterans living outside the united states who are eligible for , or receiving , the social security benefit for world war ii veterans living overseas would not be not eligible for the new improved pension rates . the bill also would not have applied the current income or net worth limitations for the improved pension and the death pension for veterans who served with the philippine forces and their survivors living outside the united states . in addition , the bill would not have required any veteran who served with the philippine forces or their survivors receiving other federal benefits at the time of enactment to apply for the improved pension or the death pension if receiving the new benefits would have made them ineligible for their other federal benefits or reduced the amount of their other federal benefits . s. 1315 provided that disability compensation ( for service - connected disabilities ) would be paid to all recipients at the same rate regardless of residence , while maintaining the general payment rate of 50 cents per dollar for other benefits to filipino veterans and survivors living outside the united states . on september 22 , 2008 , the house passed an amended version of s. 1315 that did not contain the filipino benefit provisions . 6897 , as passed by the house on september 23 , 2008 , would have provided a one - time payment to filipino veterans who served in the commonwealth army of the philippines , recognized guerrilla forces , and new philippine scouts . the payment would be $15,000 for u.s. citizens and $9,000 for non - u.s citizens . payments are made from the filipino veterans equity compensation fund and are subject to funds being available ( appropriated ) . 110-329 appropriated $198 million for the filipino veterans equity compensation fund . the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l . 111-5 ) authorizes a one - time payment from the filipino veterans equity compensation fund to filipino veterans who served in the commonwealth army of the philippines , recognized guerrilla forces , and new philippine scouts . the one - time payment is $15,000 for u.s. citizens and $9,000 for non - u.s citizens . filipino veterans currently receiving benefits will continue to receive those benefits .