exempt under h.r . 1317 , would be information held by such agencies as the federal bureau of investigation , the central intelligence agency , the defense intelligence agency , the national geospatial - intelligence agency , and the national security agency . the ongoing activities — to inventory agency activities , to oversee agency policies and procedures , to clarify terminology , and to develop professional groups' codes of conduct and voluntary control procedures — may foster practices that are compatible with the continuous growth of scientific knowledge and dynamics in the emergence of new threats . competing stakeholder demands will continue to confront congress and the executive branch as policies are refined to balance security and access to scientific information . appendix a. illustrations of federal agency controls on sensitive information the following information illustrates how agencies define sbu information and the procedures they use to control it . because agency policies are difficult to obtain , the information in this section is meant to be illustrative and is limited to what is readily accessible . it divides agency descriptions into four categories: ( 1 ) agencies that use the definition of "sensitive" as found in the computer security act ; ( 2 ) agencies that use fisma guidelines or risk - based procedures to develop information security policies ; ( 3 ) agencies that mix use of sbu and fisma concepts ; and ( 4 ) agencies that use unique definitions . agencies that use the definition of "sensitive" as found in the computer security act ( csa ) some agencies use the csa definition of sensitive , which identifies information based on its content , not on the risk of release . department of homeland security ( dhs ) the department of homeland security in a management directive applicable within the agency , released first in 2004 and then revised in january 2005 , cited the csa , p.l . 100-235 , and repeated the law's now rescinded definition of "sensitive information" as the first element of policy guiding the directive . it does not necessarily endorse use of this definition but says that "specific , standard criteria and terminology defining the types of information warranting designation as 'sensitive information' does not exist within the federal government . such designations are left to the discretion of each individual agency. office of management and budget ( omb ) appendix iii , "security of federal automated information resources," of omb circular a - 130 , transmittal memorandum #4 , management of federal information resources , which is dated november 28 , 2000 , but is identified on the omb website in november 2005 as the current circular , references the csa , but not the fisma act . the appendix establishes "a minimum set of controls to be included in federal automated information security programs ; assigns federal agency responsibilities for the security of automated information ; and links agency automated information security programs and agency management control systems established in accordance with omb circular no .