the burden is on the agency to sustain its action . on december 14 , 2005 , the president issued executive order 13392 , entitled "improving agency disclosure of information," and which contains several statements of foia policy and specific planning and reporting requirements for federal agencies . executive order 13392 directs federal agencies to improve their foia operations and designates a chief foia officer for each agency's administration of the foia . the "critical infrastructure information act of 2002," ( "ciia" ) is found in subtitle b of title ii of the homeland security act of 2002 . ciia consists of a group of provisions that address the circumstances under which the department of homeland security may obtain , use , and disclose critical infrastructure information as part of a critical infrastructure protection program . the ciia was enacted , in part , to respond to the need for the federal government and owners and operators of the nation's critical infrastructures to share information on vulnerabilities and threats , and to promote information sharing between the private and public sectors in order to protect critical assets . ciia establishes several limitations on the disclosure of critical infrastructure information voluntarily submitted to dhs . the law governing ssi originated with the air transportation security act of 1974 ( 1974 act ) , which delegated authority for transportation security to various agencies within the department of transportation ( dot ) . the 1974 act specifically authorized the federal aviation administration ( faa ) to: prohibit disclosure of any information obtained or developed in the conduct of research and development activities ... if in the opinion of the administrator the disclosure of such information— ( a ) would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy... ; ( b ) would reveal trade secrets or privileged or confidential commercial or financial information obtained from any person ; or ( c ) would be detrimental to the safety of persons traveling in air transportation . the faa implemented this authority by promulgating regulations , which , inter alia , established a category of information known as ssi . as late as 1997 , the dot's definition of ssi included "records and information ... obtained or developed during security activities or research and development activities. encompassed within this definition were airport and air carrier security programs , as well as specific details concerning aviation security measures . consistent with this grant of authority , the faa limited the applicability of the ssi regulation to airport operators , air carriers , and other air transportation related entities and personnel . after the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , congress enacted the aviation and transportation security act ( atsa ) , which , in addition to creating new security mandates , established the transportation security administration ( tsa ) within dot , and transferred the responsibility for aviation security to the newly created under secretary of transportation for security . among the legal authorities transferred to the under secretary was the protection of certain information vital to transportation security , or ssi . in addition to transferring ssi classification authority to tsa , the atsa eliminated the statute's specific reference to air transportation , thereby expanding the categories of information that can be classified as ssi .