the outgoing u.s . ambassador put it even more bluntly , saying , "india needs to be asking itself: is it delivering on the global partnership ? there's no doubt this needs to be a two - way street. commerce department officials and the white house chief of staff have more recently admonished new delhi to move forward with economic reforms . of particular recent concern to secretary locke and other u.s. officials is new delhi's restrictions on imports of solar power technology . the central government plans to disburse some $20 billion in subsidies to power - plant developers this decade , but is barring importation of foreign - made solar panels , making it difficult for u.s. firms to get a share of the market . in june 2011 , treasury secretary tim geithner led the u.s. delegation at the second meeting of the u.s. - india financial and trade partnership in washington , dc , where he and his indian counterpart , finance minister pranab mukherjee , agreed to further expand bilateral trade and investment links . while acknowledging that reducing barriers to investment was politically challenging for the indian government , he reiterated the u.s. contention that easing such barriers would benefit both national economies and be an important step toward their "integration. inadequate intellectual property rights protection is a long - standing issue between the united states and india . india remained on the u.s. special 301 "priority watch list" in 2011 for failing to provide an adequate level of ipr protection or enforcement , or market access for persons relying on intellectual property protection . the report recognized the introduction of a copyright amendment bill as an improvement in the regulatory regime , but expressed concerns about its compliance with international standards . the united states also acknowledged india's progress on enforcement , but maintained that piracy and counterfeiting , including the counterfeiting of pharmaceuticals , remains widespread . india remains critical of u.s. efforts to pressure developing nations , including india , to adopt laws and regulations governing pharmaceuticals that are overly supportive of the major pharmaceutical companies and could potentially deny poorer nations of access to important medicines . the year 2003 saw the inaugural session of the u.s. - india high - technology cooperation group ( htcg ) , a forum in which officials can discuss a wide range of issues relevant to creating the conditions for more robust bilateral high technology commerce . the 8 th htcg meeting was held in new delhi , india , on july 19 , 2011 , with discussion focusing on dual - use technology and ways to foster greater research and development cooperation . in 2007 , india and the united states concluded a bilateral 123 agreement on civil nuclear cooperation . while the accord addressed many concerns about india's nuclear program and trade in dual - use technology , there remain concerns in the united states about india's ability to prevent the distribution of potentially dangerous technology and equipment to undesirable recipients . since 1998 , a number of indian entities have been subjected to case - by - case licensing requirements and appear on the u.s. export control "entity list" of foreign end users involved in weapons proliferation activities .