the house bill has no disaster provisions . the house bill provides $17.8 billion in "net" discretionary appropriations , about $1 billion above fy2006 . because the bills limit certain mandatory programs , the "gross" discretionary amounts are higher . the house's $18.4 billion "gross" discretionary subtotal is 1.5% less than the senate's , and 0.7% less than in fy2006 . for mandatory programs , the house bill includes $76.1 billion , $300 million less than the senate bill . this would be down nearly $7 billion from fy2006 , mostly due to changing economic conditions . the agriculture appropriations bill includes all of usda ( except the forest service ) , plus the food and drug administration and the commodity futures trading commission . because the fy2007 fiscal year began before most of the appropriations bills were enacted , including the agriculture appropriations bill , congress has passed three continuing resolutions to continue funding the government . the first provided temporary funding through november 17 , 2006 ( division b of p.l . a continuing resolution ( p.l . 109-383 ) is providing temporary funding for fy2007 through february 15 , 2007 , at the lower of either the fy2006 level or the house - passed level in h.r . the full house passed the fy2007 agriculture appropriations bill on may 23 , 2006 ( h.r . the senate - reported bill expanded an amendment in the house - passed bill regarding financial conflicts of interest of fda advisory committee and panel members . adding to the house's prohibiting fda from waiving specific financial conflicts of interest restrictions of individuals serving as voting members of fda advisory committees and panels ; the senate - reported bill would allow such an individual to serve if the hhs secretary were to disclose , on the fda website at least 15 days before the relevant meeting , the nature of the conflict , and the nature and basis of the waiver or any recusal due to the potential for conflict of interest . the senate - reported bill also would require that the fda commissioner submit a semiannual report to senate and house appropriations and authorizing committees and the hhs inspector general that describes , in detail outlined in the amendment , efforts that fda took to find individuals without potential conflicts or interest . not included in the senate - reported bill is a house - passed amendment that would prohibit fda from using funds to prevent individuals , pharmacists , or wholesalers from importing prescription drugs that comply with core requirements of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act . thus , this year's conference committee may face the annual struggle over drug importation: the fy2005 conference report had prohibited fda from using funds to enforce the current statute that bans importation of prescription drugs by parties other than drug companies , and the fy2006 appropriations conferees did not adopt a house amendment that would have allowed prescription drug importation , thus averting a possible veto .