the administration of george h.w . bush had an approval rating for rescission requests considerably below that for president reagan , and about the same overall as that of president ford , with 20% of the total dollars requested approved , and 18% of the total proposals accepted . during the presidential election year of 1992 , however , the use of rescissions became a controversial and highly partisan political issue to an extent not seen since the conflicts of the nixon administration . 100-203 , 101 stat . apparently , president reagan decided not to submit formal rescission requests for fiscal 1988 , which might have been perceived in congress as violating the spirit if not the letter of the agreement . he did , however , send a message to congress identifying "wasteful items earmarked in the fy1988 full - year continuing resolution," with a transmittal letter stating the following: accordingly , i am informally asking that the congress review these projects , appropriations , and other provisions line by line and either rescind or repeal them as soon as possible . i reserve the option of transmitting at a later date either formal rescission proposals or language that would make the funds available for more worthwhile purposes , for any or all of these items . for example , are funds originally proposed for rescission in a special message , but which again become available for obligation before congress permanently rescinds them , to be considered as "congressional approval of a president's request" or as a "rescission initiated by congress" ? supporters of the existing ica framework might note that in 1992 the president was able to gain public attention for his proposed rescissions . table 1 provides data on rescissions from fy1974 through fy2008 as compiled by gao . recesses of more than three days are not counted . in practice , this usually means that funds proposed for rescission not approved by congress become available for obligation after about 60 calendar days , although the period can extend to 75 days or longer . the funds may be withheld from obligation until the 45-day period elapses or congress disapproves the rescission . congress may alter the amount proposed for rescission by the president , either increasing or decreasing it , as well as approving or disapproving the rescission request in toto . section 1017 of the ica establishes expedited procedures for congressional action on "any rescission bill introduced with respect to a special message" submitted by the president . in the fall of 1987 , as a component of legislation to raise the limit on the public debt ( p.l . 100-119 ) that also included changes in the gramm - rudman - hollings act , congress enacted several other budget process reforms as well . section 206 effectively eliminated presidential deferrals for policy reasons . section 207 involved the use of rescission authority . it provides a statutory prohibition against the practice , sometimes used by presidents when congress failed to act on a rescission proposal within the 45-day period , of resubmitting a new rescission proposal covering identical or very similar matter .