however , he disagreed with the court's disposition of the case . the "machine - or - transformation" test has been repeatedly helpful to courts in identifying what is a patentable "process. although the "machine - or - transformation" test has always been a "useful and important clue" for determining patentability of processes , it has never been the "sole test. the court disagrees with state street bank's judgment that anything which produces a "useful , concrete , and tangible result" is patentable . the patent application at issue in bilski v. kappos contained claims that relate to a method of hedging risk in the commodities trading field . the pto examiner rejected the application on the basis that the claims were not directed to patent - eligible subject matter under § 101 of the patent act , a determination that was upheld by the board of patent appeals and interferences ( "board" ) . while the text of § 101 is broad , it is not without limit . the board held that the transformation of "non - physical financial risks and legal liabilities of the commodity provider , the consumer , and the market participants" is not patentable subject matter . in addition , the board found that the claimed process did not produce a "useful , concrete and tangible result. on october 30 , 2008 , the federal circuit issued an opinion in the case , in which it affirmed the board's decision . more importantly , the appellate court's decision clarified the standards concerning patentability of process claims . in so doing , the federal circuit expressly overruled in re alappat , state street bank & trust co. v. signature financial group , and its other prior decisions that relied on the "useful , concrete and tangible result" test for process patent eligibility . instead , the federal circuit announced a different test that was to exclusively govern the eligibility of process claims for patent protection under § 101 of the patent act: a claimed process is surely patent - eligible under § 101 if: ( 1 ) it is tied to a particular machine or apparatus , or ( 2 ) it transforms a particular article into a different state or thing . in applying the "machine - or - transformation" test to the facts in bilski , the federal circuit held that bilski's process claim failed to satisfy the new legal standard , because the process does not transform any article to a different state or thing , nor does it meet the machine implementation part of the test as well . on june 1 , 2009 , the supreme court granted certiorari in bilski to consider two questions: whether the federal circuit erred by holding that a "process" must be tied to a particular machine or apparatus , or transform a particular article into a different state or thing ( "machine - or - transformation" test ) , to be eligible for patenting under 35 u.s.c . § 101 , despite this court's precedent declining to limit the broad statutory grant of patent eligibility for "any" new and useful process beyond excluding patents for "laws of nature , physical phenomena , and abstract ideas.