no more excuses energy act of 2013 . nuclear disaster preparedness act . requires the president to issue guidance for federal response to nuclear disasters , covering specific topics listed in the bill . introduced april 24 , 2013 ; referred to committee on transportation and infrastructure . requires congressional approval of u.s. peaceful nuclear cooperation agreements with countries that do not agree to forgo enrichment and reprocessing . introduced december 12 , 2013 ; referred to committees on foreign affairs and rules . energy exploration and production to achieve national demand ( expand ) act . the case of iran raises perhaps the most critical current question for strengthening the nuclear nonproliferation regime: how can access to sensitive fuel cycle activities ( which could be used to produce fissile material for weapons ) be circumscribed without further alienating non - nuclear weapon states in the npt ? leaders of the international nuclear nonproliferation regime have suggested ways of reining in the diffusion of such inherently dual - use technology , primarily through the creation of incentives not to enrich uranium or reprocess spent fuel . the international community is in the process of evaluating those proposals and may decide upon a mix of approaches . at the same time , there is debate on how to improve the iaea safeguards system and its means of detecting diversion of nuclear material to a weapons program in the face of expanded nuclear power facilities worldwide . ( for more information , see crs report rl34234 , managing the nuclear fuel cycle: policy implications of expanding global access to nuclear power , coordinated by [author name scrubbed]. ) the following tables summarize current funding for doe nuclear energy programs and nrc . the sources for the funding figures are administration budget requests and committee reports on the energy and water development appropriations acts , which fund doe and nrc . the house passed its version of the fy2015 energy and water bill ( h.r . 113-486 ) on july 10 , 2014 . the senate subcommittee on energy and water development appropriations approved a draft fy2015 bill and report on july 24 , 2014 . pending enactment of full - year appropriations , fy2015 funding for these programs is being provided by a continuing resolution ( p.l . energy freedom and economic prosperity act . terminates nuclear energy production tax credit , among other provisions . house bill introduced january 15 , 2013 ; referred to committee on ways and means . senate bill introduced may 1 , 2014 ; referred to committee on finance . includes provisions to prohibit nrc from considering nuclear waste storage when licensing new nuclear facilities , and to establish a tax credit for obtaining nuclear component manufacturing certification . introduced may 21 , 2013 ; referred to multiple committees . energy and water development and related agencies appropriations act , 2014 . provides funding for doe nuclear programs and nrc . house bill introduced july 2 , 2013 ; reported as original measure by committee on appropriations july 2 , 2013 ( h.rept . 113-135 ) ; passed house july 10 , 2013 , by vote of 227-198 .