congress did not override any of these vetoes . delayed in the consideration of major legislation by the extraordinary events of 1973 and 1974 — the watergate investigations , the resignation of vice president spiro t. agnew , the nomination and confirmation of gerald r. ford to be vice president , and the resignation of president nixon and succession of president ford — congress reconvened on november 18 , 1974 , in an effort to clear a long list of important items . although congressional leaders had indicated that only the most critical bills would be considered , including approval of the nomination of nelson a. rockefeller to be vice president , president ford greeted the returning congress with a 10-page list of legislation he wanted passed before the session expired . in the end , congress did consider a wide range of issues before it adjourned on december 20 , 1974 , but its actions were not always to president ford's liking . the rockefeller nomination was approved by mid - december , but congress overrode presidential vetoes of both a vocational rehabilitation bill and a measure amending the freedom of information act . congress also approved , and the president signed , a bill that nullified a prior agreement giving former president nixon control over the tapes and papers of his administration . in other actions , congress approved a long - delayed trade reform bill giving the president broad authority to negotiate trade agreements , act on trade barriers , and provide import relief to workers , industries , and communities ; established a federal policy for research on development of non - nuclear sources of energy ; and cleared legislation making continuing appropriations for federal agencies whose regular appropriations had not been enacted . in 1980 , some observers contended that postponing final congressional action on a lengthy agenda of major issues until a post - election session would accomplish two goals: first , it would delay potentially difficult pre - election votes on budget matters , and second , it would allow incumbents extra time to campaign . the large republican gains on election day were thought to complicate the prospects for a productive lame duck program , however , especially with such important issues as budget reconciliation , several major appropriations bills , and landmark environmental legislation still left for consideration . in fact , during the lame duck session , from november 12 to december 16 , 1980 , congress completed action on many of the issues that had been left unfinished in the regular session , including the following: a budget resolution and a budget reconciliation measure ; five regular appropriations bills , although one was subsequently vetoed ; a second continuing resolution was approved to continue funding for other parts of the government ; an alaska lands bill and a "superfund" bill to help clean up chemical contamination ; a measure extending general revenue sharing for three years ; a measure that made disposal of low - level nuclear waste a state responsibility ; and changes to military pay and benefits , and authority for the president to call 100,000 military reservists to active duty without declaring a national emergency .