table 1 . u.s. drug - related foreign assistance to the andeanregion , fy2000-fy2006 ( in millions u.s. $ ) source: congressional budget justifications , foreign operations fy2002-fy2006 ; u.s.department of state's washington file , "u.s. support for plan colombia , fy2000 emergencysupplemental appropriations," july 5 , 2000 . note: aci figures reflect funding for all nations considered a part of the andean counterdruginitiative . fmf and imet figures are for bolivia , colombia , ecuador , and peru . fy2006 figuresfor fmf and imet are amounts proposed by the administration in its budget request . aci funds are divided between programs that support eradication and interdiction efforts,as well as those focused on alternative development and democratic institution building . on theinterdiction side , programs train and support national police and military forces , providecommunications and intelligence systems , support the maintenance and operations of host countryaerial eradication aircraft , and improve infrastructure related to counternarcotics activities . on thealternative development side , funds support development programs in drug crop growing areas,including infrastructure , and marketing and technical support for alternative crops . it also includesassistance for internally displaced persons , promotion of the rule of law , and expansion of judicialcapabilities . table 2 . aci funding eradication versus alternativedevelopment , fy2000-fy2006 ( in millions u.s. $ ) note: eradication figures include interdiction programs ; ad figures include institution buildingprograms . the fy2006 figures are the amounts provided in the fy2006 foreign operationsappropriations act , p.l . other figures are drawn from foreign operations annualcongressional budget justifications , fy2002 through fy2006 . congress has expressed a number of concerns with regard to eradication , including thefollowing: the health and environmental effects of aerial spraying ; the reliability of drug cropestimates ; and the effectiveness and sustainability of eradication . with regard to alternativedevelopment , congress has expressed interest in its effectiveness ; its relationship with eradication ; and the long - term sustainability of programs . both eradication and alternative development face anumber of challenges , some of which are general to the region , and others that are specific to thecountry in which they are conducted . bolivia is the third largest producer ofcoca . the united states has made a significant commitment of funds and material support to helpthe andean region fight drug trafficking since 2000 . ( see table 1 . ) congress passed legislationproviding $1.3 billion in assistance for fy2000 ( p.l . 106-246 ) for colombia and its neighbors . from fy2000 through fy2005 , the united states has provided a total of about $4.3 billion from theandean counterdrug initiative account . for fy2006 , the administration requested , and congressapproved , $734.5 million in aci funding ( p.l . the department of defense has spentapproximately $1.2 billion from fy2000 through fy2005 from its counternarcotics account,managed by the u.s. army southern command . the state department's international narcoticscontrol and law enforcement ( inl ) bureau is responsible for managing the aci account . thecountries considered part of the aci include bolivia , brazil , colombia , ecuador , panama , peru , andvenezuela , ( 1 ) with mostfunding allocated for colombia , peru and bolivia .