small businesses . for fy2007 ( mdufma , as modified by mdufsa ) , firms with annual gross sales or receipts of $30 million or less , including the gross sales and receipts of all affiliates , partners , and parent firms , qualify for a fee waiver for their first pma . firms with annual gross sales or receipts of $100 million or less , including the gross sales and receipts of all affiliates , partners , and parent firms , qualify for lower rates for all applications that are subject to a fee . the small business discounted fee schedule is important to the medical device industry ; according to gao , the vast majority of companies that paid mdufma fees in 2006 qualified as small businesses: of the 697 companies that qualified as small businesses under the mdufma user fee program in fiscal year 2006 , 656 , or about 95% , had revenues at or below $30 million — the threshold for small business qualification originally set by mdufma in 2002 . of the 41 companies that had revenues above $30 million but at or below the current threshold of $100 million , 35 had revenues above $30 million but at or below $70 million . of the 697 companies that qualified as small businesses in fiscal year 2006 , two - thirds submitted at least one device application subject to user fees during that year . these companies were responsible for about 20% of the approximately 4,500 device applications subject to user fees that were submitted to fda in fiscal year 2006 . mdufa 2007 would no longer consider the assets of partners and parent firms in the small business qualification calculation , and would further reduce the application fees paid by small business — the majority of device manufacturers . for example , a small business would pay 50% of the standard fee when it submits a 510 ( k ) , compared with 80% at present , and 25% of the standard fee when it submits a pma , compared with 38% at present . fda would also continue to provide a fee waiver for the first pma submitted by a qualified small business applicant . in addition , mdufa 2007 would allow foreign businesses to qualify for small business fees and fee waivers . modular pma refunds . manufacturers may choose to submit to fda the large amount of information required in a pma in sections , over time , in a modular pma . in the event that a manufacturer chooses to withdraw a modular application before fda takes its first action on the application or before all of the parts have been submitted , both bills provide that the secretary may make a partial refund of the filing fee . s. 1082 specifies that the secretary would have the sole authority to make refund decisions , and that such decisions would not be reviewable . according to the terms of mdufma , fda may only use fees collected under mdufma for specified purposes ( ffdca § 737 ( 5 ) ) . most of these are related to decreasing the time required for fda to determine whether a medical device should reach the marketplace . ( see table 9 . )