which sources to regulate . how to allocate emissions allowances . whether to allow the use of offsets as compliance alternatives . whether to include a safety valve and , if so , how high to set it . state programs can inform federal policymakers in other ways . the political process by which states create climate change policy can be enlightening and perhaps adaptable on the federal level . for instance , by examining the development and passage of state legislation , federal policymakers may better understand the motivations of different stakeholders and learn how best to frame the issues . emission reduction programs will likely have economic effects on consumers , businesses and manufacturers , and possibly interstate commerce . the most immediate effects of the emissions programs ( at least the ones furthest along in development ) will be on the automotive manufacturing and electricity generation sectors . for automotive manufacturers , the california motor vehicle regulations — which at least 16 states have indicated they plan to implement if epa approves the waiver ( discussed above ) — will likely have the effect of dividing the market , potentially requiring the manufacture of a different class of cars to meet the new standards ( scheduled to apply in 2009 ) . for automotive companies , this raises the issues of the technical means of meeting the standard , marketing , ensuring compliance , and pricing . depending on how the emission limits are to be met , they may also influence fueling infrastructure . state governments will need resources to enforce the standards . consumers in regulated states may face higher prices for vehicles . regarding the electric power industry , the mandatory reduction requirements will likely promote generation from low carbon - intensive fuels , while curtailing generation from high carbon - intensive fuels , such as coal . the ghg performance standards in california and washington will reach into neighboring states as well , effectively barring electricity imports generated by conventional coal - fired power plants . because coal - fired plants tend to produce lower - cost electricity , the result of these requirements may be to increase electricity prices within the states that limit emissions , and possibly lower prices in states without such emission standards . if the ghg limitations lead to energy price increases in the regulated states , businesses and manufacturers may factor this cost into location decisions . there is some concern that regulated industries will have a financial incentive to move ( and thus transfer jobs ) to states ( or nations ) that do not limit ghg emissions . others fear that emission limits will raise the cost of living and doing business within those states , although in theory such effects can be at least partially addressed through the design of the emissions reduction program . one concern shared by many observers , particularly industry stakeholders , is that state climate change programs ( in lieu of a federal program ) will create a patchwork of regulations across the nation . a patchwork system of standards may hinder a company's efficiency and possibly create economic burdens for firms that operate in multiple states . this is based upon the combination of two conclusions .