clinical validity . the clinical validity of a genetic test is its ability to accurately diagnose or predict the risk of a particular clinical outcome . a genetic test's clinical validity relies on an established connection between the dna variant being tested for and a specific health outcome . clinical validity is a measure of how well a test performs in a clinical rather than laboratory setting . many measures are used to assess clinical validity , but the two of key importance are clinical sensitivity and positive predictive value . genetic tests can be either diagnostic or predictive and , therefore , the measures used to assess the clinical validity of a genetic test must take this into consideration . for the purposes of a genetic test , positive predictive value can be defined as the probability that a person with a positive test result ( i.e. it may sometimes be desirable to limit the definition only to predictive , and not diagnostic , genetic testing because predictive tests may raise public policy concerns that diagnostic tests do not ( see " what type of information can genetic tests provide ? on the other hand , policymakers wishing to avoid raising potentially controversial issues associated with predictive genetic testing may instead choose a definition limited to diagnostic testing . in still other cases , it may be desirable to limit the definition to only analysis of specific material , such as dna , rna , and chromosomes , but not metabolites or proteins , for example , to help avoid capturing certain types of tests , such as some newborn screening tests , in the scope of a proposed law . policies extending protection against discrimination — for example , the genetic information nondiscrimination act ( gina , p.l . 110-233 ) — may aim to be broader ( eg , including predictive tests , not limiting the definition to tests analyzing only certain materials ) . on the other hand , policies addressing the stringency of oversight of clinical laboratory or in vitro diagnostic tests , of which genetic tests are a subset , may aim to be more limited ( eg , only those tests that are considered to be higher risk ) . in certain cases , the lack of an accepted definition for "genetic test" may affect policymaking . for example , in discussions about whether to add a genetic testing specialty under the clinical laboratory improvement amendments of 1988 ( clia , p.l . 100-578 ) , the law regulating clinical laboratories , it was decided not to do so , partially based on the fact that there is "no widely accepted definition of a 'genetic test.' most clinical genetic tests are for rare disorders , but increasingly , tests are becoming available to determine susceptibility to common , complex diseases and to predict response to medication . with respect to health - related tests ( i.e. , excluding tests used for paternity , forensic purposes , such as "dna fingerprinting," or for ancestry ) , there are two general types of genetic testing: ( 1 ) diagnostic and ( 2 ) predictive . diagnostic genetic tests can be utilized to identify the presence or absence of a disease .