other bills ( h.r . 3453 ) would take a different approach ; they would require that administration officials revise and update the criteria currently used to determine whether a major disaster declaration will be issued . also , one bill ( h.r . 4297 ) would require that the president consider the needs of rural areas marked by less dense land development in determining eligibility for assistance . revisions to the criteria for declarations could result in expanded eligibility for aid , or , as discussed below , possibly lead to reduced federal expenditures . some might contend that any such expansion of eligibility would result in considerably higher federal disaster relief expenditures as private , for - profit entities , newly designated property owners , or entire states would increasingly turn to federal grants in lieu of relying upon insurance policies or agreeing to repay loans . accordingly , opponents of the proposals might argue that just as the 2000 amendments expanded certain federal assistance ( largely through the establishment of a new pre - disaster hazard mitigation program ) and reduced costs in some areas , the pending legislation should balance increased aid proposals with cost - cutting measures . others would contend that amendments that would expand the boundaries of eligibility are appropriate as state and local governments struggle with budget problems , property owners face increased costs of credit , and policyholders face more expensive insurance premiums and more stringent insurance requirements . also , they may contend that just as some of the facilities newly designated as eligible for public assistance funds in 1988 , notably educational and health care institutions , provide services comparable to those available through public or non - profit organizations , the institutions identified in the pending legislation also provide public services critical to a community's revival . such a conclusion , it might be argued , is consistent with congressional findings in the statute . as discussed below , precedent exists for the provision of such assistance . on at least two occasions , congress appropriated funds to help private corporations deemed to be particularly affected after disasters — when utility companies' electricity lines were damaged in 1998 ice storms , and when other companies lost infrastructure in the terrorist attacks of 2001 in new york city . in the face of record deficits and calls to reduce federal spending , members of congress may elect to evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of enacting a means test before housing or other needs assistance ( referred to as ona ) are to be provided pursuant to section 408 of the stafford act . some may argue that means testing should not be used after a disaster when the full extent of losses is unknown , seemingly wealthy households will face new expenses , and administrative workloads will increase . others may contend that such thresholds would result in lower federal expenditures , be consistent with the existing provision that federal aid not duplicative assistance from other sources , and encourage individuals and families to allocate personal resources to unanticipated needs . the most significant action taken by the 111 th congress regarding stafford act policy involved the authority of the u.s .