term of appointment . faca a pplicability . advisory bodies established in the executive branch that report to the president are subject to the federal advisory committee act ( faca ) , which governs their creation , administration , and management . advisory bodies that are appointed by congress and report only to congress are not specifically bound by the requirements set forth in faca . because many commissions involve both congressional and presidential participation , some of the entities in this report may be governed by faca . occasionally , statutes creating congressional advisory bodies will incorporate explicit statutory language exempting a commission from faca requirements , in whole or in part . membership appointment structure . each entry includes the advisory body's membership appointment scheme . the particulars of congressional involvement in the appointment process are varied . the statutory language of membership appointment schemes detail a wide range of membership patterns that may be of interest to lawmakers who might be contemplating creation of advisory bodies . in the legislative branch , the individuals most commonly empowered to make appointments to commissions and similar bodies are the speaker of the house , the president or president pro tempore of the senate , and the majority and minority leaders of the house and senate . the majority leader of the house is less often included in these mechanisms , since the appointment role of the minority leader may be paired with the speaker's appointment role . for each board , the appointment structure is outlined , with the participation of members of congress highlighted . for member appointments , the appointer's role is provided in ( parentheses ) in the left - hand column . additionally , the role of noncongressional officials is also provided . most ongoing congressional advisory bodies have fixed terms of appointment set by statute . statutes creating temporary commissions often provide that appointments are for the "life of the commission. additionally , commissions are divided into two groups: temporary advisory commissions ( eg , those with a statutory end date ) and permanent entities . the more than 90 entries on the following pages highlight the broad diversity of matters congress has felt deserved examination beyond the established organizational structure of congress . entries are arranged alphabetically . citations to the u.s. code and the statutes at large are provided where particulars relating to the scope , purpose , and composition of these bodies may be located . the internet address of the entity's website is also provided , if available . ยง72a or under chamber rules or resolutions . the membership of these entities , such as the advisory commission to study the consumer price index , might be selected by the chairman and ranking minority member of the committee concerned , and these bodies are generally empaneled for short durations . this report also does not include caucuses , observer groups , or working groups created by means other than statute . tracking the provisions of law that create congressional advisory bodies is an inherently inexact exercise . although many such bodies are created in easily identifiable freestanding statutes , others are contained within the statutory language of lengthy omnibus legislation .