some options are . according to the wmd commission , the ead - i controlled only 4% of fbi's spending on intelligence . the wmd commission also concluded that if the fbi's ead - i does not directly control the national intelligence program resources within the fbi , then the dni's influence over the fbi's national intelligence program is tenuous , which may be inconsistent with his stated budgetary authorities outlined in p.l . the bulk of the bureau's spending on intelligence lies outside the ead - i's control , residing principally in the counterterrorism and counterintelligence divisions . the june 29 , 2005 white house memorandum stipulates that the attorney general shall ".. . ensure that the fbi's national security service's intelligence activities , both at headquarters and in the field , are funded through the national intelligence program...." this appears to be consistent with the more specific language outlined in title i , section 102a ( 2 ) ( c ) of p.l . 108-458 which provides the dni's authority to "provide ... guidance," "develop and determine," and "present" a national intelligence program budget . in a related matter , the internal structure of the fbi's budget might also be more clearly delineated to specify the sum total of its intelligence spending . currently , the bottom line figure in the fbi budget's "intelligence decision unit" does not represent the total of fbi spending on intelligence related matters . how will any disputes between the fbi director and the dni over resources within the national security service be resolved ? finally , how will the national security service relate to and interact with the fbi's criminal and cyber divisions ? the legislative options depend , to some extent , on which school of thought one finds most compelling . not surprisingly , skeptics will advocate more far - reaching options , and optimists will favor more narrowly targeted changes focused on implementation . consistency in congressional procedures for funding elements of the intelligence community , however , may not necessarily be a compelling argument for change , particularly if congressional oversight and support of the fbi's intelligence program is determined to be best served by existing arrangements . adherents to the skeptics school of thought find problematic the argument that there is strong synergy between the intelligence and law enforcement disciplines . moreover , they believe the civil liberties argument for the fbi maintaining the domestic intelligence mission may have been weakened by p.l . 108-458 , as it provided the dni with substantially enhanced authority over domestic intelligence through personnel and budgetary means . if one is in the optimist / "synergist" camp , one of the greatest threats to the fbi's intelligence program may be undue turnover in leadership at the senior most levels of the fbi , which could undermine the institutionalization of change . a close second in terms of threats to the reform efforts is attrition rates among intelligence professionals , and the potential to lose substantial numbers of newly hired analysts .