firm ? ; ( 2 ) how should national security be defined ? ; and ( 3 ) which types of economic activities should be targeted for a cfius review ? whether any foreign person engaged in a transaction has a history of complying with u.s. laws and regulations ; 4 . control of u.s. industries and commercial activity that affect u.s. capability and capacity to meet the requirements of national security , including the availability of human resources , products , technology , materials , and other supplies and services ; 5 . the extent to which a transaction is likely to expose personally identifiable information , genetic information , or other sensitive data of u.s. citizens to access by a foreign government or person that may exploit that information to threaten national security ; and 6 . whether a transaction is likely to exacerbate or create new cybersecurity vulnerabilities or is likely to result in a foreign government gaining a significant new capability to engage in malicious cyber - enabled activities . according to the annual report filed by cfius , cfius activity dropped sharply in 2009 as a result of tight credit markets and hesitation by banks to fund acquisitions and takeovers during the global financial crisis , but rebounded in 2010 , as indicated in table 2 . during the eight - year period 2008-2015 ( the latest years for which such data are available ) , foreign investors sent 925 notices to cfius of plans to acquire , take over , or merge with a u.s. firm . in comparison , the commerce department reports there were over 1,800 foreign investment transactions in 2015 , slightly less than half of which were acquisitions of existing u.s. firms . acquisitions , however , accounted for 96% of the total annual value of foreign direct investments . of the investment transactions notified during the 2008-2015 period , about 4% were withdrawn during the initial 30-day review ; about 36% of the total notified transactions required a 45-day investigation . also , of the transactions investigated , about 6% were withdrawn before a final determination was reached . as a result , of the 925 proposed investment transactions notified to cfius during this period , 822 transactions , or 89% of the transactions , were completed . on january 23 , 2008 , president bush issued executive order 13456 implementing the law . of these issues , the most controversial and far - reaching was the lack of a definition of national security . as originally drafted , the provision would have considered investments which affected the "national security and essential commerce" of the united states . the term "essential commerce" was the focus of intense debate between congress and the reagan administration . the treasury department , headed by secretary james baker , objected to the exon - florio amendment , and the administration vetoed the first version of the omnibus trade legislation , in part due to its objections to the language in the measure regarding "national security and essential commerce. the reagan administration argued that the language would broaden the definition of national security beyond the traditional concept of military / defense to one which included a strong economic component .