pursuant to 18 u.s.c . § 3553 ( b ) , the guidelines were mandatory and thus create a statutory maximum for the purpose of apprendi v. new jersey , 530 u.s. 466 ( 2000 ) , which had condemned mandatory judicial fact - finding for purposes of imposing a sentence beyond the statutory maximum . the court had applied apprendi 's reasoning to a state sentencing guideline system in blakely v. washington , and the rationale applied with equal force to the federal guideline system in booker . under the then current administration of the guidelines , judges , rather than juries , were required to find sentence determining facts , and thus the practice was unconstitutional . the second part , written by justice breyer for a different 5-4 majority ( justices rehnquist , o'connor , kennedy , and ginsburg ) remedies this defect by holding that the guidelines are advisory , thereby making it necessary for the courts to consider the guidelines along with other traditional factors when deciding on a sentence , and also finding that the appellant courts may review sentences for "reasonableness. driven by the court's first holding , it "excises" ( through severance and excision of two provisions ) 18 u.s.c . § 3553 ( b ) ( 1 ) and § 3742 ( e ) from the sentencing reform act and declares the guidelines are now "advisory. pursuant to § 3553 ( a ) , district judges need only to "consider" the guideline range as one of many factors , including the need for the sentence to provide just punishment for the offense ( § 3553 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( a ) , to afford adequate deterrence to criminal conduct ( § 3553 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( b ) , to protect the public from further crimes of the defendant ( § 3553 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( c ) ) , and to avoid unwarranted sentencing disparities among similarly situated defendants ( § 3553 ( a ) ( 6 ) ) . the sentencing reform act , absent the mandate of § 3553 ( b ) ( 1 ) , authorizes the judge to apply his own perceptions of just punishment , deterrence , and protection of the public , even when these differ from the perceptions of the united states sentencing commission . the sentencing reform act continues to provide for appeals from sentencing decisions ( regardless of whether the trial judge sentences are within or outside of the guideline range ) based on an "unreasonableness" standard ( 18 u.s.c . §§ 3553 ( a ) and 3742 ( e ) ( 3 ) ) . after booker , the federal courts wrestled with whether they may or must impose sentences below the guidelines' ranges in crack cocaine cases in view of the united states sentencing commission's conclusions and recommendations , the facts and circumstances of the case , the history and characteristics of the defendant , and the command of 18 u.s.c . § 3553 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( 6 ) to avoid unwarranted sentencing disparity .