from 1959 until 1976 , castro ruled by decree . some have advocated a policy of keeping maximum pressure on the cuban government until reforms are enacted , while continuing efforts to support the cuban people . others argue for an approach , sometimes referred to as constructive engagement , that would lift some u.s. sanctions that they believe are hurting the cuban people , and move toward engaging cuba in dialogue . still others have called for a swift normalization of u.s. - cuban relations by lifting the u.s. embargo . while there has been growing sentiment in congress over the past several years to ease sanctions on cuba , legislative efforts to make changes to the economic embargo have not been enacted . president bush has threatened to veto several appropriations bills if they contained any provisions weakening cuba sanctions . at this juncture , congress and the administration essentially agree that any change in the u.s. sanctions - based policy toward cuba will only be triggered by substantial movement toward democracy on the island . with regard to cuban migration , normalization of relations could bring about change to the u.s. policy , set forth in the cuban refugee act of 1966 ( p.l . 89-732 ) , popularly known as the cuban adjustment act , that allows the attorney general and now the secretary of homeland security to permit undocumented cubans arriving in the united states to stay and adjust to permanent resident status within one year . in 1996 , congress approved legislation ( p.l . lifting these sanctions could have a significant impact on the level of trade between the two countries . cuba's population of 11 million and its two - way foreign trade of almost $9.9 billion in 2005 ( $2.7 billion in exports and almost $7.2 billion in imports ) point to the country becoming the largest u.s. trade partner in the caribbean absent economic sanctions . with the normalization of u.s. - cuban relations , the status of the u.s. naval base at guantanamo bay would most likely change . the mission of the base , which dates back to 1903 , has changed over time and currently includes being the location of a u.s. military prison for detainees in the war against terrorism . as set forth in a 1934 u.s. - cuban treaty , the u.s. presence at guantanamo can only be terminated by mutual agreement or by abandonment by the united states . however , a provision in the cuban liberty and democratic solidarity act of 1996 ( p.l . 104-114 , section 201 ) states that once a democratically - elected cuban government is in place , the united states will be prepared to enter into negotiations to return the base or to renegotiate the present agreement under mutually agreeable terms . 104-208 , division c , title vi , section 606 ) that conditions the repeal of the cuban adjustment act upon a presidential determination that a democratically - elected cuban government is in power . although many observers believe that the eventual demise of cuba's communist system of government is inevitable , there is considerable disagreement over when or how this may occur .