such requirements do not affect the global fund . thompson served until april 2005 . ambassador tobias currently serves ashead of the global fund's policy and strategy committee . many argue that this history ofcooperation represents a significant u.s. policy investment in the global fund , and consideredtogether with u.s. financial contributions , gives the united states a significant stake in the fund'ssuccess . those who insist that the global fund and pepfar are partners also assert that the work ofthe two organizations is complementary . this overlap was estimated at 63,000 in 2004 . the global fund estimates that it needs $3.3 billion in 2006 and 2007 to cover all existinggrants through the end of 2007 . in addition , it is seeking $3.7 billion , for a total of $7 billion , inorder to respond to anticipated applications in rounds 6 through 8 during the two - year period . ( 18 ) at a pledging conferenceheld in london in september 2005 , donors pledged a total of $3.7 billion . unless additional pledgesare made , the global fund will have the resources to do little more than fund its existing grants . itwill not be able to bring new resources to bear in fighting the aids pandemic . resource constraintswere evident when the global fund's board met in geneva at the end of september 2005 to discussround 5 grants . the board decided to approve 26 grants costing $382 million over the first twoyears . another 37 grants costing $344 million were provisionally accepted pending additionalpledges in the first half of 2006 . if sufficient pledges are not received by the end of june 2006 , the37 grants will be denied final approval . ( 19 ) the board did not schedule a sixth round . representatives of the global fund and pepfar consistently maintain that the two arepartners rather than competitors in the struggle against aids . ambassador tobias told the londonpledging conference that the u.s. contribution to the global fund is a "strategic priority" of pepfar . the operational plan of the office of the global aids coordinator for fy2005 states thatthe global fund "was conceived to be an integral part of the administration's global strategy againstthe epidemic. ( 23 ) anaugust 2005 global fund press release affirmed that the two programs are partners , noting that"together , the global fund and pepfar are the major financial engines to achieve greatly increasedtreatment numbers over the coming years. ( 24 ) jack valenti , president of friends of the global fight againstaids , tuberculosis , and malaria , which advocates for the global fund in the united states,describes the fund as the "multi - lateral arm of pepfar , complementing the work of u.s. bilateralprograms around the world. ( 25 ) u.s. - global fund cooperation was underscored in january 2003,when then u.s. secretary of health and human services tommy thompson was elected chairmanof the fund's board . they point out that the global fund is the principal vehiclefor mobilizing new resources to fight aids outside the 15 global hiv / aids initiative focuscountries , thus furthering pepfar's worldwide objectives . at the same time , the global fund isadding resources for treatment and other aids relief measures within the ghai countries .