appendix a . these requirements vary by academy and are revised regularly . in preparation for making appointments , a congressional office might review each academy's most recent class profile for specific information on test scores , class rankings , and activities of recently admitted students . some of this information is available on the academies' websites . usmma is governed by regulations issued by the department of transportation . uscga , which does not require a congressional nomination for admission , is an organizational unit of the department of homeland security . to qualify for an appointment to any service academy , an applicant must meet the following criteria: be a u.s. citizen or national ; be at least 17 years of age and not yet 23 years old on july 1 of the year the applicant would enter an academy ( 25 years old for usmma ) ; be unmarried ; be not pregnant , and without legal obligation to support children or other dependents ; demonstrate comprehensive academic preparation ; demonstrate leadership in athletics and other extracurricular activities ; take the sat , or the act assessment ( act ) ; be in good physical and mental health ; pass a comprehensive medical examination ; and pass a physical aptitude examination . beyond what is written in federal law and regulation , each academy can further specify academic , physical , and leadership requirements for admission . in addition to requesting a nomination from a member of congress or another nominating official , an individual seeking appointment to a service academy must separately apply to the service academies to which he or she seeks to be appointed . each academy requires the submission of a preliminary application to initiate the admissions process . preliminary application materials are available from the academies' websites listed in table 3 . acceptance of a service academy appointment requires at least a nine - year service obligation , including four years at an academy and five years of active duty service . sample initial contact letter appendix b . sample information sheet appendix c. sample application information appendix d. sample nomination application appendix e. sample post - nomination lette . the use of volunteers in congressional offices is governed by regulations issued by the select committee on ethics in the senate and by the committees on house administration and ethics in the house . it is common for member offices to devote a page on their official websites to the service academy nomination process . this web page can be used to explain the office's particular nomination process , provide application materials , announce deadlines , refer prospective nominees to service academy liaisons or websites , share information about past and / or present service academy nominees , or for other purposes . many offices encourage digital delivery of all or part of the nominee's application , and some member offices provide forms on their websites for nomination requests . the service academies also offer guidance and support for congressional member offices regarding the nomination and appointment process . coordination with the service academies may help members of congress assist constituents throughout the appointment process .