that support , however , was not unanimous . there were some members of the foreign service , as well as some members and staff , concerned about the loss of the current system's automatic increases in salary with the elimination of both the step increases and the tie to the annual employment cost index ( eci ) adjustment . selection boards make recommendations to the secretary regarding performance - based salary adjustments . they were concerned that it could be interpreted as curtailing traditional bargaining rights to negotiate procedures for the pay for performance system and appropriate arrangements for employees adversely impacted by the change to such a system . those members and congressional staff asserted that it is contradictory to use the phrase "sole and exclusive" and then put limitations on the exercise of that discretion . they were concerned that in the end , "the secretary's sole and exclusive discretion" would have greater standing than the limitations if an issue had to be resolved in court . the foreign service compensation reform provisions did not include the phrase "in the secretary's sole and exclusive discretion. instead , existing "management rights" authorities under the foreign service act of 1980 were expanded to include certain salary adjustments and the allocation of funds to cover these adjustments . on november 30 , 2006 , secretary of state rice wrote to the house and senate leadership expressing the administration's support for the provisions in the foreign service compensation reform title , and requesting prompt consideration and passage . she also stated that the administration intends to fund this initiative within its fy 2007 budget request and out year estimates . if the 110 th congress chooses to address the elimination of the foreign service "service in washington / service abroad" pay disparity , one possible approach would be to reintroduce the agreed upon authorization language of the foreign service compensation reform proposal . such language would authorize the following: the president establishes , reviews on an annual basis , and periodically adjusts a new worldwide foreign service schedule consisting of nine classes with no intervening steps within each class . the annual review shall include consideration of pertinent economic measures , including changes in the economic cost index ( eci ) . the new system becomes effective april 2008 . the secretary determines , on at least an annual basis , the size of any salary adjustment , expressed as a percentage or otherwise , which shall be paid to members of a salary class . the secretary's determination takes into account several factors , some of which are negotiated with afsa as the recognized bargaining agent for the fs . they unsuccessfully tried to bring this language to the floor of the house for consideration . the provisions would allow the administration to establish a new foreign service performance - based compensation schedule for those at the upper mid - level rank of fs - 01 and below . the new compensation system would also eliminate an 18.59% higher pay level that foreign service personnel receive for being posted in the washington , dc , area than for being posted abroad .