such a change would require congressional approval . the houseof representatives has approved a measure as part of the fy2007 defense authorization act thatwould abolish nnsa's ci office and reintegrate its functions into doe's new intelligence andcounterintelligence office . ( 37 ) the senate's version of the legislation is silent on the issue , andhouse and senate conferees will likely address the matter . proponents assert that such a consolidation would produce a more efficient bureaucraticstructure , one that would better serve doe's broader intelligence needs and responsibilities . specifically , they suggest that by creating a new intelligence agency , doe will be able to improvecoordination and communication between those responsible for assessing foreign intelligence andthose in charge of the department's counterintelligence programs . proponents also contend that bymerging doe's and nnsa's ci programs under a new doe intelligence agency , the department willbe able to clarify roles and missions and to improve coordination and communication . opponents believe the current bifurcated ci program - - with doe and nnsa splittingresponsibilities for counterintelligence - - is the program's principal weakness , and favorconsolidating the two ci offices within a single office in doe . they question , however , theadvisability of placing such an integrated ci program under the control of a new intelligence agencywithin doe . doing so , they contend , will weaken the authority and effectiveness of those in chargeof counterintelligence by superimposing a new bureaucratic layer between them and the doesecretary . that month losalamos national security laboratory scientist wen ho lee was fired after allegedly failing apolygraph exam . ( 11 ) ( leehad also allegedly failed to notify doe officials about certain contacts with individuals in the prc,to properly safeguard classified material , and to cooperate with authorities with regard to certainsecurity matters . he pleaded guilty to one felony count of unlawful retention of national defenseinformation ; the government dropped 58 additional counts . ( 12 ) ) in may of that same year,a bipartisan house select committee charged in a report that was declassified that the prc hadstolen u.s. nuclear weapons secrets . in june , the president's foreign intelligence advisory board ( pfiab ) criticized doe for the "worst" security record on secrecy that panel members said they hadever encountered . ( 13 ) the criticism was contained in a pfiab report , the first of its kind to be publicly released in thepanel's 38-year history . although the pfiab dismissed assertions of wholesale losses of nuclearweapons technology as a result of espionage , the panel did concur , on balance , with the u.s.intelligence community's assessment that the prc had stolen classified u.s. nuclear weaponsinformation that probably enabled the prc to accelerate its development of nuclear weapons . ( 14 ) congress and thepresident responded to the panel's report by establishing nnsa ( 15 ) and placing it charge ofdoe's national security - related nuclear programs . ( 16 ) in restructuring doe and establishing nnsa , congress created dual counterintelligenceoffices in doe and nnsa , respectively . within doe , the already - existing office ofcounterintelligence was codified and made responsible for establishing counterintelligence policyfor both doe and nnsa . the department further directed that the office be responsible forimplementing ci programs at non - nnsa facilities .