ch . 75 relating to passport and visa offenses , and among other changes add a new section governing the extraterritorial application of the chapter , proposed 18 u.s.c . 1551 ( b ) : ( b ) any person who commits an offense under this chapter outside the united states shall be punished as provided under this chapter if – ( 1 ) the offense involves a united states immigration document ( or any document purporting to be such a document ) or any matter , right , or benefit arising under or authorized by federal immigration laws ; ( 2 ) the offense is in or affects foreign commerce ; ( 3 ) the offense affects , jeopardizes , or poses a significant risk to the lawful administration of federal immigration laws , or the national security of the united states ; ( 4 ) the offense is committed to facilitate an act of international terrorism ( as defined in section 2331 ) or a drug trafficking crime ( as defined in section 929 ( a ) ( 2 ) ) that affects and would affect the national security of the united states ; ( 5 ) the offender is a national of the united states ( as defined in section 101 ( a ) ( 220 of the immigration and nationality act ( 8 u.s.c . 1101 ( a ) ( 22 ) ) or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the united states ( as defined in section 101 ( a ) ( 12 ) of such act ) ; or ( 6 ) the offender is a stateless person whose habitual resident is in the united states . the specific jurisdictional circumstances in this proposed inventory reflected in part conditions under which the courts have approved extraterritorial application in the absence such a statement . proposed section 1551 ( b ) ( 1 ) would have grounded extraterritorial jurisdiction on the fact that the fraud or other offenses involved a u.s. immigration document . the courts have recognized extraterritorial jurisdiction in such cases in the past . on the other hand , the proposed amendments to 18 u.s.c . ch.75 would have outlawed offenses involving foreign passports and passport offenses involving u.s. passports without regard to whether they were committed in frustration of u.s. immigration laws , proposed 18 u.s.c . under existing law , the courts faced with a comparable prohibition relating to u.s. passports and a statute silent as to extraterritorial jurisdiction would likely uphold overseas application under the protective principle . under proposed section 1551 ( b ) this option apparently would have been foreclosed , since the grounds for extraterritorial jurisdiction would have been specifically listed and the fact the offense involves a u.s. passport as such was not among them . the loss might have been minimal considering the scope of the grounds for extraterritorial jurisdiction under proposed section 1551 ( b ) . proposed section 1551 ( b ) ( 2 ) would have permitted the exercise of extraterritorial jurisdiction over such offenses when they were committed "in or affect[ing] foreign commerce [of the united states]. the phrase bespeaks sweeping legislative authority when used in the context of interstate commerce where federalism cabins its scope .