the circumstances under which these alliances were forged have changed dramatically . the fall of the soviet union , the post - cold war world , the asian financial crisis , the rise of china , and the emergence of violent islamist extremists have all done much to significantly alter the geopolitical landscape of asia . a survey and assessment of the united states strategic and defense relationships in asia may be of use given important shifts in the geopolitical dynamics of asia . such a review has led to several key shifts in the positioning of u.s. asia - pacific based forces including the anticipated shifting of some 8,000 marines from okinawa to guam , the reduction and repositioning of u.s. forces in south korea away from the demilitarized zone dividing the peninsula , and an increase of additional naval and air forces on guam . most regional states continue to welcome the positive role that the united states can play in promoting regional security but some are beginning to hedge against what they perceive as an increasingly distracted and insufficiently engaged american power . regional states' geographic proximity to china and rapidly expanding trade ties with china are , when combined with perceptions of american inattention , shifting regional states' perceptions of the long term role of the united states in the region . a recent study on the united states and asia suggests that "washington must actively re - engage if it is to maintain its influence" in the region . the united states' relative lack of attention to asia comes at a time when the correlates of power are shifting not only with regard to china but elsewhere in asia as well . friction in the sino - japanese relationship as well as in north korea - japan relations is prompting japan to develop its military capabilities and play a more assertive role in international affairs . india is developing rapidly and may as a result play an increasingly influential role in asian and world affairs . south korea may be developing capabilities that look to strategic scenarios other than those involving north korea at a time when its alliance relationship with the united states is increasingly strained . indonesia appears to be emerging from a lengthy period of economic and political instability as an increasingly effective democratic nation . these developments present both challenges and opportunities to the united states . several key strategic issues in the asia - pacific region are potentially of concern to u.s. decision makers . these developments include the rise of china , continuing potential for interstate conflict , the struggle against islamist militancy , and asia - pacific arms expenditures . american military forces in asia fall under one of two military commands , the u.s. pacific command and u.s. central command which are two of nine unified combatant commands and two of five regional commands . ( see figure 1 , below. ) while the asia - pacific falls under pacific command , parts of south and central asia are part of central command . figure 1 illustrates the geographic division of responsibility for u.s. regional commands .