television . the effect . was to eliminate altogether the transmission of the targeted programming outside the safe harbor period [6 a.m. to 10 p.m.] in affected cable service areas . in other words , for two - thirds of the day no household in those service areas could receive the programming , whether or not the household or the viewer wanted to do so. the court also noted that "[t]he speech in question was not thought by congress to be so harmful that all channels were subject to restriction . instead , the statutory disability applies only to channels 'primarily dedicated to sexually - oriented programming.' but would it be constitutional to apply the indecency restriction to cable ? in united states v. playboy entertainment group , inc. , the supreme court held that a content - based speech restriction on cable television "can stand only if it satisfies strict scrutiny . if a statute regulates speech based on its content , it must be narrowly tailored to promote a compelling government interest . if a less restrictive alternative would serve the government's purpose , the legislature must use that alternative . to do otherwise would be to restrict speech without an adequate justification , a course the first amendment does not permit . it is rare that a regulation restricting speech because of its content will ever be permissible. the indecency restriction is content - based ; therefore , for its application to cable television to be constitutional , it must meet "strict scrutiny," which means that it must promote a compelling governmental interest and be the least restrictive means to do so . this is the same standard that the supreme court applies to speech in newspapers , the internet , and every other medium except broadcast radio and television . the court does not apply strict scrutiny to broadcast media because , as noted in the above quotation from pacifica , the court holds that broadcast media have less first amendment protection than other media . the court , therefore , did not apply strict scrutiny in pacifica , and the fact that in pacifica it upheld the constitutionality of the indecency restriction as applied to broadcast media does not imply that it would uphold its constitutionality as applied to cable . playboy concerned federal restrictions on a type of "indecent" material on cable television: "signal bleed," which refers to images or sounds that come through to non - subscribers , even though cable operators have "used scrambling in the regular course of business , so that only paying customers had access to certain programs. these restrictions , which are found in section 505 of the communications decency act of 1996 , require operators of cable channels "primarily dedicated to sexually - oriented programming" to implement more effective scrambling — to fully scramble or otherwise fully block programming so that non - subscribers do not receive it — or to "time channel," which , under an fcc regulation meant to transmit the programming only from 10 p.m. to 6 a.m. "to comply with the statute," the court noted , "the majority of cable operators adopted the second , or 'time channeling,' approach . the court then applied strict scrutiny to section 505 .