bangladesh has denied their existence . bangladesh is strategically situated between south and southeast asia and is located in proximity to both india and china . for which , charges ... are brought against you . after 17 months in prison choudhury was released , though his offices were bombed and the government continues to press the charges against him . kirk was joined by 18 cosponsors when he introduced legislation calling for the charges against choudhury to be dropped . relations between new delhi and dhaka have been strained in recent years as indian officials have accused bangladesh of harboring both agents of pakistan's intelligence service and separatist militants fighting the new delhi government in india's northeastern states , such as the all tripura tiger force . dhaka has denied the accusations as "totally baseless and irresponsible. acrimony over migration issues led to periodic and lethal exchanges of gunfire between the border security forces of bangladesh and india . bangladesh reportedly refused a request by india to have transit rights across bangladesh to link with its northeastern states . with the exception of a small corridor , bangladesh separates india from its northeastern states . border incidents , including exchanges of small arms fire between indian border security force and bangladesh rifles soldiers , continue to be an irritant in india - bangladesh relations . india is building a fence along the 4,000 kilometer border with bangladesh to stem the flow of illegal immigrants . india has also demanded that bangladesh suppress separatist militants that cross the border . india has alleged that there are some 172 insurgent bases in bangladesh . bangladesh's natural gas deposits , estimated at between 32 trillion and 80 trillion cubic feet , increase bangladesh's strategic importance to india and china , which may seek to secure additional energy resources for future economic growth . arguments in bangladesh against developing the gas reserves for export have focused on the need to secure a 50-year supply of domestic energy requirements before entering the export market . it has been estimated that bangladesh's energy needs to 2050 would require 63 trillion cubic feet of gas . bangladesh and china signed a defense co - operation agreement in december 2002 . government corruption remained a significant problem . violence against women and children also was a major problem , as was trafficking in persons . the bnp and its alliance partners were elected in october 2001 . observers declared the poll generally free and fair , though more than 100 people were killed in pre - election violence . some observers are already concerned that elections may be further delayed . according to brad adams , asia director for human rights watch , the army is running the country and does not intend to relinquish power in the near future . it has been reported that as many as 200,000 people , including leading politicians , have been jailed under the emergency . disillusionment among bangladeshis with the two traditional ruling political parties , the awami league led by sheikh hasina and the bangladesh national party led by khaleda zia , meant that emergency rule has been broadly welcomed by the populace .