3199 during conference . they have several intriguing aspects although the constitutional reach of two provisions may be somewhat limited . title vii of the act contains subtitles concerning regulation of domestic and international commerce in three methamphetamine ( meth ) precursor chemicals: ephedrine , pseudoephedrine , and phenylpropanolamine ( epp ) ; increased penalties for methamphetamine offenses ; expanded environmentally - related regulations ; and adjusted grant programs . in many of its particulars , title vii resembles h.r . 3889 , the methamphetamine epidemic elimination act , as amended by the house committees on energy and commerce and on the judiciary , h.rept . 109-299 ( pts . the first part of title vii addresses the fact that certain cold and allergy medicines—widely and lawfully used for medicinal purposes and readily available in news stands , convenience stores , grocery stores , and drugstores—when collected in bulk can be used to manufacture methamphetamine . at the federal level , the food and drug administration ( fda ) regulates the commercial drug market to ensure the public of safe and effective medicinal products pursuant to the federal food drug and cosmetic act , 21 u.s.c . the attorney general through the drug enforcement administration regulates the commercial drug market with respect to drugs with a potential for addiction and abuse , pursuant to the controlled substances act , 21 u.s.c . 801-904 , and the controlled substances import and export act , 21 u.s.c . the degree of regulatory scrutiny afforded a particular drug classified as a controlled substance and sometimes certain of the chemicals essential for its production ( precursor chemicals , also known as "list chemicals" ) depends upon the drug's potential for abuse weighed against its possible beneficial uses . those who lawfully import , export , produce , prescribe , sell or otherwise dispense drugs classified as controlled substances must be registered , 21 u.s.c . in the case of controlled substances susceptible to abuse and therefore criminal diversion and for certain of their precursor chemicals , the attorney general may impose production and import / export quotas , security demands , inventory control measures , and extensive registration , record keeping and inspection requirements , 21 u.s.c . a wide range of civil and criminal sanctions , some of them quite severe , may be imposed for violation of the controlled substances act , the controlled substances import and export act , or of the regulations promulgated for their implementation , 21 u.s.c . prior to the act , the controlled substances act , in a dizzying array of criss - crossing exceptions and definitions , permitted the over - the - counter sale , without regulatory complications , of cold remedies containing ephedrine , pseudoephedrine or phenlypropanolamine ( epp ) —methamphetamine precursors—in packages containing less than 3 grams of epp base ( and in amounts not in excess of 9 grams of pseudoephedrine or phenlypropanolamine base per transaction ) . title vii eliminates the criss - crossing and replaces it with a new regulatory scheme for "scheduled listed chemical products," i.e.