ambassador . on september 16 , 2008 , president bush designated bolivia as a country that had failed to live up to its obligations under international narcotics agreements . that decision was closely followed by a bush administration proposal to suspend bolivia's trade preferences under the andean trade preferences act ( atpa ) . on november 1 , 2008 , bolivian president morales announced an indefinite suspension of u.s. drug enforcement administration ( dea ) operations in bolivia after accusing some dea agents of espionage . concerns regarding bolivia in the 110 th congress focused largely on counternarcotics and trade issues . bolivia received an estimated $99.5 million in u.s. foreign aid in fy2008 , including roughly $47 million in counternarcotics assistance , significantly lower than in previous years . an enacted continuing resolution h.r . 110-329 will provide funding for u.s. programs in bolivia at fy2008 levels through march 6 , 2009 . in october 2008 , congress enacted legislation to extend atpa trade preferences for bolivia until june 30 , 2009 ( p.l . however , on november 25 , 2008 , president bush announced his decision to suspend bolivia's atpa trade preferences effective december 15 , 2008 , citing bolivia's failure to cooperate with the united states on counternarcotics efforts . on january 1 , 2007 , luis inácio "lula" da silva , of the leftist workers' party ( pt ) , was inaugurated for a second four - year term as president of brazil . lula was re - elected in the second round of voting with fairly broad popular support . his immediate tasks were to boost brazil's lagging economic growth and address the issues of crime and violence . despite president lula's personal popularity , many predicted that intra - party rivalries within his fragile governing coalition would make it hard for him to push his agenda through brazil's notoriously fractured legislature . two years into his second term , president lula still enjoys high approval ratings ( 70% in december 2008 ) and is benefitting from a resurgent economy ( gdp growth estimated to reach 5% again in 2008 ) . ongoing corruption investigations involving president lula's pt party have not diminished the strength of his second term in office , and some are urging him to seek a third presidential term , a move that would require a constitutional amendment . some have criticized president lula for thus far being unwilling or unable to use his significant political capital to gain legislative approval for a more robust political and economic reform agenda . they maintain that action on much - needed structural reforms will be necessary to bolster brazil's economic growth during the anticipated global economic downturn . during the first lula term , brazil's relations with the united states were generally positive , although president lula prioritized strengthening relations with neighboring countries and expanding ties with nontraditional partners , including india and china . brazil - u.s. cooperation has increased during president lula's second term , particularly on energy issues . president bush visited brazil on march 9 , 2007 , and president lula visited camp david on march 31 , 2007 .