congress did not enact any of those measures . instead , it amended p.l . 109-289 ( division b ) , which provides funding at the lessor of fy2006 enacted , fy2007 house - passed , or fy2007 senate - passed levels until february 15 , 2007 . on november 1 , 2005 , the president released the national strategy for pandemic influenza . the national strategy was to provide a framework for future u.s. planning efforts that were consistent with the national security strategy and the national strategy for homeland security . the president requested $7.1 billion to fund the national strategy for pandemic influenza , some of which he suggested be set aside for international activities . the majority of the funds , $6.7 billion , were requested for hhs . one day later , on november 2 , 2005 , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) released its influenza plan . the hhs plan provided a detailed explanation of how the department would implement its part of the national strategy . some were disappointed by the relatively small proportion of funds reserved for international efforts in the national strategy and in hhs' plan . advocates of greater spending on global avian flu efforts argued that if more resources were allocated to containing the virus abroad , americans would be better protected , domestic pandemic preparedness efforts would be enhanced , and the likelihood that h5n1 would continue to spread and become efficiently transmissible between people would be lessened . of the $7.1 billion related to international activities , the president requested: $200.0 million for hhs to undertake a number of activities , including international pandemic preparedness planning initiatives and pandemic influenza disease surveillance ; $18.3 million for the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) to undertake research and development initiatives and to provide avian influenza surveillance and prevention technical assistance globally ; $120.0 million for the department of defense ( dod ) to increase worldwide surveillance and upgrade related equipment ; $10.0 million for dod to assist military partner nations in procuring protective equipment , portable field assay testing equipment , and related laboratory equipment ; $17.0 million for dos to implement public diplomacy , training , and international outreach activities related to avian influenza and pandemic preparedness ; $1.5 million for dos international visitors program to provide 100 additional professional exchanges of doctors , health practitioners , and non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) ; $75.2 million to usaid for efforts that encourage behavior change and raise awareness about avian flu awareness , diagnostic support initiatives , and pandemic preparedness and planning activities ; and $56.3 million for international disaster and famine assistance funds of usaid to pre - position supplies and equipment , such as antiviral medication and protective equipment . in may 2006 , the white house released the implementation plan for the national strategy for pandemic influenza , which was released in november 2005 . the plan outlined how various u.s. agencies and departments would integrate the implementation of more than 300 actions that respond to an influenza pandemic threat .