( 3 ) table 1 . major party vote percentages in the last three germanfederal election . only the president candissolve parliament and only after a vote of no confidence in the government . german presidenthorst kohler set new elections for september 18 , 2005 after the bundestag held a vote of noconfidence in the government which the chancellor himself initiated on july 1 , 2005 . before theelection was held , the decision was reviewed and approved by the german constitutional court . the election gave no party the necessary majority with its preferred coalition partner . although the christian democratic union / christian social union ( cdu / csu ) got the most votesby a slim margin , it had an unexpectedly weak showing compared to pre - election polls and in lightof the general disgruntlement with the previous government . analysts attributed the weak showingto the fact that voters were deeply skeptical of whether a cdu / csu government could accomplishmore than its predecessor and were also worried about some of the cdu reform ideas . voter turnout was 77.7 percent , slightly less than in the 2002 election . accordingto official results , the cdu / csu received 35.2 percent of the vote , barely beating out the socialdemocrats ( spd ) with 34.3 percent of the vote . this left neither party in a position to form agovernment with just its most likely coalition partner . the free democratic party ( fdp ) actuallydid better than expected with 9.8 percent of the vote and ahead of the greens who received 8.1percent . the new left party , a union of east german former communists and a breakaway factionof the spd , received 8.9 percent of the vote , enough to be seated as a faction in the bundestag . theformer communist party ( pds ) did not achieve the 4 percent threshold to gain seats in thebundestag . early elections are rare in germany because the german basic law ( constitution ) makes itvery difficult for the bundestag ( lower house of parliament ) to be dissolved . foreign policy is likely to play a secondary and lesscontentious role , given the press of domestic business and a general consensus on most internationalissues . the sluggish economy,persistently high unemployment , as well as concern about welfare and labor reforms , both enactedand planned , were widely seen as principal reasons for the spd defeat . the atmosphere of u.s. - german relations has already improved since the merkelgovernment took office , as reflected by the successful first official visit of chancellor merkel towashington on january 13 , 2006 . on may 22 , 2005 , german chancellor gerhard schroeder surprised his country byannouncing that he would seek early federal elections in september 2005 , a year ahead of schedule . his decision followed the resounding defeat suffered by his social democrats ( spd ) in the stateelection in north rhine - westphalia , a traditional spd stronghold . ( 2 ) this was the most recent ina string of state election losses that had given the christian democratic union ( cdu ) oppositionfirm control of the german bundesrat ( upper house of parliament ) .