puhca 2005 and order no . 667 also continue to exempt qualifying facilities and exempt wholesale generators , as well as foreign utility companies , from the requirements otherwise applicable to holding companies and their affiliates and subsidiaries under the statute and regulations . certain additional persons and classes of transactions are also exempted . these important exemptions include passive investors ( mutual funds and other collective investment vehicles ) ; broker / dealers , underwriters and fiduciaries who buy and sell securities in the ordinary course of business ; utilities that have no captive customers ; transactions in which the holding company affirmatively certifies that it will not charge , bill , or allocate to the public utility or natural gas company in its holding company system any costs or expenses and will not engage in financing transactions with the public utility or natural gas company ; transactions between or among affiliates that are independent of and do not include a public utility or natural gas company ; electric power cooperatives ; and local gas distribution companies . ferc also has discretionary authority to grant exemptions from the applicable requirements for any person or transaction . ferc exempted these qualifying facilities , wholesale generators , and foreign utility companies because its main regulatory interest is to monitor the costs incurred by traditional utilities providing monopoly service in order to ensure reasonable rates . the exemptions and waivers are intended to remove from puhca 2005 regulation those entities that would be unlikely to affect jurisdictional rates . as ferc has stated , the change in puhca law granting it new authority to review books and records did not affect the commission's ... primary means of protecting customers served by jurisdictional companies that are members of holding company systems: the [federal power act ( fpa ) ] and the [natural gas act ( nga ) ] . in particular , the commission's rate authorities and information access authorities under the fpa and the nga enable the commission to detect and disallow from jurisdictional rates any imprudently - incurred , unjust or unreasonable , or unduly discriminatory or preferential costs resulting from affiliate transactions between companies in the same holding system . this includes both power transactions and non - power goods or services transactions between commission - regulated companies that have captive companies and their "unregulated" affiliates . ... further ... in the context of individual rate cases involving public utilities that seek to flow through in jurisdictional rates the costs of affiliate purchases of non - power goods and services , the commission has the ability to protect customers by reviewing the prudence and justness and reasonableness of such costs . the commission has also adopted rules and policies regarding cash management practices or arrangements that involve commission - jurisdictional companies . under the fpa and nga , ferc is charged with regulating the interstate transmission of natural gas and electricity . the fpa also grants ferc authority over electric utility mergers . section 203 of the fpa requires ferc to approve any merger attempted by the public utilities within the agency's jurisdiction before the transaction can occur . section 203 was modified somewhat by the energy policy act of 2005 , but most of ferc's authority was preexisting .