examples of these policies follow . since helping to reduce the overall vulnerability of critical infrastructure is an objective of the federal government , it is useful to outline what options , if any , may be considered to reduce vulnerabilities and potential national consequences arising specifically from the geographic concentration of such infrastructure . some analysts may argue that little government intervention in infrastructure concentration is necessary because the private sector will appropriately adjust its infrastructure practices out of its own financial interest . catastrophic insurance premiums , for example , or internal corporate risk management programs , may influence corporate practices in a way that reduces vulnerabilities and associated risk to future profits by reducing the geographic vulnerability of private infrastructure . as the national strategy for the physical protection of critical infrastructures and key assets states , customarily , private sector firms prudently engage in risk management planning and invest in security as a necessary function of business operations and customer confidence.... consequently , private sector owners and operators should reassess and adjust their planning , assurance , and investment programs to better accommodate the increased risk.... holders of such a view would assert that the socially optimal geographic distribution of critical infrastructure , balancing economic efficiency with geographic risk , is best left to the market forces outlined earlier in this report . other analysts have argued that the private sector does not properly account for the full social costs of critical infrastructure failure , or that individual companies cannot independently and significantly influence geographic concentration in a critical sector . holders of this view would see a definite and active role for the federal government in alleviating geographic vulnerability of critical infrastructure in addition to the market - driven measures taken by the private sector on its own . if congress concludes that federal intervention is appropriate , it has several broad policy options for doing so . geographic concentrations of critical infrastructure exist across a number infrastructure sectors . although such concentrations often provide substantial economic and social benefits , they may also be distinctly vulnerable to catastrophic geographic disruption . any public policy addressing critical infrastructure concentration must try to balance these benefits and potential costs . prominent among these are legislative proposals such as h.r . 6709 , s. 3202 , and s. 3126 , which would lift federal moratoriums on , or otherwise encourage , offshore oil and natural gas development outside the western gulf of mexico . this report provides an overview of geographic concentration and related vulnerability among critical infrastructures in the united states . the report illustrates the nature of such geographic concentration and how it may expose infrastructures to catastrophic failure due to geographic hazards . it identifies several long - term forces which have contributed to infrastructure concentration . these forces include resource location , agglomeration economies , scale economies , community preferences , and capital efficiency . it reviews several ways in which the federal government has also influenced critical infrastructure , such as prescriptive siting , economic incentives , environmental regulation , and economic regulation . the report concludes with options to address geographic vulnerability in the context of current federal infrastructure policy .