during its consideration of h.r . 10488 and the proposed federal buildings fund , the committee reported that a single congressional approval for all the costs of acquiring a site , designing , and construction of a building is essential to a timely , responsive federal building program . such a consolidated appropriation would expedite construction by allowing gsa to employ various time - saving techniques used in private construction but unavailable where funding uncertainties preclude the precision planning necessary to implement them.... a buildings fund to finance the acquisition , construction , alteration , maintenance , operation , and protection of all public buildings is the logical mechanism for one - time project funding . the proposed buildings fund was to be financed by income from rental charges assessed to tenant agencies occupying gsa - owned - and - leased space that approximated commercial rates for comparable space and services . each tenant agency would budget for its own space needs in the annual congressional authorizations and appropriations process . the legislative history reveals that congress believed that the requirement for tenant agencies to be directly accountable for their space needs would result in more efficient utilization of federal office space . during its 1971 consideration of legislation to create the fbf , the senate committee on public works reported that individual agency requests and justifications for office space during the annual budget process represented a "significant step toward performance budgeting," resulting in greater congressional oversight of the federal buildings program . the 1971 congressional deliberations focused on two different methods to establish agency rental charges , the cost - recovery method and the rent - equivalent method . under the cost - recovery method , charges would have been based on estimated maintenance costs , the cost of leasing space , and depreciation costs on gsa - owned facilities . income resulting from the depreciation charges would have been available to finance future gsa construction and repairs projects . the cost - recovery approach was rejected by congress because not enough revenue could have been generated ; in fact , gsa estimated that it would have needed additional appropriations of nearly $150 million each year to finance future construction projects . the second option , the rent - equivalent method based on commercial rates for leasing space , was ultimately embodied in law . gsa officials estimated that , based on 1971 funding obligations , approximately $800 million in rental charges would be paid to the fund . of this total , congress and gsa anticipated that nearly $300 million in revenues would be available for capital expenditures . the senate committee on public works reported that , while it endorsed gsa's use of commercial charges , it was not encouraging the agency to establish its rates so high as to produce an inordinate surplus of monies in the fund . on the contrary , the committee desires that the rates charged ... be sufficient only to defray the cost of constructing , maintaining , and replacing public buildings and facilities , and to provide related services . the senate committee on appropriations agreed to the provision .