the program did not have a match requirement . 111-22 ) responded to these concerns , in part by directing hud to develop a formula for determining need for the competitive continuum of care program within two years of the law's enactment . in its interim regulations , hud maintained the use of the cdbg formula for determining preliminary pro rata need ( pprn ) for participating communities ( see " the grant application process " ) . the cdbg formula uses a combination of five factors to award funds to recipient communities . ( the cdbg formula uses four separate methods to award funds ; this report does not discuss the details of these methods. ) the five factors are population , the number of persons in poverty , housing overcrowding ( homes in which there are more than 1.01 persons per room ) , the age of housing ( the number of housing structures built prior to 1940 ) , and the extent of growth lag in a given community ( the lack of population growth in a community compared to the growth rate it would have had if it had grown at the rate of other communities ) . the factors are measured as ratios between the recipient community and all grant recipients . the cdbg formula was last changed in 1977 ( p.l . there have been other proposals for how to determine need for the homeless assistance grants . for example , legislation to reauthorize the mckinney - vento act that was introduced prior to enactment of the hearth act gave more specific guidance as to how the hud secretary might determine need . the community partnership to end homelessness act of 2007 ( s. 1518 ) , as passed by the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs , would have directed the secretary to consider factors such as the number of homeless individuals , shortages of affordable housing , and severe housing problems among extremely low - income households . the report released by hud in 2001 proposed a number of potential formula factors , with an emphasis on a measure of housing affordability . in general , factors used to distribute formula funds for programs such as cdbg are based on data collected by government entities , like the census bureau , that do not have an interest in the way in which funds are distributed . while the best measure of community need for homeless assistance may be the number of people who are homeless in a given community , current measures of homelessness are uncertain ( it is difficult to accurately collect data on people experiencing homelessness ) , and the entities that collect the data―the communities themselves―have an interest in the distribution of funds . another possible issue that could affect the distribution of the homeless assistance grants is the cdbg formula itself . in past years , hud and the administration have proposed changes to the formula , but , to date , no legislation has been introduced that would affect the distribution .