should the priority be affordability , and if so , for whom ? or should the priority be facilitating access to benefits ? for workers ; for people with lower income ; for people who are older , sick , or disabled ; or for everyone ? about 16% of the population was uninsured . the market for private insurance excels in creating new products and adapting to changing demand , but is not set up to ensure that everyone gets coverage . consumers who are sick or poor may not be able to find adequate insurance at an affordable price , while others may decide that premiums are more than they are willing to pay . if health insurance were another good or service , people might not care about consumers who cannot afford it or choose not to buy it . but many think that health insurance and the health care it pays for are different from other goods and services . government helps ensure access to health coverage where the market might not . it does this through public programs , such as medicare and medicaid , and through policies that affect the market for private insurance . federal policies include tax subsidies and regulations . subsidies make health insurance more affordable for consumers and employers , and regulations help ensure access to insurance and the adequacy of benefits . states play a fundamental role in regulating health insurers and the products they sell . functions vary by state , and may include licensing insurance companies and agents , ensuring financial solvency through standards and oversight , approving rates , and assessing insurance companies to fund programs for consumers . of course , there is no bright line between the market and government . market limitations prompt government policies , and government policies in turn shape market trends . in addition , differences among state policies and the interaction between federal and state requirements create a complex landscape for consumers , employers , and insurers who wish to buy or provide health benefits . this report analyzes the roles of the market and government in providing , financing , and regulating private health insurance . it focuses on federal policy , and shows that although both the market and government play important roles , both also have limitations . by generating diverse insurance products and by adapting to different and changing conditions , the market for private health insurance provides choices for consumers and employers who have different needs and preferences . government plays a role in helping ensure access to health coverage . in 2007 , federal spending on medicare , medicaid , and the state children's health insurance program ( schip ) is expected to total $634 billion . these programs serve primarily older , low - income , and disabled people , populations that otherwise would have difficulty finding adequate and affordable coverage in the private market . for vulnerable individuals who lack access to employer - paid insurance , government benefits may be the only viable alternative . in addition to providing health benefits for vulnerable populations , the federal government uses tax and regulatory policy to influence the market for private health insurance .