has taken a wrong turn . ( 75 ) on the current court , justices stevens , souter , ginsburg , and breyer have continued this argumentdespite the fact that the court majority has continued to apply and extend the sovereign immunityprinciple reflected by hans . ( 76 ) for years justices brennan and marshall voted against imposition of the death penalty on thebasis of their views that the death penalty "is in all circumstances cruel and unusual punishment,"despite the accretion of precedents by which the court accepted capital punishment as constitutional,and justice blackmun later came to hold the same view . ( 77 ) how does one measure the impact of stare decisis on the court's decision making ? oneextensive study of the subject suggests that the critical question is whether "precedent actuallycause[s] justices to reach decisions that they otherwise would not have made. ( 78 ) this can be verified ifjustices voice disapproval of precedent but nonetheless vote to uphold it . ( 79 ) spaeth and segal'sconclusion is that "in the realm of stare decisis , minority will does not defer to majority rule. this sampling of the court's practice in adhering to or departing from precedent seems tobear out justice souter's observation , quoted above , that the decision whether to overrule precedentinvolves "a variety of often competing considerations" ( 81 ) ( including competing perspectives among the justices ) . staredecisis is always one such consideration when the court decides whether to overrule precedent . butbecause the court does not appear to have developed a "coherent or stable conception of theappropriate role of precedent in constitutional adjudication," ( 82 ) it is difficult to predictwhen the court will rely on stare decisis and when it will depart from it . ofthe sort that could counsel against overturning its holding. ( 36 ) dissenting justice scaliachallenged these conclusions , and suggested that roe "satisfies these conditions to at least the samedegree as bowers . ( 37 ) other recent overruling decisions that received considerable public attention barredapplication of the death penalty to mentally retarded persons and to juveniles . in 1989 the court hadrefused to hold that execution of a mentally retarded individual , ( 38 ) or of an individual whowas 16 or 17 at the time of his offense , ( 39 ) violated the eighth amendment ; in 2002 , however , the courtreversed its conclusion about execution of the mentally retarded , ( 40 ) and in 2005 it did so forjuveniles . ( 41 ) thesedecisions shed little light on general principles governing departures from stare decisis , however,because they were controlled by the unique language of the eighth amendment's prohibition against"cruel and unusual punishment. ( 42 ) basically , the court determined that , although execution of thementally retarded or of juveniles had not been "unusual" in 1989 , it had become so by 2002 and2005 , respectively . ( 43 ) often , especially if no major social issue such as abortion or racial segregation is at issue,society's understanding of the precedent is not implicated , and the court may change and narrow itsfocus . other factors , such as reliance or workability , may carry the day .