each of these issues is discussed in turn below . these discussions are brief , and are intended primarily as an introduction to other crs reports ( referenced below ) that provide much more detailed discussions and analyses of these broad issues . what has been the impact of the substantial expansion of standards - based assessments of pupil achievement required under the esea , and should these requirements be expanded further to include additional subjects and / or grade levels ( especially for senior high school pupils ) ? the current generation of pupil assessment requirements under esea title i - a began with the improving america's schools act ( iasa ) of 1994 ( p.l . 103 - 382 ) , that required participating states to develop or adopt curriculum content standards , pupil performance standards , and assessments linked to these , at least in the subjects of mathematics and reading / english language arts , and for at least one grade in each of three grade ranges ( grades 3-5 , 6-9 , and 10-12 ) . the nclb substantially expanded these requirements to provide that all participating states are to implement assessments , linked to state content and academic achievement standards , for all public school pupils in each of grades 3-8 in reading and mathematics by the end of the 2005-2006 school year . participating states were also required to develop and implement assessments at three grade levels in science by the 2007-2008 school year . should the active federal role in k - 12 education embodied in the nclb be maintained ? the primary rationale for requiring annual administration of standards - based tests in each of grades 3-8 is that the provision of timely information on the performance of pupils , schools , and leas throughout most of the elementary and middle school grades is of value for both diagnostic and accountability purposes . arguably , such assessment results will improve the quality of the ayp determinations that are based primarily on the assessments , and help determine whether title i - a is meeting its primary goals , such as reducing achievement gaps between disadvantaged and other pupils . an exception is made for teachers in public charter schools , who must meet the requirements established in the state's charter school law . achievement standards associated with the required assessments must establish at least three performance levels for all pupils — advanced , proficient , and basic ( or partially proficient ) . the additional criteria applicable to teachers who are new to the profession are that they must ( a ) demonstrate , by passing a "rigorous" state test , subject area knowledge and teaching skills in basic elementary curricula ( if teaching at the elementary level ) ; or ( b ) demonstrate "a high level of competency" by passing a rigorous state academic test or completing an academic major ( or equivalent course work ) , graduate degree , or advanced certification in each subject taught ( if teaching at the middle or high school level ) .