only turkey has recognized the trnc . denktash argued that creation of an independent state is a necessary precondition for a federation with the greek cypriots . he ruled out a merger with turkey and pledged cooperation with u.n. settlement efforts . after 1974 , u.n. negotiations focused on reconciling the two sides' interests and reestablishing a central government . they foundered on definitions of goals and ways to implement a federal solution . turkish cypriots emphasized bizonality and the political equality of the two communities , preferring two nearly autonomous societies with limited contact . greek cypriots emphasized the freedoms of movement , property , and settlement throughout the island . the two parties also differed on the means of achieving a federation: greek cypriots wanted their internationally recognized national government to devolve power to the turkish cypriots , who would then join a cypriot republic . for the turkish cypriots , two entities would join , for the first time , in a new federation . these views could affect resolution of property , citizenship of turkish settlers , and other legal issues . since 1974 , there have been many unsuccessful rounds of u.n. - sponsored direct and indirect negotiations to achieve a settlement . the united nations has had forces on cyprus since 1964 . as of november 2007 , unficyp consisted of 858 military personnel and 69 civilian police from 19 countries . it emphasizes liaison , observation , and mediation rather than the interposition of forces . this military intervention had many ramifications . foremost was the widespread dislocation of the cypriot population and related refugee and property problems . the athens junta fell , civilian government was restored in athens and in nicosia , greece withdrew from nato's military command to protest nato's failure to prevent turkey's action , and turkey's civilian government entered an extended period of instability . u.s. relations with all parties , each of which blamed its fate on washington's lack of support , suffered . after 1974 , turkish cypriots emphasized a solution that would keep the two communities separate in two sovereign states or two states in a loose confederation . in february 1975 , they declared their government the "turkish federated state of cyprus" ( tfsc ) . in 1983 , turkish cypriot leader rauf denktash declared the "turkish republic of northern cyprus" ( trnc ) — a move considered by some to be a unilateral declaration of independence . the general assembly appropriated $54.9 million for unficyp for the period from july 1 , 2008 to june 30 , 2009 . the government of cyprus contributes one - third of the cost and the government of greece contributes $6.5 million annually . unficyp costs not covered by contributions are treated as assessed u.n. expenses . the united states provided an estimated $6.412 million for unficyp in fy2008 and the bush administration requested $4.54 million for fy2009 . the secretary - general has proposed a budget of $54.9 million for the period from july 1 , 2008 to june 30 , 2009 . it is still under consideration by the general assembly . s. 695 , the american - owned property in occupied cyprus claims act .