united states . for several congresses , legislation intended to reverse the swancc and rapanos rulings was introduced but not enacted . more recently , legislation that instead would halt or redirect obama administration rules to re - define "waters of the united states" has been introduced , including numerous bills in the 114 th congress . scientific questions about wetlands , with answers that can be important to policymakers , include how to define wetlands ; how to catalogue the rate and pattern of wetland declines and losses as well as restorations and increases ; and how to assess the importance of wetland changes to broader ecosystems . wetlands science has made considerable strides in developing a fuller and more sophisticated knowledge about many aspects of wetlands in the more than two decades since protecting wetlands became a general policy goal in federal law and program administration . there are two topics where scientific information and wetland protection policies remain inconsistent: should all regulated wetlands be treated equally ; and if all scientifically defined wetlands are not covered by the federal regulatory program , what subset should be covered , and how should such decisions be made ? while discussion of either question has major science elements , both are primarily addressed in the section below about the clean water act section 404 program . federal program issues include the administration of programs to protect , restore , or mitigate wetland resources ( especially the clean water act section 404 program ) ; relationships between agricultural and regulatory programs ; whether all wetlands should be treated the same in federal programs , and which wetlands should be subject to regulation ; and whether protecting wetlands by acres is an effective proxy for protecting wetlands based on the functions they perform and the values they provide . in addition , private property questions are raised , because almost three - quarters of the remaining wetlands are located on private lands . states use a variety of programs and tools to protect and manage wetlands , including regulation and mitigation , wetland water quality standards , monitoring and assessment , voluntary restoration , tax incentives , coordination among state and federal agencies , and public / private partnerships . some property owners believe that they should be compensated when federal programs limit how they can use their land and for decisions that arguably diminish the value of the land . in addition to federal programs and activities , wetlands in the united states are regulated and protected through a variety of state and local laws and regulations , as well as through initiatives and actions of nongovernmental organizations , schools and universities , and private citizens . the role of states in wetland protection is especially important , as noted in a study by the environmental law institute . states have long held the right and the responsibility to provide stewardship over their resources , and state agency staff typically have a well - versed understanding of the "lay of the land," in terms of both topography and state priorities , policies , and practices .