legislation ( h.r . 4619 , s. 2879 ) to expand the role of the usf was introduced . in a move to address the issue of affordability of broadband for low - income households representative matsui introduced , on september 24 , 2009 , h.r . 3646 , the "broadband affordability act of 2009. . this measure expanded the usf's low - income lifeline program to include subscribership to broadband services at reduced rates . eligibility requirements were the same as those used for the current lifeline telephone program . the senate commerce committee held a march 1 , 2007 , hearing on the challenges facing the usf and the house telecommunications subcommittee held a june 24 , 2008 , hearing focusing on the future of universal service including the role of broadband and its role in the future of the program . fcc oversight hearings held by the senate commerce committee and the house telecommunications subcommittee , as well as hearings on broadband deployment held by the house small business committee included examination of usf issues . furthermore , the senate commerce committee held a june 12 , 2007 , hearing to examine the federal - state joint board's recommendation that the fcc place an interim , emergency cap on the amount of high - cost support that competitive eligible telecommunications carriers receive for each state from the high cost program . ( for a further discussion of this proposal see the section on " capping ," above. ) the house oversight and government reform committee under the direction of then - chairman waxman requested information from industry recipients as part of an oversight investigation of the usf . the inquiry focused on the high cost fund portion of the program and requested information from 24 companies that , according to the fcc , are the top 10 recipients of federal high cost funds from 2006 through 2008 as well as the those that have received the 10 highest per - line subsidies , by location , for 2006 and 2007 . according to a memorandum chairman waxman sent to the committee , he was not accusing any of these companies of wrongdoing , but felt that the gathering of additional information about and committee oversight of the usf program will "benefit" the program and "may offer useful information to the state and federal policymakers as they formulate proposals for usf reform. eligibility requirements are the same as those used for the current lifeline telephone program . provisions require the fcc to establish regulations to prevent eligible households from receiving more than a single subsidy per household . the fcc is tasked with establishing the amount of support and determining whether state matching funds will be required for participation as well as determining how broadband service is defined . broadband service providers are required to obtain fcc authorization to participate in the program , but the program is neutral as to what type of technology is used and does not require a provider to be classified as eligible telecommunications carrier to participate .