it is divided into grades of difficulty and responsibility of work . there are 15 grades and 10 steps within each grade . the duties attached to positions at each grade are stated in statute at 5 u.s.c . those for a gs - 15 , the top level of the schedule , are these: ( a ) to perform , under general administrative direction , with very wide latitude for the exercise of independent judgment , work of outstanding difficulty and responsibility along special technical , supervisory , or administrative lines which has demonstrated leadership and exceptional attainments ; ( b ) to serve as head of a major organization within a bureau involving work of comparable level ; ( c ) to plan and direct or to plan and execute specialized programs of marked difficulty , responsibility , and national significance , along professional , scientific , technical , administrative , fiscal , or other lines , requiring extended training and experience which has demonstrated leadership and unusual attainments in professional , scientific , or technical research , practice , or administration , or in administrative , fiscal , or other specialized activities ; or ( d ) to perform consulting or other professional , scientific , technical , administrative , fiscal , or other specialized work of equal importance , difficulty , and responsibility , and requiring comparable qualifications . gs employees receive an annual adjustment to basic pay and a locality - based comparability payment . ex pay rates provide limitations on gs pay . basic pay cannot exceed ex level v ( $145,700 , salary became effective in january 2010 ) ; basic pay and locality pay combined cannot exceed ex level iv ( $155,500 , salary became effective in january 2010 ) ; and total compensation cannot exceed ex level i ( $199,700 , salary became effective in january 2010 ) . gs - 15 employees at the upper end of that pay grade in 18 locality pay areas are currently affected by the ex level iv cap on basic pay and locality pay combined as follows: employees at step 10 in the dallas - fort worth , tx ; denver - aurora - boulder , co ; miami - fort lauderdale - pompano beach , fl ; minneapolis - st. paul - st . cloud , mn - wi ; philadelphia - camden - vineland , pa - nj - de - md ; portland - vancouver - beaverton , or - wa ; sacramento­ arden - arcade­ yuba city , ca - nv ; and seattle - tacoma - olympia , wa , locality pay areas . employees at steps 9 and 10 in the boston - worcester - manchester , ma - nh - ri - me ; chicago - naperville - michigan city , il - in - wi ; detroit - warren - flint , mi ; hartford - west hartford - willimantic , ct - ma ; san diego - carlsbad - san marcos , ca ; and washington - baltimore - northern virginia , dc - md - va - wv - pa , locality pay areas .