allowance . an allowance is generally defined as a limited authorization by the government to emit 1 ton of pollutant . in the case of greenhouse gases , an allowance generally refers to a metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent . although used generically , an allowance is technically different from a credit . private parties are also allowed to participate . a second possibility is to use an auction to raise revenues for a related ( or unrelated ) program . for example , the regional greenhouse gas initiative ( rggi ) is exploring an auction to implement its public benefit program to assist consumers or pursue strategic energy purposes . a third possibility is to use auctions as a means of allocating some , or all , of the allowances established under a ghg control program . obviously , the impact that an auction would have on cost would depend on how extensively it was used in any ghg control program , and to what purpose the revenues were expended . appendix a . comparison of key provisions of senate greenhouse gas reduction bills appendix b . comparison of key provisions of house greenhouse gas reduction bills appendix c. common terms allocation schemes ( upstream and downstream ) . regulatory approaches to allocating allowances ( as opposed to auction schemes ) can choose different points and participants along the production process to assign allowances and the resulting compliance responsibility . upstream allocation schemes establish emission caps and assign allowances at a production , importation , or distribution point of products that will eventually produce greenhouse emissions further down the production process . for example , in the natural gas sector , emission caps could be established and allowances assigned at processing facilities where facilities and participants shrink from about 400,000 wells and 8,000 companies to 500 facilities and 200 companies . in contrast , downstream allocation schemes establish emission caps and assign allowances at the point in the process where the emissions are emitted . in the case of the natural gas industry , to achieve the same coverage as the upstream scheme , this would involve assigning allowances to natural gas - fired electric generators , industry , and even residential users . thus , some downstream proposals choose either to exempt certain sectors ( such as residential use ) from a cap - and - trade program or to employ a hybrid allocation scheme where some of the allowances are allocated upstream and others downstream ( such as the electric generators ) . a credit represents a ton of pollutant that an entity has reduced in excess of its legal requirement . however , the terms tend to be used interchangeably , along with others , such as permits . auctions . auctions can be used in market - based pollution control schemes in several different ways . for example , title iv of the 1990 clean air act amendments uses an annual auction to ensure the liquidity of the credit trading program . for this purpose , a small percentage of the credits permitted under the program are auctioned annually , with the proceeds returned to the entities that would have otherwise received them . banking .