there is no global copyright , patent or trademark . innovators must secure and enforce these rights within the particular jurisdiction where they desire protection . each of these contentions has a varying degree of persuasiveness . as of yet , however , no conclusive study has demonstrated that the social benefits of the intellectual property laws outweigh the costs . as a result , the justifications and criticisms of intellectual property remain open to challenge . at present time , no unified legal regime governing intellectual property rights exists on an international basis . in addition , the varying national laws that establish intellectual property rights often differ in important respects . such factors as the works subject to protection , the scope of rights , and the duration of protection are among the factors that may vary widely in different jurisdictions . absent some obligation , a particular nation is not required to provide intellectual property rights that resemble those of the united states , or even to establish such laws at all . since the nineteenth century , however , many nations in fact have committed to provide certain standards of intellectual property protection via bilateral and multilateral international agreements . the most significant of these is the wto agreement on trade — related aspects of intellectual property rights , commonly known as the trips agreement . domestically , the uruguay round agreements act in 1995 made significant amendments to u.s. intellectual property laws in an effort to comply with the trips agreement . as discussed below , the trips agreement required each wto member state to provide minimum substantive standards of intellectual property protection and enforcement . the trips agreement obligated each wto member state to provide stated levels of intellectual property protection . although commentators broadly agree that the trips agreement was a watershed event for international intellectual provision , many of its obligations nonetheless fell short of the level of intellectual property rights available in the united states . for example , u.s. copyright law provides for a term of protection of the life of the author plus 70 years , while a term of life plus 50 years is acceptable under the trips agreement . u.s. patent law allows patent term to be extended in order to account for long delays in patent office acquisition procedures , but the trips agreement does not require such a measure . the trips agreement allows wto member states to disallow the registration of trademarks that are not visually perceivable — an option that blocks protection for such commercial symbols as sounds and scents — but no such blanket restriction exists under u.s. law . in enacting the bipartisan trade promotion act of 2002 , congress stated that an overall negotiating objective of such agreements was to encourage our treaty partners to agree to "a standard of [intellectual property] protection similar to that found in united states law. in keeping with this mandate , the united states has entered into numerous ftas that have required their signatories to provide higher levels of intellectual property protection than are required under the trips agreement . with respect to the intellectual property laws , each of the ftas stipulates standards that comply with current u.s. law .