that process is not over . the google book settlement would frustrate the committee's efforts and make it exceedingly difficult for congress to move forward . a much more productive path would be for google to engage with this committee and with other stakeholders to discuss whether and to what degree a diligent search for the rights holder should be a precondition of a user receiving the benefits of orphan works legislation , or whether a solution that is more like a compulsory license may make sense for those engaged in mass scanning . whatever the outcome , congress is much better situated than the judiciary to consider such important and far - reaching changes to the copyright system . in defending the settlement , a representative of google asserted that the settlement "is a strong complement to , and not a substitute for , orphan works legislation. he disagreed with the register's claim that the settlement would change copyright law: the settlement represents the resolution of a long and hard - fought litigation among multiple parties with divergent interests . the suggestion that the settlement usurps the role of congress to set copyright policy because the suit took the form of a class action is flatly wrong . the settlement does not establish new copyright law ; it is not even a determination on the merits of copyright law . all the settlement represents is the means by which the class of rightsholders decided to resolve the lawsuit . it remains to be seen whether the court's consideration of the settlement agreement in the google library project litigation affects the course of potential orphan works legislation in the 111 th congress . the court granted preliminary approval of the revised agreement on november 19 , 2009 , and scheduled a final fairness hearing on it for february 18 , 2010 . the court will consider any objections from class members , as well as conduct an independent review of the proposed agreement , in determining whether to grant final approval . • other legislative solutions . examples of proposed solutions in this category are deeming all orphaned works to be in the public domain , or changing the tax or bankruptcy codes to reduce the factors that cause orphan works to come into existence in the first place . it also considers several of the solutions proposed . for example , one approach might be that utilized by the canadian copyright board , which reviews applications for use of orphan works and approves them prior to use . this method receives support by some for the certainty that it provides and opposition by others who view it as administratively cumbersome , expensive , and largely ineffective in promoting actual use of orphan works . no legislation relating to orphan works has yet been introduced in the 111 th congress as of the date of this report . what follows is an analysis of orphan works bills that were considered by the 109 th and 110 th congresses . although congress has not yet passed orphan works legislation , recent developments in the private sector have further increased public interest in the orphan works problem .