cybersecurity is an emerging concern . section 1701 of the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( p.l . 110-53 ) requires that all imported marine containers be scanned by nonintrusive imaging equipment and radiation detection equipment at a foreign loading port by july 1 , 2012 , unless dhs can demonstrate it is not feasible , in which case the deadline can be extended by two years on a port - by - port basis . dhs has sought a blanket extension for all ports , citing numerous challenges to implementing the 100% scanning requirement at overseas ports . in a letter requesting renewal of the two - year extension , dhs secretary jeh johnson stated , i have personally reviewed our current port security and dhs's short term and long term ability to comply with 100% scanning requirement . following this review , i must report , in all candor , that dhs's ability to fully comply with this unfunded mandate of 100% scanning , even in the long term , is highly improbable , hugely expensive , and in our judgment , not the best use of taxpayer resources to meet this country's port security and homeland security needs . in an october 2015 hearing , dhs officials reiterated their opposition to a 100% scanning strategy in favor of a risk - based and layered security strategy . major u.s. trading partners also oppose 100% scanning . the european commission has determined that 100% scanning is the wrong approach , favoring a multilayered risk management approach to inspecting cargo . other facilities , including those handling containerized cargo , would continue to use the twic as a "flash pass," but the biometric data on the card would not be used to positively identify the worker . potential problems with this approach were highlighted by the february 2016 announcement that federal investigators uncovered a "document mill" producing fraudulent twic cards in los angeles . the final rule becomes effective on august 23 , 2018 . currently , the coast guard performs spot checks with hand - held biometric readers while conducting port security inspections . gao and inspector general audits have been highly critical of how the twic has been implemented . a 2013 gao audit found that the results of a pilot test of card readers should not be relied upon for developing regulations on card reader requirements because they were incomplete , inaccurate , and unreliable . this audit was discussed at a hearing by the house subcommittee on government operations on may 9 , 2013 , and by the house subcommittee on border and maritime security on june 18 , 2013 . the vast majority of the funding goes to public transit providers . crs estimates that , on an inflation - adjusted basis , funding for this program has declined 84% since 2009 , when congress allocated $150 million in the american recovery and reinvestment act , in addition to routine appropriations ( see table 1 ) . in a february 2012 report , gao found potential for duplication among four dhs state and local security grant programs with similar goals , one of which was the public transportation security grant program .