first . but how minimal ? what might be included within a minimal standard ? to whom should not less than the minimum be paid ? men , it was assumed , would need at least the minimum wage to support themselves and their families . but what about women , especially those with an employed spouse ? and young persons: youth workers ? are certain types of work , by definition , minimum wage work — deserving payment at the minimum wage or below ? early in the past century , some proposed a living , family , saving wage : that is , to allow for safe and healthful living , for procreation , and for setting aside a little for one's old age . still , there were problems with definitions . how safe and how healthful ? how much procreation: one child, two , or perhaps five or six ? setting aside a little for one's old age may be appropriate , but how much ? during 1937 and 1938 when the future flsa was under consideration by the congress , tensions arose that kept the bill from being enacted in its initial form . speaking generally , a compromise was developed that allowed the several parties to claim victory in the negotiations . the northern states would have preferred a higher wage ( 40 cents an hour ) ; the south agreed to settle for 25 cents an hour — leading up to 40 cents some years later . representative mary norton ( d - nj ) , then chair of the committee on labor , argued that "a bill of this kind is very necessary if we are going to help the underpaid workers of our country , reduce the relief rolls , and spread employment. the initial minimum wage ( 1938 ) was enacted as the united states was coming out of the great depression and just as it was about to enter world war ii . though it appears to have had little disruptive impact , the circumstances may not have been ideal for a test . the 1949 amendments may have been , similarly , obscured by the war in korea . thus , as congress considered new legislation that would adjust the minimum wage , it seems to have done so with some measure of circumspection . in 1975 , representative john dent ( d - pa ) , chair of the subcommittee on labor standards , introduced h.r . 10130 , a bill that would have increased the minimum wage , in steps , to $3.00 per hour . thereafter , an indexation formula , based upon the consumer price index ( or cpi ) would take effect . noting the increase in the cost - of - living , the afl - cio's andrew biemiller , agreed . "some such escalator provision is essential if we are to maintain the purchasing power of the minimum wage...." john erlenborn ( r - il ) , the ranking member , opposed indexation .