it is a part of its independence . if it could not exclude aliens , it would be to that extent subject to the control of another power... . the united states , in their relation to foreign countries and their subjects or citizens , are one nation , invested with powers which belong to independent nations , the exercise of which can be invoked for the maintenance of its absolute independence and security throughout its entire territory . congress has also been held to have the power to regulate the conduct of alien residents and to prescribe the conditions for their admission and residency . thus , it is arguable that congress can condition entry and residency of an alien upon his or her not acquiring investments in the united states . although this might be an extreme condition to apply , no federal case appears to suggest limits to congress's ability to place substantive conditions upon entry and residency of aliens . congress also has the exclusive power to "regulate commerce with foreign nations , and among the several states. the commerce clause would appear to give congress the power to restrict the use of instrumentalities of interstate commerce to transact the sale or exchange of property to a foreign citizen or to the representative of a foreign citizen . finally , congress's power to "raise and support armies" would also appear to be a constitutional basis for restricting foreign investment in the united states . if it is determined that foreign investments impair national preparedness in the event of an emergency , it appears that prohibition of foreign investments could on this basis be construed as constitutional . further , it should be noted that the federal government has exclusive authority over foreign relations . in the case zschernig v. miller , the supreme court held unconstitutional an oregon statute which provided for the escheat to the state of property which would otherwise pass to a nonresident alien unless the laws of the foreign nation had reciprocal rights for united states citizens . the oregon statute required the local probate courts to inquire into: the type of governments that obtain in particular foreign nations — whether aliens under their law have enforceable rights , whether the so - called "rights" are merely dispensations turning upon the whim or caprice of government officials , whether the representation of consuls , ambassadors , and other representatives of foreign nations is credible or made in good faith , whether there is the actual administration in the particular foreign system of law any element of confiscation . the court found the oregon statute to be unconstitutional because it infringed upon the exclusively federal authority over foreign relations . on the other hand , it has been stated that: the imposition of any significant investment controls would likely violate both the spirit and the letter of more than forty bilateral treaties regulating trade and investment relations , many of which laws have been signed within the last ten years , as well as derogating our commitment to the oecd code of liberalization of capital movements .