but this species is rare. former securities and exchange commission ( sec ) chairman arthur levitt , jr. has written that "these huge paydays , i believe , undermine corporate governance and send a signal that boards are willing to spend shareholders' money lavishly..." in addition , a 2006 survey found that 90% of institutional investors , who are the largest owners of outstanding domestic corporate shares , said that executives at most companies are overpaid . there are also a number of current examples of congressional concerns over executive pay . for example , the version of h.r . 2 ( the minimum wage bill ) passed by the senate on february 1 , 2007 , included several tax provisions , one of which applies to executive pay . current tax rules permit individuals to defer taxes on income that is held in non - qualified deferred compensation plans . under the senate version of h.r . 2 , an individual could defer no more than $1,000,000 annually from taxable income by contributing to such a plan . the version passed by the house had no similar provision . arguing for the cap , chairman max baucus of the senate finance committee , which unanimously passed the tax provisions that became part of the senate version of h.r . 2 , observed: rank - and - file workers generally have to pay taxes on their compensation when they earn it . the exception is deferred compensation provided through qualified retirement plans with statutory limits on contributions and benefits . a 401 ( k ) is the best example . management , on the other hand , has no limit on the amount that can be deferred to nonqualified arrangements — no limit... with respect to ceo pay , chairman barney frank of the house financial services committee said that: i do not think the boards of directors work as effective independent checks . they are not the fox guarding the hen house . they are the hens guarding the rooster . and i think the time has come to say we need the shareholders to do this... . in the 110 th congress , representative frank has introduced the shareholder vote on executive compensation act ( h.r . 1257 ) , which was approved by the house on april 19 , 2007 . soon afterwards , senator obama introduced an identically named companion bill , s. 1181 . the bills would require publicly held companies to hold annual non - binding shareholder votes on their executive compensation plans and any new "golden parachute" compensation offered to executives during mergers and acquisitions . critics argue that excessive executive pay can be significantly traced to the fact that the members of corporate boards are not sufficiently independent of managerial influence . in this view , boards formulate executive pay packages that often allow executives to extract hefty compensation deals that bear little relationship to their contribution to the firms . in addition , if corporate executives are overpaid , other potentially significant concerns include the following: issues over pay inequality and worker productivity .