appendix a . estimated allotments to the states under various hypothetical appropriations levels table a - 1 , below , shows estimated allocations to the states at various hypothetical appropriations levels . in column ( a ) are allotments at the equivalent of a hypothetical fy1984 appropriation of $1.975 billion — under recent liheap practice where funds are set aside for training and technical assistance , the equivalent appropriation level is approximately $1.978 billion . the remaining columns show estimated allotments at appropriations of $2.14 billion , just under $2.25 billion , $2.25 billion , $3.0 billion , $3.69 billion ( the amount appropriated in fy2019 ) , $4.0 billion , and $5.1 billion , the amount at which the liheap program was last authorized in p.l . in each case , the estimates assume that 0.5% would be set aside for the territories , the amount set aside by hhs starting in fy2014 . appendix b . further depiction of how state allotments depend upon appropriation levels figure b - 1 graphically illustrates the interplay of the hold harmless provisions in state allotments for three types of states over a range of appropriations from $0 to $5.1 billion . represented are ( 1 ) a hold - harmless level state , ( 2 ) a state whose increased allocations are ratably reduced in order to maintain allocations for the hold - harmless level and rate states , and ( 3 ) a hold - harmless level and rate state . these three states are not representative of all states in the three categories ; see table a - 1 for the range of individual state allocations . in the figure , there are three vertical areas . these areas separate the three levels of appropriations that are triggers under current law and were explained previously in this report . the figure also graphs the three types of states . these three types of states are as follows . hold - harmless level only state . this state is depicted with a blue line running from $0 to point g. states with "new" formula percentages that start out lower than their "old" formula percentages are subject to only the hold - harmless level provision . they do not qualify for the hold - harmless rate because each state's share of the regular funds at $2.25 billion is greater than 1% . the hold - harmless level is evident from point a to point f. here , despite increases in the appropriations level , the state allotment remains fixed . in table 1 , these are the states that have a "y" in column ( c ) and an "n" in column ( e ) .ratable reduction state . this state is depicted with a purple line running from $0 to point h. states with "new" formula percentages that are higher than their "old" formula percentages are subject to a ratable reduction . their new formula percentage is greater than their old ( fy1984 ) percentage . there is a small decrease in state allotments at point d that is attributable to the increased shortfall on the distribution of funds that the hold - harmless rate imposes .