in its decision , the d.c . ~ art . ii , §2 , cl . 3 as mentioned above , a functionalist interpretation of the phrases "the recess of the senate" and "vacancies that may happen" has traditionally prevailed , permitting the president to exercise his recess appointment power during either an inter - or intra - session recess of the senate and to fill any vacancy that exists regardless of when it arose . however , in 2013 , the united states court of appeals for the d.c . circuit ( d.c . circuit ) in noel canning v. nlrb resurrected a formalist interpretation of these phrases that would have significantly curbed the president's authority under the clause . circuit declared that the president could only make recess appointments when the senate entered into an inter - session recess at the end of congress , and only to vacancies that arose during that inter - session recess . because neither of those conditions were met in the facts underlying the noel canning appointments , the d.c . circuit declared the three recess appointments made by president barack obama to the nlrb constitutionally invalid . upon review , the supreme court unanimously affirmed that the recess appointments were invalid . however , the majority , in an opinion authored by justice breyer , rejected the d.c . circuit's interpretation of these key phrases , while four justices , concurring in judgment only , issued an opinion authored by justice scalia agreeing with the d.c . circuit's formalist interpretation . before delving into the supreme court's opinion in noel canning , this section first provides an overview of the historical interpretations of the phrases "the recess of the senate" and "vacancies that may happen. congress , in an attempt to check the president's use of the recess appointment clause and preserve its role in the appointments process , has enacted legislation that would restrict the pay of recess appointees under certain circumstances . as a fundamental matter , a recess appointee possesses the same legal authority as a confirmed appointee . the commission of a recess appointee expires "at the end of [the senate's] next session," whereas the service of a confirmed appointee continues until the end of the statutory term or at the pleasure of the president , subject to the requirements laid out by congress in creating the position . when the senate reconvenes after a recess during the same session , this is considered a continuation of the session and is not regarded as the "next session" within the meaning of the clause . the supreme court's decision in noel canning did not alter this understanding of the clause . in practice , this means that a recess appointment could last for almost two years . ( see textbox. ) on the one hand , if an individual receives an intersession recess appointment — that is , an appointment between sessions of the same or successive congresses — such individual could serve until the end of the following session .