figure 2 . india's separation plan sources: dr. frederick mackie , lawrence livermore national laboratory , and the congressional research service . u.s. officials acknowledge the importance of a credible indian separationplan for ensuring that the united states complies with its article i obligations underthe nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( npt ) - - to not in any way assist a nuclearweapons program in a non - nuclear weapon state . for almost thirty years , the u.s.legal standard has been that only nuclear safeguards on all nuclear activities in a stateprovides adequate assurances . the administration has sought , and congress hasprovided , backing for a lower level of assurance by proposing that the separation plantake the place of comprehensive safeguards . from a broad perspective , congress may consider whether opening upinternational cooperation to india after all these years has a net positive effect onindia's nuclear weapons program . under secretary of state nicholas burns toldreporters on march 2 , 2006 , that the agreement will not have an impact on india'sstrategic program . ( 55 ) however , some observers believe that unlessindia stops production of fissile material for weapons purposes , nuclear safeguardswill do little to ensure that assistance is not diverted . the dhruva researchreactor is excluded . under secretary of state burns stated that india "would enter into permanentsafeguard arrangements with the international atomic energy agency. however,the indian statement that an indian - specific safeguards agreement would "guardagainst withdrawal of safeguarded nuclear material from civilian use at any time aswell as providing for corrective measures that india may take to ensure uninterruptedoperation of its civilian nuclear reactors in the event of disruption of foreign fuelsupplies"raises questions about exactly what kind of safeguards arrangement isenvisioned . burns noted that the arrangement "achieved a degree of transparency andoversight and impact on the indian nuclear program that was not possible for threedecades. ( 47 ) figure 2 shows a rough depiction of how the final separation applies toindia's civilian and military nuclear facilities . from a narrower perspective , the text of a peaceful nuclear cooperationagreement is necessary for congress to assess whether or not the united states cancomply with its npt obligations not to assist india's nuclear weapons program . p.l.109-401 , which gives the president authority to waive certain requirements of theatomic energy act , still requires the administration to send congress not only thetext of a peaceful nuclear cooperation agreement , but also a nuclear proliferationassessment statement ( npas ) , which must address the extent to which u.s. treatycommitments are met . 109-401 , the following sections require reports to congressrelated to the separation plan: under the submission to congress provision of section 104 ( section 104 . ( c ) ( 2 ) ( a ) ) , the administration will be required to provide "a summaryof the plan provided by india to the united states and the iaea to separate india'scivil and military nuclear facilities , materials , and programs , and the declarationmade by india to the iaea identifying india's civil facilities to be placed under iaeasafeguards , including an analysis of the credibility of such plan and declaration,together with copies of the plan and declaration. under the reporting to congress provision of section 104 ( section 104 .