the cbi programs are not immune to these criticisms . beneficiary countries have no formal say in the design of the tariff preferences , must lobby the u.s. congress and executive branch to make a case for their continuance , must comply with numerous foreign policy and political requirements to maintain eligibility , and have been restricted from exporting key products under preference programs . results of the cbera program disappointed some because of the many structural limitations . even with cbi ii making the program permanent and the cbtpa adding many new products to the list of eligible exports , including textile and apparel articles , success has not been overwhelming . this change points to a critical analytical point . in disaggregating the u.s. import data , it is important to distinguish between two types of trends in the tariff preference programs , those that allow new categories of goods to enter the united states duty free , counted as increased trade because of trade preferences , and those that switch goods from one preference category to another ( eg , from gsp to cbtpa , cbtpa to cafta - dr , or cbtpa to hope ii ) , accounting for little net increase in imports from trade preferences , as discussed in more detail below . since first implemented in 1984 , caribbean tariff preference programs were intended to assist beneficiary countries with enhancing their export - led development strategies . they have combined u.s. trade preferences with their own proximity - driven niching strategies in a way that has helped them maintain a relatively small , but important market share in the united states . it is a strategy that may have led to selective export and economic growth , but the effects may have run their course given the proliferation of large low - cost asian producers and increasing substitution by the united states of the reciprocal fta for unilateral preferential trade arrangements in the region . in addition , many economists are skeptical about the efficacy of trade preferences as a development strategy , pointing to two areas in particular: design and administration of the preference programs and weak trade effects . structural design flaws can limit the effectiveness of unilateral trade preferences . trade preferences are also paternalistic in nature ; designed by developed countries to give "generous" one - way benefits to developing countries , but given the unilateral concessions required , the preference programs can be self - limiting , often for political reasons . for example , critics argue that unilateral agreements are non - binding , often subject to renewal , and can be denied or suspended ( and have been ) on a product or country basis , which can hinder investors from committing more fully to developing economies ; eligibility criteria are based on foreign policy and political goals of the developed country , often unrelated to enhancing trade performance , so they are not a costless proposition for recipients ; and , program details are subject to domestic economic pressures that typically seek to exclude import - sensitive articles , which can cause the developed country to apply higher than average tariffs on these goods for non - beneficiary countries .