this is not a new issue . for several decades , u.s. policy makers in the executive branch and congress have sought through legislation and the imf to influence international exchange rate policy in ways they believe compatible with u.s. interests . two decades ago , congress enacted the exchange rates and international economic policy coordination act of 1988 ( called here the 1988 exchange rates act ) out of concern that "policy initiatives by some major trading nations that manipulate the value of their currencies in relation to the united states dollar to gain competitive advantage continue to create serious competitive problems for united states industry. the 1976 amendment also provided that , if countries holding 85% of the imf voting power should ever agree , a uniform exchange rate system could be mandated for all imf member countries . given the differences of view among the major countries , most analysts believe the prospect for such an agreement is very small . article iv of the imf charter requires countries to cooperate with each other in order to assure orderly exchange arrangements and a stable exchange rate system . in particular , it says they must pursue economic policies which aim at fostering orderly economic growth with price stability , promote stable international monetary conditions , and avoid manipulating the exchange rate of their currencies in order to gain unfair competitive advantage in international trade or to prevent effective balance of payments adjustment . article iv says that the imf shall "exercise firm surveillance over the exchange rate policies of members" and "oversee the compliance of each member with its obligations" to cooperate with other countries and not to manipulate the value of their currency in order to gain unfair trade advantage . the imf charter gives the international agency no effective tools , however , to help it enforce its oversight responsibilities or its judgment whether countries are meeting their article iv responsibilities . it can issue statements but it has no tools to force them to alter their exchange policies . previously , most of the imf's surveillance over countries' exchange policies occurred during the fund's annual bilateral discussions with its member countries about their domestic and international economic policies . these discussions are mandated by article iv and called "article iv consultations. the imf also discussed international economic issues in publications — such as the annual world economic outlook report ( weo ) — which focus on cross - national or regional trends . the fund's independent evaluation office ( ieo ) estimates that only about 9% of the imf's resources are used for the preparation of such reports , however , while more than three times this volume of resources was spent for bilateral surveillance of individual countries . surprisingly , ieo reports that for all the emphasis given in imf commentaries to the importance of multilateral surveillance , discussion of foreign exchange issues accounts for only a small portion of the effort devoted to the analysis of global trends . moreover , ieo says , "conspicuously missing [from the fund's discussion of issues in the weo and other major reports] was an analysis of china's exchange rate , which in recent years has figured prominently in international policy debate.