, when an individual does not have a manifested disease ) . thus , the scope of protections afforded to pharmacogenomic test results might depend on whether the person already had a disease for which the treatment was indicated . s. 358 contains no parallel provisions . during the february 14 , 2007 , house education and labor committee markup , a proposed amendment to expand the definition of family member to include fetuses was defeated . however , the chairman's amended version of the bill contains provisions in title i and title ii specifying that the definition of genetic information ( rather than family member ) would include that of a fetus . s. 358 contains no similar provisions . although prenatal testing may be either diagnostic or predictive in nature , coverage for a child does not usually begin until the moment of birth . in general , medical insurance covers the named insured and dependents of the named insured . any genetic information collected about a fetus while a woman is pregnant would likely arise in the context of providing prenatal care to the insured woman . because the fetus would not appear to be a separate insured individual , it seems likely that any genetic information collected about the fetus would probably be attributed to the woman as the named insured , and protected from discrimination to the extent that her own medical information was protected . the bills' two titles define genetic information differently and , therefore , apply different restrictions to employers and insurers ( see table 1 ) . title i ( health insurance provisions ) specifically excludes from its definition of genetic information — and therefore does not protect — medical information that is not genetic information , including the analysis of proteins or metabolites directly related to manifested disease , disorder , or pathological condition . this exemption is not present in title ii ( employment provisions ) , making the definition of genetic information — and the scope of what is protected — broader for employers than insurers . in addition , the bills would permit health insurers to use or disclose the individual's current health status ( as determined without a genetic test ) , consistent with existing law . this permission is not present in title ii , as employers are already prohibited from using a person's current health status in specific ways by existing law . title i of the bills focuses on protecting predictive information ( i.e. , information about a future or potential health state in a currently symptom - free individual ) . it does so by exempting from the definition of genetic information analyses of proteins or metabolites that are directly related to manifested diseases . insurers could thus use this type of genetic information in accordance with current law governing insurance and employment practices . the definition of genetic test in the bills is more limited than the medical or scientific definition of genetic test , which covers both predictive and diagnostic reasons for testing . instances in which the distinction is blurred between predictive information and that related to a manifested disease may cause some confusion if the bills are enacted .