appendix a . 3144 ( s. 1739 proposed amendments ) ( a ) arrest of material witness— ( 1 ) a judicial officer may order the arrest of a person as a material witness , if it appears from an affidavit filed by a party in a criminal case before a court of the united states , or by an attorney for the government in a matter occurring before a federal grand jury , that there is probable cause to believe that— ( a ) the testimony of such person is material in such case or matter ; and ( b ) the person has been served with a summons or subpoena and failed or refused to appear as required . ( 2 ) a judicial officer may waive the summons or subpoena requirement described in paragraph ( 1 ) ( b ) , if the judicial officer finds by clear and convincing evidence that the service of a summons or subpoena— ( a ) is likely to result in the person fleeing ; or ( b ) cannot adequately secure the appearance of the person as required . ( b ) warrant for material witness— ( 1 ) a warrant issued under subsection ( a ) shall— ( a ) contain the name of the material witness or , if the name of such witness is unknown , a name or description by which the witness can be identified with reasonable certainty ; ( b ) specify that the testimony of the witness is sought in a criminal case or grand jury proceeding ; ( c ) command that the witness be arrested and brought without unnecessary delay before a judicial officer ; ( d ) inform the witness of the witness's right to retain counsel or to request that counsel be appointed if the witness cannot obtain counsel ; and ( e ) be signed by a judicial officer . ( 2 ) ( a ) a warrant issued under subsection ( a ) shall be executed by arresting the material witness . ( b ) ( i ) upon arrest , an officer possessing the warrant shall show such warrant to the material witness . ( ii ) if an officer does not possess the warrant at the time of arrest of a material witness , an officer— ( i ) shall inform the witness of the existence and purpose of the warrant ; and ( ii ) at the request of the witness , shall provide the warrant to the witness as soon as possible . ( 3 ) ( a ) after executing a warrant issued under subsection ( a ) , an officer shall return the warrant to the judicial officer before whom the material witness is brought in accordance with subsection ( c ) . ( b ) at the request of an attorney for the united states government , an unexecuted warrant shall be brought back to and canceled by a judicial officer . pretrial detention of witnesses , 117 university of pennsylvania law review 700 ( 1969 ) . ( c ) initial appearance— ( 1 ) a material witness arrested pursuant to a warrant issued under subsection ( a ) shall be brought without unnecessary delay before a judicial officer .