appendix a . special sessions of the human rights counci . if so , under what circumstances ? this report provides background on the council , including the role of the previous u.n. commission on human rights . should the united states rejoin the council ? finally , it highlights policy aspects of possible interest to the 116 th congress , including the debate over u.s. membership , u.s. funding of the council , alternatives to the council in u.n. fora , and the council's focus on israel . the u.n. commission on human rights was the primary intergovernmental policymaking body for human rights issues before it was replaced by the u.n. human rights council in 2006 . it discusses the council's current mandate and structure , as well as administration policy and congressional actions . created in 1946 as a subsidiary body of the u.n. economic and social council ( ecosoc ) , the commission's initial mandate was to establish international human rights standards and develop an international bill of rights . during its existence , the commission played a key role in developing a comprehensive body of human rights treaties and declarations , including the universal declaration of human rights . over time , its work evolved to address specific human rights violations and complaints , as well as broader human rights issues . it developed a system of special procedures to monitor , analyze , and report on country - specific human rights violations , as well as thematic cross - cutting human rights abuses such as racial discrimination , religious intolerance , and denial of freedom of expression . in the late 1990s and early 2000s , controversy developed over the human rights records of some commission members that were widely perceived as systematic abusers of human rights . these instances significantly affected the commission's credibility . critics , including the united states , claimed that countries used their membership to deflect attention from their own human rights violations by questioning the records of others . some members were accused of bloc voting and excessive procedural manipulation to prevent debate of their human rights abuses . in 2001 , the united states was not elected to the commission , whereas widely perceived human rights violators such as pakistan , sudan , and uganda were elected . in 2005 , the collective impact of these and other controversies led u.n. secretary - general kofi annan to propose the idea of a new and smaller human rights council to replace the commission . in 2006 , as part of broader u.n. reform efforts , the u.n. general assembly approved resolution 60 / 251 , which dissolved the u.n. commission on human rights and created the human rights council in its place . this section provides an overview of council structure and selected policy issues and concerns that have emerged over the years . most u.s. policymakers have generally supported the council's overall purpose and mandate ; however , many have expressed concern regarding its effectiveness in addressing human rights issues — leading to ongoing disagreements as to whether or not the united states should be a member of or provide funding for the council .