the court consolidated these cases for argument . the cases involved review of state convictions of two foreign nationals who were not promptly informed of their ability under vccr article 36 to have their consul notified of their arrest . the court in sanchez - llamas cites the presidential memorandum only once , to indicate that the united states "has agreed to 'discharge its international obligations' in having state courts give effect to the decision in avena , [but] it has not taken the view that the icj's interpretation of article 36 is binding on our courts. the vccr is a multilateral agreement codifying consular practices which have traditionally been governed by custom and bilateral agreements between nations . the vccr enumerates basic legal rights and duties of signatory states relating to , inter alia , the conduct of consular relations and the privileges and immunities accorded to consular officers and offices . the united states ratified the vccr in 1969 , and most countries are parties to the agreement . when the united states became a party to the vccr , it also chose to become a party to the vccr's optional protocol concerning the compulsory settlement of disputes ( optional protocol ) . parties to the optional protocol agree to accept the jurisdiction of the international court of justice ( icj ) to resolve disputes arising between nations with respect to the vccr . on march 7 , 2005 , the united states withdrew from the optional protocol . as a result , the icj's jurisdiction over vccr claims is no longer recognized by the united states . on november 2 , 2005 , the supreme court granted certiorari in two cases concerning article 36 violations , moises sanchez - llamas v. oregon and bustillo v. johnson . this was not the first instance where the court was asked to adjudicate matters relating to the enforcement of vccr article 36 . most notably , in the 1998 per curium opinion issued in the case of breard v. greene , the court concluded that , among other things , article 36 did not alter or create an exception to traditional u.s. procedural default rules in cases where a foreign national was not provided with requisite consular information . nevertheless , more recent legal developments raised questions regarding the continuing precedential value of breard . acting pursuant to the optional protocol , germany and mexico brought claims before the icj against the united states in 1999 and 2003 , respectively , for alleged article 36 violations . in the lagrand case ( federal republic of germany v. united states ) , the icj concluded , inter alia , that ( 1 ) article 36 provides covered individuals with a right to consular notification , and a violation of that right may require review and reconsideration of a foreign national's sentence and conviction in certain instances ; and ( 2 ) the application of procedural default rules to bar the raising of article 36 claims , at least in certain instances , prevents "full effect" from being given to the purposes for which the rights accorded under article 36 were intended .