other expectations included position taking and constituent education . table 1 summarizes the responses received by role categories established by the commission . according to the public survey conducted by the commission , the most common expectations of members were to represent the people and district according to the wishes of the majority ; to solve problems in the district ; and to keep in contact with the people in the district through regular visits and meetings in the district and polls or questionnaires . where members are daily confronted with representational , legislative , and institutional duties , the public focuses on representational , legislative , and service responsibilities , apparently without recognizing a broader underlying institutional , procedural , and operational framework in which members of congress operate . some observers suggest that this narrow public focus is in part a reflection of the attention the public gives , or does not give , to political matters in general . common member and public interest in local representation , constituency service issues , legislative activity , and regular contact between the member and the constituency may partially explain how individual members of congress receive broad public satisfaction or approval of their performance while congress as an institution , where members engage the procedural and operational barriers the public disdains , routinely trails the executive and judicial branches in public approval . the responses to the member and public surveys suggest that the roles and duties of a member of congress can be identified in part as an outgrowth of congressional and public expectations . other public expectations included regular attendance in legislative sessions and voting on legislation . table 2 summarizes the most frequently mentioned responses to the public survey . despite differences in point of view , both the member and public survey results describe common interests in local representation , constituency services , legislative activity , and regular contact between the member and the district . the differences between member and public expectations may reflect the different perspectives on the work of a member of congress . these congressional roles may be described by focusing on some of the underlying tasks typically required to carry them out . because some of the duties are complex , and some of the underlying tasks often overlap , some of the roles may overlap . the roles described below are derived from congressional duties mentioned in the constitution ; responses to the house surveys of members and the general public ; and scholarly studies . with no formal or definitive requirements , each member of congress is free to define his or her own job and set his or her own priorities . although elements of each of the roles described can be found among the duties performed by any senator or representative , the degree to which each is carried out differs among members as they pursue the common goals of seeking reelection , building influence in congress , and making good public policy . each member may also emphasize different duties during different stages of his or her career as other conditions of the member's situation change . for example , some may focus on outreach , constituent service , and other state or district activity .