also , h.r . unique to h.r . 2881 is a provision for a pilot program for aircraft departure queue management to decrease fuel consumption and emissions , and a provision requiring the faa and the epa to examine how engine noise and emissions standards development could be better integrated across the two agencies . similar to s. 1300 , h.r . 2881 includes a provision that would prohibit operations of non - stage 3 compliant jets under 75,000 pounds after 2012 . an amendment agreed to by the house also adds language stating that it is the sense of the house of representatives that the port authority of new york and new jersey should conduct noise compatibility planning studies ( referred to as part 150 studies ) at john f. kennedy international airport and laguardia airport in new york and newark liberty and teterboro airports in new jersey . additionally , the bill would increase funding for the airport cooperative research program ( acrp ) to examine airport environmental issues and calls for an interagency study on the effects of aviation on climate change . the bill would also require the faa to study the use of lead - free fuels for piston aircraft . with regard to the air tour management program and curtailing aircraft noise in national parks , the modifications proposed in h.r . 2881 are similar to the faa proposal initiatives to streamline and expedite agency actions . 2881 reserves $50 million in overflight fees for funding the essential air service ( eas ) program and increases the authorization for additional eas funds to $83 million . the bill encourages financial incentives and long - term contracts for eas , but would eliminate the local participation program created by vision 100 . the bill would also create an office of rural aviation within dot to monitor and improve air service to small communities . the bill also includes language allowing state and local governments to restore an airport's eas eligibility status by offering proposals , developed in cooperation with the air carrier , to reduce subsidies to below statutory per passenger maximums and allows dot to increase negotiated eas subsidies to adjust for any significant increases in air carrier fuel costs . the bill also seeks to clarify the statutory definitions related to the actual control of the operations of u.s. airlines that are owned in part by foreign entities . the house committee on transportation and infrastructure has also agreed to an amendment offered by representative oberstar to limit express carrier employees covered under the railway labor act ( rla ) to those performing certain aviation - related functions , leaving other express carrier employees , like delivery truck drivers , to be covered under provisions of the more broadly defined national labor relations act ( nlra ) , which allow them to organize and collectively bargain at the local level and according to less formal standards for affiliation . the measure is supported by labor unions and united parcel service ( ups ) whose employees are already primarily covered under the nlra , but is opposed by fedex , whose employees fall under the rla guidelines .