the issue is twofold . first is general u.s. interest in halting criminal behavior ( upholding the rule of law and protecting u.s. citizens and assets from illicit activity ) . second is how to deal with a government suspected of countenancing or sponsoring activity that may threaten u.s. diplomatic and security interests . a challenge facing policy makers is how to balance pursuing anti - drug , counterfeiting , and crime policies vis - à - vis north korea against effectively pursuing other high - priority u.s. foreign policy objectives , including ( 1 ) limiting possession and production of weapons of mass destruction , ( 2 ) limiting ballistic missile production and export , ( 3 ) curbing terrorism , and ( 4 ) addressing humanitarian needs . a core issue is whether the income from the dprk's reportedly widespread criminal activity has financed the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction and has strengthened the dprk's ability to maintain , until recently , truculent , no - compromise positions on the issue of its nuclear weapons program . some also speculate that the dprk's criminal smuggling networks could help facilitate the illicit movement of nuclear materials in and out of the country . resolution 1718 ( 2006 ) provides for economic sanctions against persons or entities engaged in or providing support for , including through illicit means , dprk's nuclear - related , other weapons of mass destruction - related and ballistic missile - related programs . counterfeiting , copyright and trademark violations , and other illicit activity occur in virtually all countries of the world , but in the north korean case , numerous sources indicate that the state apparently had — and may continue to be — sponsoring some of these activities . in this view , if the dprk is to join the larger international community of nations , it would be expected to cease state - sponsorship of such activities and to take appropriate measures against private parties engaged in such production and / or distribution . as the six - party talks on north korea's nuclear program have proceeded in 2008 , it appears that the u.s. goal of denuclearization has outweighed concerns related to dprk illicit activity ( with the exception of proliferation of nuclear weapons technology and materials ) . such illicit activity by north korea , however , could resurface as the six - party process proceeds and attention turns toward normalizing diplomatic ties with the dprk by the united states , japan , and south korea and allowing north korea to join international financial institutions such as the asian development bank , international monetary fund , and the world bank . the role of congress in this issue includes overseeing u.s. policy , eliciting information and raising public awareness of the issue , and balancing u.s. interests when foreign policy goals may conflict with anti - crime activities . congress also authorizes and appropriates funds for humanitarian and other economic assistance for north korea .