currently there are 75 countries who offer the treaty class visas . of these countries , 28 offer only the e - 2 treaty investor visa while 4 countries offer only the e - 1 treaty trader visa ( see appendix a ) . in the cases where a country offers both types of visas , an applicant who qualifies for both types of visa may choose based upon his or her own preference . such decisions , however , would depend upon the specific nature of the business as the e category visas carry different qualifying criteria for renewal . a focus of past debates has been on the impact immigrants have on jobs and wages . yet , these discussions frequently take on a different focus when it comes to foreign investors , in part because such visas are targeted at immigrants that are poised to inject capital into the economy and create employment . foreign investors are often viewed as providing employment opportunities for u.s. citizens rather than displacing native workers . thus , congress has in previous years been willing to set aside both temporary and permanent visas for foreign investors with the goal that this visa distribution would net positive economic effects . yet , extending foreign investor visas provides several potential risks as well , such as visa abuses and security concerns . with the extension of the immigrant investor visa pilot program — a program aimed at granting permanent immigrant visas for investments into certain limited liability corporations — until september 30 , 2012 , members of congress will have to decide if the current policy towards foreign investors should be maintained , or if a different set of policies should be implemented . the central policy question surrounding foreign investors — and particularly legal permanent resident ( lpr ) investors — is whether the benefits reaped from allocating visas to foreign investors outweigh the costs of denying visas to other employment - based groups . the subsequent analysis provides a background and contextual framework for the consideration of foreign investor visa policy . after a brief legislative background , this report will provide discussions of immigrant and nonimmigrant investors visas , a comparison of u.s. and canadian immigrant investor programs , an analysis of the relationship between investment and migration , and finally a review of current issues . since the immigration act of 1924 the united states has expressly granted visas to foreign nationals for the purpose of conducting commerce within the united states . although foreign investors had previously been allowed legal status under several treaties of friendship , commerce and navigation treaties , the creation in 1924 of the nonimmigrant treaty trader visa provided the first statutory recognition of foreign nationals as temporary traders . with the implementation of the immigration and nationality act of 1952 ( ina ) , the statute was expanded to include nonimmigrant treaty investors — a visa for which trade was no longer a requirement . nonimmigrant visa categories for traders and investors have always required that the principal visa holder stems from a country with which the united states has a treaty . the nonimmigrant visa classes are defined in §101 ( a ) ( 15 ) of the ina .