, worms and viruses ) . this technology can also be used by prc authorities to block politically sensitive content . in april 2004,shi , who was an editor at contemporary business news based in hunan province , attended aneditorial meeting in which government officials read an internal document outlining mediarestrictions before the 15th anniversary of the 1989 tiananmen square crackdown in june 2004 . shisent copies of his notes via his personal yahoo e - mail account to a pro - democracy organization inthe united states . prc state security authorities later requested information from yahoo thatenabled them to identify shi and use it in his conviction . jerry yang , co - founder and seniorexecutive of yahoo , confirmed that his company gave chinese authorities information and describedthe company's compliance as part of the legal burden of doing business in china . some u.s. officials have expressed their belief that the growth of the internet and otherinformation technologies will help bring about wide - scale democratization abroad . cisco has declared thatit does not tailor its products to the china market , and the products it sells in china are the same asthose in other countries . ( 42 ) in addition to u.s. companies , such as cisco , that provide hardware , a number of u.s.software and internet service providers , such as yahoo and microsoft , have been accused ofcomplying with censorship in china . ( 43 ) in 2002 , yahoo was condemned by human rights groups forvoluntarily signing a pledge of "self - discipline," promising to follow china's censorship laws . injune 2005 , microsoft's blog - hosting service , msn spaces , began removing words like "democracy"and "human rights" from use in chinese blog titles and postings . ( 44 ) in december 2005 , humanrights activists criticized microsoft after the company , at the prc government's behest , removed themsn spaces web log of a well - known chinese journalist , zhao jing . zhao , who worked for thebeijing bureau of the new york times , occasionally broached sensitive political topics on his blog,such as a recent strike at a city newspaper . in january 2006 , microsoft announced a new policy forforeign countries whereby the company would close personal web logs only if presented with alegally - binding order , inform its users of the reason for the removal , and continue to make such blogsaccessible in other countries . ( 45 ) in january 2006 , google announced that it would launch a search engine in china . - based site currently is the second - most popular search engine in china , despite the prcgovernment's occasional blocking of it , with an estimated 23% share of the market , after the chineseinternet content provider baidu ( 37% ) and followed closely by yahoo ( 21% ) . google will not offere - mail or blog services in china in order to avoid the possibility of having to divulge private internetuser information to the prc government . google reportedly will comply with prc laws regardingcensorship of information deemed inappropriate or illegal , but plans to disclose when suchinformation was removed for censorship purposes .