there are penalties for not reporting . the program has received some 500,000 pieces of data each day ; usda in turn has made the data public through more than 100 daily , weekly , or monthly reports . the program has captured information from 85-90% of the boxed beef market , 75% of the lamb meat market , 75-80% of the steer and heifer cattle market , 60% of the lamb market , and 95% of the hog market , usda officials testified in 2005 . should animal id be expanded to traceability of meat and poultry products from farm to the consumer , or used for other purposes such as food safety or certification of labeling claims ? how much will it cost , and who should pay ? in response , usda currently envisions a voluntary universal system for all of the major farm and ranch species of live animals , involving a cooperative effort between federal , state , tribal , producer and breed organizations . conferees omitted from the final measure a provision in the senate bill that would have required usda to issue regulations addressing "the protection of trade secrets and other proprietary and / or confidential business information that farmers and ranchers disclose in the course of participation" in an id system . other bills to establish differing animal health - oriented id systems , or to require more extensive systems tracing products through the marketing chain , also have not advanced in the 110 th congress . 1018 would prohibit usda from carrying out a mandatory animal id program and also would seek to protect the privacy of producer information under a voluntary system . 2301 would establish an animal id system administered by a board of livestock , poultry , and meat industry representatives . s. 1292 would require usda to implement a more extensive id and traceability system "for all stages of production , processing , and distribution of meat and meat food products" that are covered by federal meat and poultry inspection laws . 3485 similarly would require a comprehensive meat and poultry traceability system . meanwhile , lawmakers have sought to provide guidance and direction on the program through instructions in usda's annual appropriations and in accompanying report language . farm animals are not covered by the animal welfare act ( awa ; 9 u.s.c . ยง2131 et seq .

 ) , which requires minimum care standards for most types of warm - blooded animals bred for commercial sale , used in research , transported commercially , or exhibited to the public . the animal care division of aphis has primary responsibility for enforcing the awa and several other animal welfare statutes , including the horse protection act ( 15 u.s.c . ยง1821 et seq . ) farm animals are subject to the humane methods of slaughter act ( 7 u.s.c . 1901 et seq .

 ) , enforced by usda's food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) . the act governs the humane slaughter and handling of livestock ( but not poultry ) at packing plants . also , under the so - called twenty - eight hour law ( 49 u.s.c .