, 2 nd sess . the compromise on the energy tax title in h.r . 6 proposed to raise taxes by about $21 billion to fund extensions and liberalization of existing energy tax incentives . this point applies to all the industries reflected in table 2 . continued high crude oil and petroleum product prices and oil and gas industry profits , and the political realignment of the congress resulting from the 2006 congressional elections continued the energy policy shift toward increased taxes on the oil and gas industry , and the emphasis on energy conservation and alternative and renewable fuels rather than conventional hydrocarbons . in the 110 th congress , the shift became reflected in proposals to reduce oil and gas production incentives or subsidies , which were initially incorporated into , but ultimately dropped from comprehensive energy policy legislation . in the debate over these two comprehensive energy bills , raising taxes on the oil and gas industry , by either repealing tax incentives enacted under epact05 , by introducing new taxes on the industry , or by other means was a key objective , motivated by the feeling that additional tax incentives were unnecessary — record crude oil and gasoline prices and industry profits provides sufficient ( if not excessive ) incentives . in early december 2007 , it appeared that the congressional conferees had reached agreement on another comprehensive energy bill , the energy independence and security act ( h.r . 6 ) , and particularly on the controversial energy tax provisions . the democratic leadership in the 110 th congress proposed to eliminate or reduce tax subsidies for oil and gas and use the additional revenues to increase funding for their energy policy priorities: energy efficiency and alternative and renewable fuels ( i.e. , reducing fossil fuel demand ) rather than an energy ( oil and gas ) supply increase . in addition , congressional leaders wanted to extend many of the energy efficiency and renewable fuels tax incentives that either had expired or were about to expire . however , the senate stripped the controversial tax title from its version of the comprehensive energy bill ( h.r . 6 ) and then passed the bill ( 86-8 ) on december 13 , 2007 , leading to the president's signing of the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l . 110-140 ) , on december 19 , 2007 . the only tax - related provisions that survived were ( 1 ) an extension of the federal unemployment tax act surtax for one year , raising about $1.5 billion , ( 2 ) higher penalties for failure to file partnership returns , increasing revenues by $655 million , and ( 3 ) an extension of the amortization period for geological and geophysical expenditures from five to seven years , raising $103 million in revenues . the latter provision was the only tax increase on the oil and gas industry in the final bill . those three provisions would offset the $2.1 billion in lost excise tax revenues going into the federal highway trust fund as a result of the implementation of the revised corporate average fuel economy standards .