vol . 81 ( march 1991 ) , pp . furman , jason . health reform through tax reform: a primer , health affairs , vol . 3 , may 2008 . gruber , jonathan . tax policy for health insurance . nber working paper 10977 national bureau of economic research . december 2004 . hubbard , r. glenn , john f. cogan , and daniel p. kessler . healthy , wealthy , and wise: five steps to a better health care system . aei press / the hoover institution . november 2005 . kaplow , louis . the income tax as insurance: the casualty loss and medical expense deductions and the exclusion of medical insurance premiums . california law review , vol . 79 ( 1991 ) , pp . kahn , charles n. and ronald f. pollack . building a consensus for expanding health coverage . march 1994 . the general formula for calculating federal income taxes appears below . the list omits some steps , such as prepayments ( from withholding and estimated payments ) and the alternative minimum tax . health affairs , vol . 20 ( january / february 2001 ) , pp . smart , michael and mark stabile . tax credits and the use of medical care . nber working paper 9855 . national bureau of economic research . sheils , john and randall haught . the cost of tax - exempt health benefits in 2004 . health affairs , web exclusive ( january - june 2004 ) , pp . u.s. congressional budget office . consumer - directed health plans: potential effects on health care spending and outcomes . december 2006 . — — the tax treatment of employment - based health insurance . 20 ( january / february , 2001 ) , pp . the president's advisory panel on federal tax reform . simple , fair , and pro - growth: proposals to fix america ' s tax system . november 2005 . american economic review . july 2003 . pauly , mark . taxation , health insurance , and market failure in the medical economy . journal of economic literature , vol . 24 ( 1986 ) , pp . pauly , mark and bradley herring . expanding coverage via tax credits: trade - offs and outcomes . health affairs , vol . most of the tax rules discussed here have also been adopted by states that have income taxes . feldman , roger and bryan dowd . a new estimate of the welfare loss of excess health insurance . tax expenditures measure the difference in tax liabilities for individuals and corporations due to provisions that are exceptions to a normative comprehensive income tax . current law provides significant tax benefits for health insurance and expenses . the tax subsidies ( mostly federal income tax exclusions and deductions ) are widely available , though not everyone can take advantage of them . they reward some people more than others , raising questions of equity . they influence the amount and type of coverage that people obtain , which affects their ability to choose doctors and other providers . in addition , the tax benefits affect the distribution and cost of health care .