electricity . priorities include improving the production and distribution ofelectricity by attacking corruption and mismanagement of the independent public corporation,electricity of haiti , which has the monopoly on electricity . according to the icf , about 90 percentof haitians have no access to electricity . development of private sector and small - and medium - sizeenterprises / industries . priorities include helping to revive the private sector by making variousfunds available to small businesses , combating corruption , developing a commercial code andencouraging integration of haiti into regional and international markets . rapid job creation and micro - finance . priorities include creating jobsthrough labor intensive work programs , especially in public programs to improve infrastructure . according to the icf ( p. 25 ) , "almost 1 out of every 2 haitians between the ages of 20 and 45 doesnot have a lucrative occupation. the framework calls for creating about 687,000 jobs from2004-2006 , and increasing access to micro - credit , especially for women . agriculture . priorities include improving the capacity of agricultural workersto meet their needs in the short term by supplying vaccinations , conducting disease control , repairingfarm equipment , and distributing tools and seed . various sorts of technical assistance in agriculturaltechniques are called for in the medium term . the report recommends rehabilitation of part of theministry of agriculture "to restore its minimal intervention capability," and training of ministry ofagriculture staff , farmers organizations , and others to maximize the effectiveness of suchinterventions . although 45% to 50% of haiti's working population is engaged in agriculture , 80%of farmers cannot meet the basic food needs of their families ( icf , p. 26 ) . roads and transportation . transportation infrastructure , which includesroads , airports , airstrips , and harbors , are in great need of investment and maintenance , as they arein "a state of very advanced dilapidation," according to the icf ( p. 27 ) . priorities include makingroads that are necessary for development usable at all times , by quickly conducting roadrehabilitation work , and then setting up financial and institutional mechanisms for managing andmaintaining them . currently , only 5% of 3,400 kilometers of roads are in good condition . thestrategy also calls for identifying and quickly investing in whatever is necessary to maintaincontinuity of port and aviation activity , and improving port management . environmental protection and rehabilitation . priorities include promotingsustainable use of natural resources through reduced reliance on wood fuel ; planning and carryingout of activities aimed at halting degradation of land and natural resources ; and supporting thedevelopment and implementation of disaster management plans . haiti is caught in a vicious cyclethat makes the land unable to sustain the needs of its inhabitants and vulnerable to natural disasters . because farmers lack the means to invest in more efficient technology , they employ unsustainablemethods , such as cutting down trees for wood fuel , which contributes to deforestation , which leadsto soil erosion , which leads to inadequate agricultural production , and continued poverty . theprogram focuses on supporting local initiatives and the development of national plans to managenatural resources effectively . axis 4: improve access to basic services . muchof haiti's population lacks access to basic services .