appendix a . the juvenile justice and delinquency prevention act ( jjdpa ) of 1974 the juvenile justice and delinquency prevention act ( jjdpa ) was first passed by congress in 1974 and was most recently reauthorized in 2002 by the 21 st century department of justice appropriations authorization act . its provisions are currently authorized through fy2007 . this appendix will analyze the original jjdpa . is there sufficient coordination occurring at the federal level ? should the federal approach to juvenile justice focus on rehabilitation , accountability , or both philosophies ? the original jjdpa and its major revisions through the end of the 109 th congress , when it was most recently reauthorized , are addressed in appendix a and appendix b . juvenile justice in the united states has been predominantly the province of the states and their localities . the first juvenile court in america was founded in 1899 in cook county , illinois . twenty - five years later , all but two states had enacted legislation establishing a separate juvenile court system for young offenders . the mission of these juvenile courts was to attempt to turn young delinquents into productive adults rather than merely punishing them for their crimes . this led to marked procedural and substantive differences between the adult and juvenile court systems in the states , including a focus on the offenders and not the offenses , and on rehabilitation instead of punishment . the federal government began to play a role in the states' juvenile justice systems in the 1960s and 1970s . in the juvenile delinquency and youth offenses control act ( p.l . 87-274 ) , congress provided funds for state and local governments , through the department of health , education , and welfare ( hew ) , to conduct demonstration projects to research improved methods for preventing and controlling crime committed by juveniles . in 1968 , congress passed additional legislation to provide direct assistance to state and local governments and to train juvenile justice personnel . to receive funding , states were required to designate a single agency to take the lead in improving delinquency prevention and control programs . also in 1968 , congress for the first time placed juvenile justice grant authority within the purview of the department of justice ( doj ) . despite these congressional efforts to provide assistance to the states as they attempted to rein in juvenile crime , juvenile arrests for violent crimes increased by 216% between 1960 and 1974 . this increase in juvenile violent crime outstripped the growth in the juvenile population ; the under - 18 population grew from 47 million in 1950 to 70 million in 1970 — an increase of only 49% . it seemed apparent that the technical assistance and financial aid that congress had provided the states was not enough to address the growing problem of juvenile crime , and many commentators maintained that there was a need for a distinct federal entity to manage the federal government's response to juvenile delinquency . in 1974 , congress addressed the issue by passing the first comprehensive piece of juvenile justice legislation , the jjdpa .