theoretically , it should not . traditionally , the department observes the wage rates paid onseveral classes of construction ( i.e. , residential , public buildings , highways , and heavy construction ) for each jurisdiction ( normally a county unit ) across the united states . it is usually upon that unitthat locality is based . perhaps the most frequently asked question concerning the davis - bacon act is the following: how much money could we save ( the taxpayer and the government contractor ) if the davis - baconact were repealed or modified to narrow its scope ? many have claimed to have an answer , but thereis little empirical evidence available . the short answer would seem to be that no one really knows . does the davis - bacon act , in fact , save money for the federal construction consumer ? it may - - butthat question is similarly open . after nearly three - quarters of a century , why is the literature on davis - bacon of such dubiousvalue ? first , given the number of projects covered by the act ( and their diversity ) , it is nearlyimpossible for an independent scholar to review the act's administration and to assess its impact . second , there is the availability of basic documentation . how much information has actually beenpreserved ? third , assuming that the data are available , securing such documentation ( and access toadministrative personnel ) may be problematic . if one assumes that documentation exists , that the analyst is granted access to it , that all ofthe parties are cooperative , and that the means , financial and other , are available for such anundertaking , the analyst is left with a fourth complication . he or she is comparing something thatdid happen with something that in fact , for whatever reasons , did not happen . in the absence of adavis - bacon requirement , would the contract have gone to the same contractor ? if so ( or if not ) ,would it have been managed in the same way ? did the act have any impact upon the wages actuallypaid or upon workforce utilization ? without davis - bacon , would different workers have beenemployed - - and would they have been paid different rates ? these same questions confront a public agency in its efforts to investigate davis - bacon'simpact . for a public agency , the task is no less massive than it would have been for a privatescholar . and , in the public sector , there may be other constraints . simply put , how much fundingand staff time could ( or should ) be devoted to an investigation of the davis - bacon impact onconstruction that is already in place ? what political or policy concerns may come into play ? one might like to be able to say , forthrightly , that a change in the statute could have apositive or a negative impact . however , the state of current exploratory research would probablybe insufficient to justify just an assertion . historically , it is not entirely clear why it was necessary for the franklin rooseveltadministration to have suspended the act .