aip money cannot be used for an airport's operational expenses . for the most recent five - year period where full final data were available , major accidents in the united states occurred at a rate of less than one in every 8.8 million flight hours . nonetheless , aviation safety experts are , to some degree , at odds over whether the current level of commercial airline safety can be further improved upon . although currently not a major negotiation point with respect to u.s. "open skies" agreements , it appears that statutory changes would be required before the executive branch can enter into any sort of agreement purporting to liberalize the cabotage rules . although foreign aircraft are allowed to navigate within u.s. airspace , unless specifically authorized either by statute or dot regulations they are not permitted to perform any form of cabotage within the united states . while it is unclear what , if any , economic effect a more liberal cabotage policy would have on the domestic airline industry , only congress has the legal authority to amend the federal aviation act and permit foreign carriers to have cabotage rights . aviation is a field rich with acronyms and system specific terms . this glossary provides a listing of some of the key new technical terms and their acronyms associated with near - term and long - range operational concepts for air traffic management ( atm ) , and communication , navigation , and surveillance ( cns ) infrastructure . while this is far from an exhaustive list of aviation terminology and acronyms , its purpose is to provide the reader with a reference to several of the key new terms and concepts likely to be encountered during debate over faa reauthorization . a system for broadcasting aircraft identification , position , altitude , heading , and speed data derived from on - board navigation systems such as a global positioning system ( gps ) receiver unit . ads - b out functionality refers to a basic level of ads - b aircraft equipage where navigation data is transmitted only . aircraft reception of ads - b signals from other air traffic or traffic , weather , and flight information from ground stations is referred to as ads - b in . the ads - b system is envisioned as a future means for air traffic surveillance that may , to a large extent , replace radar surveillance of air traffic in the future . a proposed major overhaul of the national airspace system ( nas ) relying on new air traffic communications , navigation , and surveillance ( cns ) and air traffic management ( atm ) technologies to greatly enhance effective system capacity . congress last amended the cabotage laws as part of vision 100 . the enacted changes permit "eligible cargo" to be removed from aircraft , including foreign aircraft , in alaska and "not be deemed to have broken its international journey in , be taken on in , or be destined for alaska. these provisions provide for a very limited statutory exception to the general prohibition against cabotage activities . the dot envisions ngats as a system capable of tripling effective system capacity by 2025 .