the court's key decisions are now discussed in greater detail . the following section will provide a synthesis of the constitutional requirements and considerations , as gleaned from the above cases , employed by the supreme court in reviewing punitive damages awards . although the court's analysis of challenges to punitive damages has been somewhat amorphous , the basic limitations on punitive damages under the due process clause are generally considered either procedural or substantive . however , because the court has been hesitant to characterize the imposition of constitutional limits on punitive damages as an aspect of substantive due process , it can be difficult to clearly differentiate between substantive and procedural limitations . the court itself , for instance , has disagreed as to whether the court imposed limits on punitive damages have been based on substantive or procedural due process . the court's composition has changed since it last considered the application of the due process clause to punitive damages awards in philip morris . the presence of a new justice , in conjunction with a consistent pattern of strong dissents in previous cases , raises the potential for an alteration of the court's current approach to due process limitations on excessive punitive damages awards . with four justices historically supporting existing limits on punitive damages , three historically objecting to existing limits , one justice questioning the recent extension of limits , and one new justice , the current dynamic suggests an environment in which a modification of the court's current jurisprudence is possible . multiple justices have dissented from each supreme court opinion that has invalidated a punitive damages award as inconsistent with the constitutional requirements of due process . justice thomas and justice scalia have consistently expressed their position that punitive damages can never violate substantive due process . the constitution , in their view , simply "does not constrain the size of punitive damages awards. neither thomas nor scalia has ever signed onto an opinion that applies a substantive due process limitation to punitive damages . justice ginsberg has also consistently disagreed with the majority on the extent to which the constitution places limitations on punitive damages . the justice considers the court's attempts to place limits on punitive damages a subjective intrusion into an area of state concern . justice ginsberg also questions the court's method for determining the point at which a punitive damages award becomes excessive , arguing: "too big is , in the end , the amount at which five members of the court bridle. though initially supportive of due process limitations on punitive damages awards , justice stevens balked at the court's latest decision to prohibit the consideration of harm to nonparties in assessing punitive damages . in philip morris , stevens reiterated that he believed that the court's prior cases announcing due process constraints on punitive damages "were correctly decided. he disagreed , however , with the court's additional imposition of a "novel limit" on the state's power to impose punishment , through punitive damages , in civil litigation . contrary to the majority view , stevens considered harm to nonparties a "relevant factor" in reviewing the validity of a punitive damages award .