table 1 . welfare reauthorization provisions included in senatecommittee bills and house budget reconciliation bill source: congressional research service ( crs ) . there are notable exceptions . s. 667 ( the financecommittee bill ) would extend the abstinence education state grant program and revise and extendtma through fy2010 , whereas the house budget reconciliation bill includes none of thoseprovisions . further , the house reconciliation bill , unlike the senate committee bills or the earlierhouse republican leadership welfare reauthorization bill ( h.r . 240 ) , includes someadditional provisions that would reduce spending , including proposals to reduce federal matchingfunds for state child support enforcement programs and to revise foster care and adoption assistanceeligibility rules to negate a court ruling that expanded eligibility for these programs in certain states . table 1 summarizes what provisions are included in the senate committee bills and thehouse reconciliation bill . note that when provisions are included in both , they still may differsignificantly in their details . these differences are the subject of the remainder of this report . table 2 provides a detailed comparison of welfare and related provisions in the two senatecommittee bills ( s. 667 and s. 525 ) and the house budget reconciliationbill . for the senate proposals , the table notes both the bill and section numbers . the house budgetreconciliation bill is organized by titles reflecting each house committee's legislative changes . thewelfare and related proposals are found both in title ii , from the education and workforcecommittee , and title viii of the bill , from the ways and means committee . in most respects , thecommittees reported identical legislative language . in those cases , table 2 provides both sectionreferences for identical provisions . in cases where the two committees reported different provisions,the table separately indicates the education and the workforce and ways and means provisions . the house budget reconciliation bill is an omnibus bill that includes many provisionsunrelated to welfare reform programs . those provisions are not discussed in this report and notshown on the table . further , s. 667 makes a number of changes to the earned incomeand child tax credits . the tax provisions of s. 667 are also not addressed in this report orshown on the table . table 2 . comparison of current law with s. 667 / 525 and the house budget reconciliation bill welfareprovision . the 109th congress is considering legislation to reauthorize and amend programs that werecreated or revised in the 1996 welfare reform law . ( 1 ) early in the 109th congress , the senate finance and health,education , labor , and pensions committees approved and reported their welfare reauthorizationlegislation ( respectively , s. 667 and s. 525 ) . neither bill has yet seenaction in the full senate . in the house , a welfare reauthorization proposal ( h.r . 240 ) , introduced by the houserepublican leadership , has also failed to reach the floor . on november 18 , 2005 , the house passed its budget reconciliation bill ( s. 1932 ) , which includes welfare reauthorization legislation similar to that which passed the house in2002 and 2003 . ( the house - passed version of s. 1932 is h.r . 4241 asamended and approved by the house. )