the united states has not played a role in the eas process nor was it invited to attend . whatis of concern to some analysts is that this appears to be a potential challenge to americaninvolvement in the region . some fear that by shifting emphasis from apec , an organization in whichthe united states has played a leading role and which encompasses the broader pacific rim , to anannual east asia summit , in which the united states is not a participant , america's overall positioncould become relatively less influential and the united states could potentially be excluded frompreferential trade agreements . ( 42 ) the sco asked in july2005 for a timetable for the withdrawal of u.s. coalition forces in central asia . ( 43 ) china's potentialopposition to america presence in a region that it may increasingly see as within its sphere ofinfluence may portend future negative postures relative to american forces elsewhere in asia . developing a constructive relationship with china is generally viewed as the most significantforeign policy challenge for the united states in asia , and possibly the world , in the years ahead.how the united states reacts to china's bid to position itself more centrally in asia , as demonstratedby the eas , is an important component of this challenge . a policy approach that seeks to continueto foster the peaceful rise of china appeals to many . ( 44 ) some feel that it is important that american policy on the eastasia summit , or a potential future east asian community , not be interpreted by china as an effortto contain china but rather as a policy initiative to demonstrate that america seeks to remain anactive and constructive actor in asian multilateral affairs and that it supports the constructiveintegration of china into regional and world affairs . "... the efforts of the east asia summit to promote community building in thisregion will be consistent with and reinforce the realization of the asean community , and will forman integral part of the evolving regional architecture. "... the east asia summit will be an open inclusive , transparent and outwardlooking forum ... with asean as the driving force ..." the eas will focus on "fostering strategic dialogue and promoting cooperationin political and security issues ... promoting development , financial stability , energy security,economic integration and growth eradicating poverty and narrowing the development gap in eastasia ..." ( 32 ) the summit has highlighted a number of evolving geopolitical dynamics in the region . ( 4 ) apec , however , is primarily a trade and economic organization . though president bush attended the apec gathering in busan , southkorea in november 2005 , that gathering is being viewed by some as "trumped" by the december2005 eas meeting . a major strategic consideration isthat apec includes taiwan whereas the eas does not . "... we have established the east asia summit as a forum for dialogue on broadstrategic , political and economic issues of common interest and concern with the aim of promotingpeace , stability and prosperity in east asia.