several of these challenges are discussed below . china's rapid economic growth and emergence as a major economic power have given china's leadership increased confidence in its economic model . many believe the key challenges for the united states are to convince china that ( 1 ) it has a stake in maintaining the international trading system , which is largely responsible for its economic rise , and should take a more active leadership role in maintaining that system ; and ( 2 ) further economic and trade reforms are the surest way for china to grow and modernize its economy . lowering trade and investment barriers would boost competition in china , lower costs for consumers , increase economic efficiency , and spur innovation . however , many u.s. stakeholders are concerned that china's efforts to boost the development of indigenous innovation and technology could result in greater intervention by the state ( such as subsidies , trade and investment barriers , and discriminatory policies ) , which could negatively affect u.s. ip - intensive firms . opinions differ as to the most effective way to deal with china on major economic issues . some support a policy of engagement with china using various forums , such as the newly created u.s. - china comprehensive economic dialogue . others support a somewhat mixed policy of using engagement when possible , coupled with a more aggressive use of the wto dispute settlement procedures to address china's unfair trade policies . still others , who see china as a growing threat to the u.s. economy and the global trading system , advocate a policy of trying to contain china's economic power and using punitive measures ( such as trade sanctions ) to either counter the negative impact of china's industrial policies on u.s. firms or push china to modify distortive and discriminatory policies ( such as the made in china 2025 initiative ) . responding to china's bri is viewed by some as a major challenge to u.s. global economic interests . while china's financial support of infrastructure projects in numerous countries could produce positive economic results , u.s. policymakers have expressed concerns that china will use bri to mainly benefit its own firms , that the process of implementation of projects will not be transparent , that bri participation could saddle countries with large debts , and that china will use the bri to spread its economic system to other countries . these data differ significantly from official chinese fdi outflow data . the cgit data on the top destinations of total chinese outward nonbond outward investment from 2005 to 2017 included the united states ( $172.7 billion ) , australia ( $103.7 billion ) , the united kingdom ( $75 billion ) , brazil ( $61.2 billion ) , and russia ( $53.8 ) ( see figure 14 ) . the cgit also puts chinese fdi in the united states in 2017 at $24.5 billion ( compared to $54.6 billion in 2016 ) , making the united states the largest destination of chinese outward fdi . china's largest u.s. acquisition in 2017 was hna's purchase of cit group's aircraft leasing business for $10.4 billion . economic reforms and trade and investment liberalization have helped transform china into a major trading power .