ojp is overseen and managed by the aag . the aag coordinates the efforts of ojp's five bureaus and two program offices to ensure that ojp's mission is met . ojp's five bureaus are the bureau of justice assistance ( bja ) , the national institute of justice ( nij ) , the office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention ( ojjdp ) , the bureau of justice statistics ( bjs ) , and the office of victims of crime ( ovc ) . ojp's two program offices are the community capacity development office ( ccdo ) , and the sex offender sentencing , monitoring , apprehending , registering , and tracking ( smart ) office . the cops program was created by title i of the violent crime control and law enforcement act of 1994 ( the '94 crime act ) . the mission of the cops program is to advance community policing in all jurisdictions across the united states . the cops program awards grants to state , local , and tribal law enforcement agencies throughout the united states so they can hire and train law enforcement officers to participate in community policing , purchase and deploy new crime - fighting technologies , and develop and test new and innovative policing strategies . this section discusses the following doj grant programs: weed and seed , the drug court discretionary grant program , the prisoner re - entry initiative , the president's dna initiative , the debbie smith dna backlog grant program , the kirk bloodsworth post - conviction dna testing program , the paul coverdell grant program , assistance to indian tribes ( indian country prison grants , tribal courts grant program , indian country alcohol and crime demonstration program ) , and tribal law enforcement assistance . this report does not discuss any other discretionary grant programs administered by ojp and cops , nor does it discuss the justice assistance grant program ( jag ) , any grant program administered by the office on violence against women ( ovw ) , any grant program administered by the office of victims of crime ( ovc ) , or ojp and cops grant programs that have traditionally received funding through earmarks . see the appendix for a list of crs products that have a more extensive discussion of some of these other grant programs . for years , some have questioned the effectiveness of doj grant programs and have called for program evaluations . the administration responded by requiring federal agencies to submit strategic and annual performance plans and report on program performance . as a result , doj now requires grantees to collect and report output and outcome measurement data . in addition to collecting output and outcome measures , doj has also conducted evaluations of some of its programs . crs report rs22070 , juvenile justice: overview of legislative history and funding trends , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl33947 , juvenile justice: legislative history and current legislative issues , by [author name scrubbed] . the government accountability office ( gao ) assessed six evaluations of five drug courts and found mixed results . crs report rl32247 , dna testing for law enforcement: legislative issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .