because dhs's u.s . citizenship and immigration services bureau ( uscis ) was only able to process 161,579 of the potential 226,000 family - sponsored lprs in fy2003 , an extra 64,421 lpr visas rolled over to the fy2004 employment - based categories and created the spike depicted in figure 1 . employers who seek to hire prospective immigrant workers petition with the uscis . an eligible petitioner ( in this instance , the eligible petitioner is the u.s. employer seeking to employ the alien ) must file an i - 140 for the alien seeking to immigrate . uscis adjudicators determine whether the prospective lpr has demonstrated that he or she meets the qualifications for the particular job as well as the ina employment - based preference category . in terms of employment - based immigration , decisions of the board of immigration appeals ( bia ) have significantly affected the implementation of the law by offering clarification of the statutory language . while dol draws on regulations that govern its role , the uscis is more often guided through bia decisions and procedures spelled out in the former immigration and naturalization service's operations instructions . the ina does not delineate a standard policy to investigate and enforce violations of the lcas , and the statutory authority for such investigations and enforcement actions varies across visa categories . the enforcement responsibilities for violations of these adverse effect provisions , however , are variously assigned to the department of homeland security ( dhs ) or the department of justice ( doj ) as well as to dol . as discussed at the outset of this report , the ina requires the secretary of labor to certify that the employment of an employment - based lpr will not adversely affect the wages and working conditions of similarly employed workers in the united states . the dol certifying officer ( co ) who learns that an lca for an employment - based lpr is possibly fraudulent refers that case to dhs or doj for investigation . presumably , doj and dhs could also investigate such cases as document fraud under ยง274c of the ina . dol has the authority to revoke the lca if an employer is subsequently found in violation . dol also may debar an employer for three years if the employer is found to have violated the lca requirements . in the case of h - 1b labor attestation , however , the secretary of labor has statutory authority to investigate and enforce lca violations of h - 1b petitions , which she has delegated to the administrator of the wage and hour division ( whd ) . more precisely , the whd is charged with investigating the complaints . the whd administrator may assess back wages and benefits for the h - 1b worker , civil penalties against the employer , and other administrative remedies . if an employer is found to have willfully violated the ina , the whd may conduct random investigations of that employer over the next five years . a dol administrative law judge would decide the case if the employer charged with an h - 1b violation requests a hearing . the whd is also responsible for informing eta and uscis of employer violations .