composed of the u.s . secretaries of defense and state and their japanese counterparts , and thus known as the "2+2" , the scc meets roughly annually and issues joint statements that reflect present alliance concerns and provide concrete guidance for the near term . some scc meetings have been more far - reaching , elaborating on alliance priorities and common strategic objectives . due to the legacy of the u.s. occupation and the island's key strategic location , okinawa hosts a disproportionate share of the u.s. military presence in japan . about 40% of all facilities used by u.s . forces japan ( usfj ) and half of usfj military personnel are located in the prefecture , which comprises less than 1% of japan's total land area . the attitudes of native okinawans toward u.s. military bases are generally characterized as negative , reflecting a tumultuous history and complex relationships with "mainland" japan and with the united states . because of these widespread concerns among okinawans , the sustainability of the u.s. military presence in okinawa remains a challenge for the alliance . for more information and analysis , see crs report r42645 , the u.s. military presence in okinawa and the futenma base controversy , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . in the last days of 2013 , the united states and japan cleared an important political hurdle in their long - delayed plan to relocate a major u.s. military base on the island of okinawa . hirokazu nakaima , then - governor of okinawa , approved construction of an offshore landfill necessary to build the replacement facility . this new facility , located on the shoreline of camp schwab in the sparsely populated henoko area of nago city , would replace the functions of marine corps air station ( mcas ) futenma , located in the center of a crowded town in southern okinawa . the encroachment of residential areas around the futenma base over decades has raised the risks of a fatal aircraft accident , which could create a major backlash on okinawa and threaten to disrupt the alliance . nakaima's approval of the landfill permit gave hope to washington and tokyo that , after decades of delay , they could consummate their agreement to return the land occupied by mcas futenma to local authorities , while retaining a similar level of military capability on okinawa . a u.s. - japan joint planning document in april 2013 indicated that the new base at henoko would be completed no earlier than 2022 . alongside the relocation of mcas futenma , the marine corps realignment plans calls for about 9,000 marines and their dependents to be transferred from okinawa to locations outside of japan: to guam , australia ( on a rotational basis ) , hawaii , and potentially the continental united states . u.s. defense officials described the realignment as in line with their goal of making u.s. force posture in asia "more geographically distributed , operationally resilient , and politically sustainable.