all are violating the immigration laws of the united states . the existence of a large unauthorized population creates an illicit industry devoted to creating fraudulent identities and documents to aid unauthorized aliens in living and working in the united states . illegal identity documents may be used by terrorists and other criminals who desire to remain hidden from law enforcement . in addition , some argue that it would be harder for unauthorized aliens , including criminals and terrorists , to stay in the united states if finding a job were more difficult . also , they assert that the initiative would make it easier to arrest more potential terrorists and foreign born criminals , thus providing an elevated level of security for the nation . opponents contend , however , that these agreements undermine the relationship between local law enforcement agencies and the communities they serve , noting that there are existing tensions between local law enforcement agencies and many minority communities , and this tension is heightened when local law enforcement engages in immigration enforcement . for example , potential witnesses and victims of crime may be reluctant to come forward to report crimes in fear of actions that might be taken against them by dhs . they contend that the initiative could result in the reduction of local law enforcement resources as well as the inconsistent application of immigration law across jurisdictions . some law enforcement officers have raised concerns about the complexities of immigration law creating liability issues . previously in this report , workload measures were presented for the different types of immigration enforcement activities . for example , for removals , workload was measured in the number of removals , for worksite enforcement in nifs , for inspectors , the number of inspections . nonetheless , none of these measures are comparable with each other . for example , comparing the number of inspections with the number of removals does not provide any insight into resource allocation , especially since the staff time devoted to each task is different . it may take three minutes of an inspectors time to process an alien entering the country , where as it may take days or weeks for a special agent to locate and apprehend one illegal alien . this section examines the actual hours spent on different tasks by special agents and immigration agents from 1992 through 2003 . as previously discussed , during 2004 , ice and cbp switched their accounting system from ins' performance analysis system ( pas ) to the u.s. customs service's treasury enforcement communications system ( tecs ) , and as a result , data for 2004 onward are not comparable with previous years . tecs contains fewer data fields than pas , which means that some of the data in pas do not exist in tecs . in addition , the data for fy2004 are incomplete in both systems , as the different parts of ice did not switch from pas to tecs at the same time . questions have been raised concerning the impact of dhs's organizational structure on the effective enforcement of immigration laws .