appendix a . nuclear weapons , nuclear weapons complex , and stockpile stewardship program this report refers to nuclear weapons design , operation , and production throughout . this appendix describes key terms , concepts , and facilities as an aid to readers not familiar with them . current strategic ( long - range ) and most tactical nuclear weapons are of a two - stage design . the first stage , the "primary," is an atomic bomb similar in principle to the bomb dropped on nagasaki . regarding current warheads , what assurance can there be that sfis and surveillance have wrung out all the defects ? might serious defects be found in the future because they develop with age or because advances in weapons science reveal them ? why incur the added burden imposed by rrw ? the primary has at its center a "pit," a hollow core containing fissile material ( typically plutonium ) and containment shells of other metals . it is surrounded by chemical explosive shaped to generate a symmetrical inward - moving ( implosion ) shock front . when the explosive is detonated , the implosion compresses the plutonium , increasing its density so much that it becomes supercritical and can sustain a runaway nuclear chain reaction . the primary provides the energy needed to trigger the second stage , or "secondary. the neutrons drive this reaction by splitting ( fissioning ) plutonium atoms , repeatedly doubling the number of neutrons released . might rrw , which involves a new approach to design , introduce new risks and defects into the stockpile ? congress might direct nnsa to update the 1996 sfi review to learn how warhead aging and responses have developed in the past decade . a neutron generator injects neutrons into the plutonium . but the chain reaction can last only the briefest moment before the force of the nuclear explosion drives the plutonium outward so that it becomes subcritical and can no longer support a chain reaction . to increase the fraction of plutonium that is fissioned , boosting the yield of the primary , another system injects "boost gas" — a mixture of deuterium and tritium ( isotopes of hydrogen ) gases — into the pit before the explosive is detonated . the intense heat and pressure of the fission chain reaction cause this gas to undergo fusion . while the fusion reaction generates energy , its purpose is to generate a great many neutrons and thus "boost" the fission chain reaction to a higher level . others feel that rrws will reduce this burden once they are deployed . congress may wish to determine if dod leadership strongly supports rrw at present , and if not why not . rrw advocates argue that minor changes from leps may reduce confidence in current warheads over the long term , while rrw designs should provide high confidence because they stay well within parameters defined by nuclear test data and have wider margins than current warheads . lep advocates respond that current warheads have extensive nuclear test pedigrees , ssp has greatly improved understanding of weapons science , and nnsa states that leps can extend the life of current warheads by 20 to 30 years .