excerpts from the bill follow . title ix — department of defense organization and management subtitle a — department of defense management sec . additional duties of deputy assistant secretary of defense for manufacturing and industrial base policy and amendments to strategic materials protection board . ( a ) findings - congress finds the following: ( 1 ) the defense logistics agency has made little progress in addressing the findings and recommendations from the april 2009 report of the department of defense report titled `reconfiguration of the national defense stockpile report to congress' . second , what are the factors that contribute to the success or failure of the administration of the specialty metal clause ? third , how does one weigh the reliability of having a domestic supplier base in times of urgent and compelling need , coupled with the desire to promote global trade ? congress may want to consider whether recent revisions in the specialty metal clause have adequately addressed the purpose of the law , as well as concerns raised about how the new rules are implemented . it is important to note that the specialty metal clause in the berry amendment had been in place for over three decades . any change in the law could likely have both upstream and downstream effects in the defense supply chain . how will the change affect prime contractors and subcontractors on the second , third , and fourth tiers , as well as domestic suppliers ? at least seven possible options for policy makers to consider are listed below: ( 1 ) eliminate the specialty metal clause ; ( 2 ) require an assessment of compliance with new exceptions to the specialty metals clause ; ( 3 ) require a review of waivers issued under the revised specialty metals clause , including requiring dod to publicly disclose when waivers are granted ; ( 4 ) require congressional approval before non - compliant specialty metal can be used in certain defense contracts ; ( 5 ) require a congressional report for each platform / component where non - compliant specialty metals are used in defense contracts ; ( 6 ) encourage the use of domestic specialty metal ; and ( 7 ) appoint a special metals protection board . 4310 , the national defense authorization act for fy2013 , contains a provision which broaden the definition of specialty metals produced within the united states . section 817 would amend 10 u.s.c . 2533b to include "melted , or processed in a manner that results in physical or chemical property changes that are the equivalent of melting. congress enacted provisions in the fy2007 national defense authorization act that changed the statutory authority for the special metal clause . 109-364 created a new specialty metal clause separate from the berry amendment , moving it into a separate section of title 10 . also , section 842b established a one - time waiver of the berry amendment for non - compliant specialty metal incorporated into items produced , manufactured , or assembled in the united states before the date of the act's enactment . dod can grant waivers provided the noncompliance was not knowing or willful . creates a new section , 10 u.s.c .