little apparently was accomplished . in 1988 , the burmese military established rule through a military junta ( subsequently called the state peace and development council — spdc ) . one of its first acts was to change the official name of the country from burma to myanmar . however , the u.s. government has continued to use "burma" in official statements , and this report will use "burma" unless statements are quoted using "myanmar. since 1988 , numerous reports , including the annual reports of the u.s. state department , have described extensive abuses of human rights perpetuated by the spdc and the burmese military . these assessments have changed little over the subsequent 17 years . the state department's human rights report for 2004 concluded that the spdc has an "extremely poor human rights record" ; and the 2004 and 2005 reports asserted that the situation had "worsened" in each year . numerous reports throughout 2006 and 2007 indicate a continuation of this trend . the department's reports and reports of private groups have laid out a familiar pattern of government and military abuses: extra - judicial killings , torture , rape , arbitrary arrests for political reasons , forced impressment into the service of the military , forced labor and relocations , and tight restrictions on the press , speech , and assembly . the number of political prisoners has been over 1,000 for several years ( including the house arrest of aung sann suu kyi and nld deputy leader tin oo ( which the spdc extended for one year in february 2008 ) . many human rights abuses reportedly are committed by the military against members of burma's ethnic minorities . the government negotiated cease - fire agreements with 17 ethnic insurgencies in the 1990s ; but three groups , the karen , karenni , and shan have continued to fight . ethnic minorities make up the bulk of an estimated 540,000 internally displaced people in eastern burma and over 150,000 refugees who have fled across the border into thailand . a large - scale burmese military offensive against karen insurgents throughout 2006 and 2007 reportedly has included burning of villages , forced relocations of civilians , mine - laying in civilian areas , and rapes . government policies reportedly are particularly oppressive against members of the muslim rohingya minority in western burma , whom the spdc has barred from citizenship . the worsening human rights situation has been influenced by the deteriorating political situation since 2002 . it began with the physical attack by spdc supporters on aung san suu kyi and her followers in may 2003 and her subsequent house arrest . in october 2004 , the spdc arrested khin nyunt , chief of burma's defense intelligence organization , and scores of his intelligence officials . khin nyunt had been the arm of the spdc in dealing with foreign governments , including the united states and burma's partners in the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) . he reportedly had advocated that the regime open negotiations with the nld and be responsive to some of the international criticisms of the spdc .