the regulation at 42 c.f.r . ยง59.5 had required , and continues to require , that abortion not be provided as a method of family planning . the july 3 , 2000 , rule amended the section to add the requirement that a project must give pregnant women the opportunity to receive information and counseling on each of the following options: prenatal care and delivery ; infant care , foster care , or adoption ; and pregnancy termination . if the woman requests such information and counseling , the project must give "neutral , factual information and nondirective counseling on each of the options , and referral upon request , except with respect to any option ( s ) about which the pregnant woman indicates she does not wish to receive such information and counseling. according to opa , family planning projects that receive title x funds are closely monitored to ensure that federal funds are used appropriately and that funds are not used for prohibited activities such as abortion . the prohibition on abortion does not apply to all the activities of a title x grantee , but only to activities that are part of the title x project . the grantee's abortion activities must be "separate and distinct" from the title x project activities . safeguards to maintain this separation include ( 1 ) careful review of grant applications to ensure that the applicant understands the requirements and has the capacity to comply with all requirements ; ( 2 ) independent financial audits to examine whether there is a system to account for program - funded activities and nonallowable program activities ; ( 3 ) yearly comprehensive reviews of the grantees' financial status and budget report ; and ( 4 ) periodic and comprehensive program reviews and site visits by opa regional offices . it is unclear precisely how many title x clinics also provide abortions through their non - title x activities . in 2015 , the guttmacher institute surveyed a nationally representative sample of publicly funded family planning clinics . respondents included 535 clinics that received title x funds . based on that survey , an estimated 10% of clinics that received any title x funding reported offering abortions separately from their title x project . in 2004 , following appropriations conference report directions , hhs surveyed its title x grantees on whether their clinic sites also provided abortions with nonfederal funds . grantees were informed that responses were voluntary and "without consequence , or threat of consequence , to non - responsiveness. the survey did not request any identifying information . hhs mailed surveys to 86 grantees and received 46 responses . of these , 9 indicated that at least one of their clinic sites ( 17 clinic sites in all ) also provided abortions with nonfederal funds , and 34 indicated that none of their clinic sites provided abortions with nonfederal funds ; 3 responses had no numerical data or said the information was unknown . some also argue that recent declines in u.s. teen birth rates can be explained in part by changes in teen contraceptive use . by law , title x providers are required to "encourage" family participation when minors seek family planning services .