there are no national primaries in france . for most of the fifth republic , individuals who emerged as a party's candidate rose through the ranks and were the consensus choice of those who ran the party structures . the election season of 2006-2007 unfolded somewhat differently . the essence of the u.s. - french relationship is unlikely to change substantively under sarkozy's presidency . trade disputes will continue to be managed through the european union . the socialist party holds 227 seats . since 1981 , france has had only two presidents , the socialist françois mitterrand and the gaullist jacques chirac , each a formidable political figure who dominated his respective party . in 2002 , presidential terms were shortened from seven years to five years ; there are no limits on the number of terms a president may serve . legislative elections now follow the presidential elections by a month . under the fifth republic ( 1958-present ) , france has had a strong presidential system , significantly different from many european parliamentary systems . fifth republic structures were meant to avoid the ever - changing parliamentary governments of the fourth republic ( 1946-1958 ) , when the country needed but rarely found strong leadership after the second world war and during the algerian war for independence ( 1954-1962 ) , a conflict that led to instability and violence in france as well as in algeria . the president is elected by a national vote and enjoys clear command of national security and the armed forces . although the president appoints a prime minister who names a cabinet , it is the president who shapes all major policy initiatives and is the unquestioned political leader of the government . compared with the united states , france is a highly centralized country , not only in political authority but also in economic structures . although some industries have been privatized in recent years , the state continues to control or to influence many key industries to a degree unknown in the united states . even the country's main road and rail systems run through or emanate from paris . important domestic and foreign policy issues were at play in the campaign . integration of the large muslim minority , now nearly 10% of the population and mostly north african in origin , has been a focal point of discussion for a decade , but most pointedly since the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , on the united states and riots in the suburbs , where most muslims live , of several major french cities in 2005 . control of immigration , was another key electoral issue . a related issue was high unemployment , plaguing the country for years . in foreign policy , the unstable middle east and the possible rise of a nuclear - armed iran considerable attention from the key candidates . france's role in the european union was also a question of importance to the population . sarkozy's campaign was successful because he presented a clear program of reform to the electorate and appealed to national front voters concerned about immigration , crime , and the economy . the first round of the elections eliminated extremists on the right and the left .