109-282 no later than 2010 . as previously noted , the act did not require information on subcontractors and subgrantees to be included in the database until january 1 , 2009 . the delay reflected the fact that information on subrecipients was not collected consistently across federal agencies and programs . to address existing gaps in the data on subawards , the act required omb to implement a pilot program that tested the feasibility of having primary recipients provide information on their subgrantees and subcontractors . there was a provision in the legislation that allowed federal award recipients and subrecipients to be reimbursed for the costs associated with collecting and reporting data on subrecipients . the act also specified that any requirements for collecting data on subawards made by state and local governments under block and formula grants be cost - effective . according to cbo , no unfunded mandate would be placed on recipients or subrecipients for complying with the act . the act also required omb to submit an annual report to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform . the report must include data on public usage of the website , an assessment of the reporting burden on federal award and subaward recipients , and an explanation of any extension of the subaward reporting deadline . the act also required omb to post a copy of the report on the web . on december 13 , 2007 , omb launched the ffata - mandated website , usaspending.gov . the website , as required by the ffata , allows users to search for detailed information on grants , contracts , loans , and other forms of assistance . the data , however , are not complete and some observers question their accuracy . the possible cost to improve the data quality is unclear . also unclear is the possible cost to collect information that might not currently be available , such as data on subcontractors and subgrantees , which must be available to the public through the website by january 1 , 2009 . the ability of users to identify earmarks through usaspending.gov also appears to be limited . as noted previously , the underlying logic of the federal funding accountability and transparency act is that , by providing citizens with information on federal assistance awards through an online database , government officials will be less likely to fund earmarks and arguably "wasteful" projects . to put this argument succinctly: greater transparency will yield greater accountability . most observers agree that in order for a public database of federal awards to provide maximum transparency , it must encompass as broad a range of financial assistance categories as possible . the ffata database would presumably provide substantial transparency , since it covers all forms of federal financial assistance , including contracts . arguably , the database would also provide transparency by phasing in information on subcontractors and subgrantees , thus allowing the public to track the flow of federal funds down to the level of the ultimate recipient .