policing in the uk is largely decentralized . the home office has ministerial responsibility for the police services in england and wales . the scottish ministry of justice has ministerial responsibility for policing in scotland , while the secretary of state for northern ireland sets policy for policing there . operational control , however , of all of the police services in england , wales , scotland , and northern ireland rests with the chief constable of each force . mi5 operates under the statutory authority of the home secretary , although it is not part of the home office . the secret intelligence service ( sis , or mi6 ) , the uk's foreign intelligence service , gathers intelligence overseas . the government communications headquarters ( gchq ) provides signals intelligence to counter a range of threats , including terrorism , and is also the national technical authority for information assurance , helping to keep data residing on government communication and information systems safe from theft , manipulation , and other threats . both mi6 and gchq operate under the statutory authority of the foreign secretary , although neither is part of the foreign and commonwealth office . the main instrument for advising the government on priorities for intelligence gathering and for assessing its results is the joint intelligence committee ( jic ) . the jic is part of the cabinet office , and currently chaired by sir richard mottram , the security and intelligence coordinator . the jic , analogous to the u.s. national intelligence council , is responsible for providing ministers and other senior officials with coordinated , inter - departmental intelligence assessments . in june 2003 , in an effort to improve intelligence - sharing and cooperation against terrorism further among the uk's different law enforcement and intelligence agencies , the uk created the joint intelligence analysis center ( jtac ) to collate and evaluate intelligence about potential threats and provide early warning . jtac seeks to break down institutional barriers between analysts of the different security and intelligence agencies by drawing together about 100 officials from 11 government departments and agencies , including mi5 , mi6 , gchq , the police , and the defense and transport ministries . jtac provides both long - term studies of international terrorism and immediate assessments of current threats ; it is analogous to the u.s. national counter terrorism center . jtac is responsible to the director - general of mi5 . although the police and security services have the primary role in domestic protection against terrorism , the armed forces may be called upon domestically in the event of a major terrorist incident requiring military units with specialized skills ( such as the special forces hostage rescue commandos or those trained to deal with cbrn events ) . the uk armed forces may also be deployed to assist in the management of a natural disaster . the decision to deploy the military to assist the civil authorities in an emergency would be made by cobr , and the armed forces would have no jurisdiction outside of supporting the civil powers . the ministry of defense and the armed forces are also responsible for protecting 160 key uk sites , and for guarding uk nuclear weapons .