the rate is the same for all personnel . how much more ? if there is a gap , does that in itself require action ? a wide range of studies over the past several decades have attempted to compare military and civilian ( both federal civil service and private sector ) compensation . in general , the markedly different ways in which civilian public and private sector compensation and benefit systems are structured , compared to those of the armed forces , make it difficult to validate any generalizations about whether there is a "gap" between military and civilian pay . it is difficult to find a common index or indicator to compare the dollar values of military and civilian compensation . first , military compensation includes numerous separate components , whose receiving population and taxability vary widely . which of these , if any , should be included in a military - civilian pay comparison ? furthermore , total military compensation includes a wide range of noncash benefits — health care , commissary access , recreational facilities — as well as a unique deferred compensation package . few civilians work in organizations where analogous benefits are provided . attempts to facilitate a comparison by assigning a cash value to noncash benefits almost always founder on the large number of debatable assumptions that must be made to generate such an estimate . second , it is also difficult to establish a comparison between military ranks and pay grades on the one hand and civilian jobs on the other . the range of knowledge , supervision , and professional judgment required of military personnel and civilians performing similar duties in a standard peacetime industrial or office milieu may be roughly equivalent . however , when the same military member's job in the field and in combat is concerned , comparisons become difficult . third , generally speaking , the conditions of military service are frequently much more arduous than those of civilian employment , even in peacetime , for families as well as military personnel themselves . this aspect of military service is sometimes cited as a rationale for military compensation being at a higher level than it otherwise might be . on the other hand , the military services all mention travel and adventure in exotic places as a positive reason for enlistment and / or a military career , so it may be misleading to automatically assume that this is always a liability . thus , it can be difficult to make direct comparisons between military and civilian occupations . as noted by the congressional budget office: comparing compensation in the military and civilian sectors can be problematic . one obvious limitation is that such comparisons cannot easily account for different job characteristics . many military jobs are more hazardous , require frequent moves , and are less flexible than civilian jobs in the same field . members of the armed forces are subject to military discipline , are considered to be on duty at all times , and are unable to resign , change jobs at will or negotiate pay . military personnel also receive extensive training , paid for by the government . family support programs are generally more available in the military compared with civilian employers .