in the 109 th congress , h.r . the debate of dual - use export controls ultimately becomes one of choosing the right balance between national security concerns and commercial considerations . do these proposed agreements fulfill the obligations of trade promotion authority ? do the labor protection provisions in these agreements reflect the intention of congress ? do these ftas serve broader u.s. trade and foreign policy interests ? do these ftas provide an economic benefit commensurate with the negotiating resources needed to conclude them , or would resources be better spent negotiating in multilateral or large regional forums such as the wto or with the asia - pacific economic community ( apec ) ? do geopolitical considerations have a disproportionate influence on the selection of fta partners , and if so , is that justified ? of primary importance to legislators , however , may be the manner in which a potential trade agreement affects the employment or business prospects of constituents . individual members face the decision of whether the threat of lost jobs , and lost market - share to import - competing industries , outweigh the prospect of new employment or new markets for exporters . [[author name scrubbed] , specialist in international trade and finance ( [phone number scrubbed] ) ] by year - end 2006 , the u.s. current account , a broad accounting of the net difference between the goods and services the country exports and imports annually , is to surpass the record $717 billion deficit recorded in 2005 . the cumulative amount of successive deficits is raising concerns about the long - term impact on the economy as a result of financing the current account deficit through inflows of foreign capital . given current macroeconomic conditions , however , these capital inflows are bridging the gap between domestic supplies of and demand for capital , including the federal government's budget deficit . foreign investors are now major investors in u.s. corporate stocks and bonds and hold more than 50% of the publicly - traded u.s. treasury securities . at some point , foreign investors may become uncomfortable with the large share of u.s. assets in their holdings and reduce their purchases of u.s. assets . such a reduction would place added strains on the u.s. economy and likely increase pressures on the 110 th congress to address difficult budget and spending issues . international capital flows now far surpass flows of goods and services in the global economy and are the driving force behind the international exchange value of the dollar . demand for u.s. assets , such as financial securities , translates into demand for the dollar , since u.s. securities are denominated in dollars . as demand for the dollar rises or falls according to overall demand for dollar - denominated assets , the value of the dollar changes . over the past three years , the average exchange value of the dollar has fallen by more than 10 percent against the euro and other currencies that float freely .