as noted , p.l . tactics the bush administration described its "desire to transform relations with india" as "founded upon a strategic vision that transcends even today's most pressing security concerns. there is clearly broad congressional support for cultivating a close relationship with india , yet some members of congress have suggested that civil nuclear cooperation may not be the most appropriate vehicle for advancing our relationship . in a house international relations committee hearing on september 8 , 2005 , then - representative jim leach stated , i don't know any member of congress that doesn't want to have a warming of relations with the government of india... . i also don't know many members of congress who are pushing for the precise commitment that the administration has made . representative leach suggested instead that u.s. support for a permanent seat for india on the united nations security council might have been a more appropriate gesture . other observers outside of congress have questioned whether u.s. energy assistance should focus on expanding nuclear power , in contrast to other energy alternatives . henry sokolski of the nonproliferation policy education center has argued that indian energy needs might be better met through free market allocation , including improved efficiency . he asserts that nuclear power is the least leveraged of india's options to meet india's energy needs , given that it currently provides only 2.7% of installed electrical capacity . india's projections of its nuclear energy needs are predicated on an estimated annual growth rate of 8% , which some observers believe may be unrealistic . one well - known indian commentator , brahma chellaney , argued in the international herald tribune that the premise that india should meet its rapidly expanding energy needs through importing nuclear power reactors was flawed . chellaney argued that a better approach for india would be to secure clean - coal and renewable energy technologies . the senate foreign relations committee's november 2 , 2005 , hearing sought , among other things , to answer the question of why civil nuclear cooperation was so important to the u.s. - indian strategic relationship . then - under secretary of state nicholas burns told committee members that "india had made this the central issue in the new partnership developing between our countries. impact on u.s. nonproliferation policies the bush administration characterized civil nuclear cooperation with india as a "win" for nonproliferation because it would bring india into the "nonproliferation mainstream. in short , the administration proposed that india should be courted as an ally in u.s. nonproliferation policy , rather than continue as a target of u.s. nonproliferation policy . according to this reasoning , india should become an ally for three reasons: past policies have not worked ; india has a relatively good nonproliferation record ; and india could be a useful ally in the nonproliferation regime . some observers , however , are concerned that india may not support u.s. nonproliferation policies sufficiently to warrant nuclear cooperation , particularly where the united states faces its greatest nuclear proliferation threat: iran .