this is the case for wireline or wireless networks . moreover , market convergence is not simply the ability to bundle voice , data , and video services into a single product offering . rather , it is a technological spillover ( from digital technology ) that reduces entry costs so that firms that already have single - use networks providing voice , data , or video services can now use those networks with relatively inexpensive upgrades to offer multiple services over a single platform . for example , at far less cost than would be required to build an entirely new network , the incumbent local exchange carriers can deploy dsl equipment on their copper networks to offer data and video services or the cable companies can upgrade their networks to offer voip . in this situation , in which underlying costs are likely to limit the number of network providers , public policy can nonetheless foster competition by removing impediments to single - use networks expanding into other markets . this policy goal can be fully compatible with the development of a competitive market for telecommunications services , including the last mile into customers' premises , so long as the universal service funding mechanism is constructed in a competitively neutral and efficient fashion . that cannot be accomplished if any of the universal service subsidy is hidden in above - cost rates for certain services that are intended to subsidize the below cost rates for other services . in that situation , a competitor could successfully enter the market by undercutting the above - cost prices for those services whose rates are raised to include implicit subsidies , but could not compete in the provision of those services whose rates are set below cost . the policy goal also cannot be achieved if the universal service subsidy is not available on the same basis to all competitors in the market . this is especially important today , with competing wireline , cable , mobile wireless , and fixed wireless technologies all potentially able to offer service to rural customers . in addition , if the universal service funding mechanism is not efficient — and therefore requires more resources than is necessary to provide universal availability — it will place an unnecessary burden on telecommunications markets ( or on the general public , if supported by general tax revenues ) . the 1996 act took a major step in the direction of reconciling universal service with competitive markets by requiring that "[a]ny such support should be explicit and sufficient to achieve the purposes...." this requirement has not yet been achieved , however . although competitive market forces have driven some above - cost rates down toward cost , especially for business services , and an explicit federal universal service fund ( "fusf" ) funding mechanism has been created that provides a significant portion of total universal service subsidies , many rates continue to be set above cost in order to include hidden universal service subsidies ( for example , the intrastate access charges of many rural telephone carriers discussed earlier in the section on intercarrier compensation ) .