amend . xiv , ยง 1 , cl . although some legal scholars have argued that the phrase "uniform rule of naturalization" precludes congress from enacting legislation granting relief to a specific individual , the courts have interpreted the phrase as simply requiring geographic uniformity throughout the states , meaning that congress cannot enact legislation applying different rules to different states . the constitutional basis for private immigration bills generally is found in the first amendment prohibition against congressional enactments abridging the right of the people "to petition the government for a redress of grievances" ( amend . i , cl . and in the power of congress to pay the debts of the united states ( art . i , ยง 8 , cl . regardless of academic concerns about the clarity of authority for private immigration legislation , clearly , congress has a long history of such enactments . when the public laws relating to immigration operate to prevent someone from entering or remaining in the united states or obtaining some other benefit such as citizenship , private immigration bills provide for exceptions for named individuals or small groups of individuals whose circumstances merit special consideration . private bills are intended to be a last resort for relief after all administrative and judicial remedies are exhausted . aside from the individual relief granted , the number and type of private bills introduced and of private laws enacted often revealed flaws in the public laws which led to amendments to resolve such problems . conversely , expansion of immigration restrictions and elimination of relief in the public immigration laws may lead to an increase in private bills . overall , 7321 private immigration laws have been enacted since the first such law was enacted in 1839 . although the first private immigration laws enacted were related to naturalization , naturalization waivers constitute the lowest percentage of private laws because of the serious ramifications of conferring citizenship and its rights and obligations and of the united states' undertaking the protection of its new citizens . the majority of private immigration bills confer lawful permanent resident ( lpr ) status by waiving a general law provision which prevents the granting or maintenance of such status , whether that provision concerns grounds of inadmissibility or deportation , numerical allocation limits , definitions of eligible immigrant categories , etc . as noted above , under the rules of both the senate subcommittee on immigration , border security and citizenship and the house subcommittee on immigration , border security and claims , no private bill shall be considered or acted upon by the subcommittee until all avenues for administrative and judicial relief have been exhausted . if the beneficiary is subject to removal / deportation , the mere introduction of a bill does not stay such removal / deportation . a stay will generally be authorized by the u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) in the department of homeland security ( dhs ) when it receives a request for a report on information concerning a beneficiary's case from either the senate or house subcommittee chairman .