a total of 35 lcss have been procured through fy2019 . the navy wants fy2019 to be the final year of lcs procurement , and it has not requested the procurement of any additional lcss in its fy2020 budget submission . the navy wants to shift procurement of small surface combatants in fy2020 from the lcs to a new frigate called the ffg ( x ) . the navy's proposed fy2020 budget requests funding for the procurement of the first ffg ( x ) . the ffg ( x ) program is covered in detail in crs report r44972 , navy frigate ( ffg[x] ) program: background and issues for congress , by ronald o'rourke . a current issue for congress regarding the lcs program is whether to procure any additional lcss in fy2020 , and if so , how many . another issue for congress concerns future workloads and employment levels at the two lcs shipyards if one or both of these yards are not involved in building ffg ( x ) s. congress's decisions on the lcs program will affect navy capabilities and funding requirements , and the shipbuilding industrial base . for an overview of the strategic and budgetary context in which the lcs program and other navy shipbuilding programs may be considered , see crs report rl32665 , navy force structure and shipbuilding plans: background and issues for congress , by ronald o'rourke . table 2 summarizes congressional action on the navy's fy2020 procurement funding request for the lcs program . appendix a. manning and deployment of lcss this appendix provides additional background information on the manning and deployment of lcss . the navy originally planned to maintain three crews for each two lcss , and to keep one of those two lcss forward deployed — an approach navy officials referred to as the 3-2-1 plan . under this plan , lcss were to be deployed at forward station ( such as singapore ) for 16 months at a time , and crews were to rotate on and off deployed ships at 4- to 6-month intervals . the 3-2-1 plan was intended to permit the navy to maintain 50% of the lcs force in deployed status at any given time — a greater percentage than would be possible under the traditional approach of maintaining one crew for each lcs and deploying lcss for seven months at a time . the navy planned to forward - station three lcss in singapore and additional lcss at another western pacific location , such as sasebo , japan , and at bahrain . in september 2016 , the navy announced a new plan for crewing and operating the first 28 lcss . key elements of the new plan include the following: the first four lcss ( lcss 1 through 4 ) will each by operated by a single crew and be dedicated to testing and evaluating lcs mission packages ( though they could be deployed as fleet assets if needed on a limited basis ) ; the other 24 lcss ( lcss 5 through 28 ) will be divided into six divisions ( i.e. , groups ) of four ships each ; three of the divisions ( i.e.