wc is an employer - provided benefit . because the evaluation is done at the local level , the va inspector general has noted that there are unwarranted geographic variations in disability ratings . also , gao has recommended that the department do more monitoring with respect to the process , particularly of the regional medical centers reports , to ensure consistency in disability determinations . the evaluation can be viewed as a two - step process . the first step is to determine if the applicant ( servicemember ) is fit for military duty . the second step , for applicants found to be unfit , is the rating of service - connected disability . several factors are taken into account to determine a servicemember's fitness for duty , including whether or not the servicemember can perform his or her required duties ( based on office , grade , rank , or rating ) ; whether or not the servicemember is medically prevented from taking the required physical fitness test ; the impact on deployability of the servicemember and his or her unit ; and whether or not an alternative job specialty for the servicemember is feasible . if a servicemember is found unfit for duty , the servicemember can be placed on the temporary disability retired list ( tdrl , which requires a reevaluation in the future ) , or permanently released from military service . prior to release , dod examines those service - connected physical impairments that rendered the soldier unfit , and provides a disability rating . for soldiers with multiple diagnosed physical impairments , each is potentially ratable , provided that dod finds each physical impairment to be separately unfitting . dod and va use the same rating table , the veterans affairs schedule for rating disabilities ( often referred to as vasrd or srd , described in the text box below ) to determine the disability percentage . this disability percentage is one factor used to determine if the servicemember receives a lump - sum payment upon discharge ( based on a rating of 20% or lower ) , or an annual pension and possibly other lifelong benefits ( based on a rating of 30% or higher ) . some news reports and other sources have asserted that the dod underrates disability . in both the dod and va systems , disability ratings range from zero ( least severe ) to 100% ( most severe ) , in increments of 10% . generally , if an injured servicemember has served in the military less than 20 years , a dod disability rating of 20% or less entitles the servicemember to a single lump - sum severance payment and no additional military benefits , while a rating of 30% or greater may , subject to certain other conditions , make the individual eligible for certain lifelong military benefits such as retirement pay and health insurance for the servicemember and his or her family . hence , in most cases , a disability rating of 30% or greater yields a more favorable benefits package for the servicemember , and a higher and longer - term cost for the department .