the federal pensions of members of congress may be affected when a member is convicted of certain crimes . no comparable provision in house rules exists regarding a member who is merely under indictment for an offense . it should be noted that members of congress do not automatically forfeit their offices upon conviction of a crime that constitutes a felony . there is no express constitutional disability or "disqualification" from congress for the conviction of a crime , other than under the fourteenth amendment for certain treasonous conduct . state administrative and judicial rulings have thus consistently found that there exists no right or power for an electorate in that state to "recall" a federal officer such as a united states representative or senator . no law or rule exists providing that a member of the house who is indicted for or convicted of a crime must forfeit his or her congressional salary . however , a member of congress who is convicted of a crime and then incarcerated , might be required to forego his or her congressional salary for some period of the incarceration if it results in the member being absent from the house . the united states code instructs the chief administrative officer of the house to deduct from a member's salary the amount for each day that the member is absent , except in cases of sickness of the member or his or her family . as discussed earlier concerning qualifications to hold the office of member of congress , indictment for or conviction of a felony offense is not a constitutional bar for eligibility to be elected or reelected as a member of congress , other than a conviction for treasonous conduct after having taken an oath of office , under the "disqualification" provision of the fourteenth amendment . additionally , a congressional censure or expulsion does not act as a permanent disability to hold congressional office in the future . a person under indictment or a convicted felon , even one who has also been disciplined by congress , may run for and , in theory , be reelected to congress and may not be "excluded" from congress , but must be seated , if such person meets the three constitutional qualifications for office and has been duly elected . once a member is seated , however , that member may be subject to certain discipline by the house . if reelected to the house , a member who has been convicted for an offense that had barred the member from voting under house rules ( in the previous congress ) would have his or her full voting privileges restored upon re - election . under the united states constitution there is no impediment for the people of a district or state to choose an individual who is under indictment , or who is a convicted felon , to represent them in congress .