information on untested students . student level graduation and dropout data . state - wide audit system . although the availability of information on state data systems is insufficient to enable one to determine with precision how many states could or could not currently implement such models if they chose to do so , it is very likely that growth models generally require resources and data systems that many states currently lack . this concern is being addressed in part through an ed program intended to help states design , develop , and implement statewide , longitudinal data systems . an initial appropriation of $24.8 million was provided for this program , administered by ed's institute of education sciences ( ies ) , for fy2005 . subsequently , $24.6 million was appropriated for each of fy2006 and fy2007 , and $48.3 million for fy2008 . thus far , a total of 27 states have received awards through two rounds of competition . in addition , $250 million was recently appropriated for this program for fy2009 under h.r . 1 , the american recovery and reinvestment act . under this program , aid is to be provided to state educational agencies ( seas ) via cooperative agreements , not grants , to allow increased federal involvement in the supported activities . why is there increased interest in growth models for determining ayp under nclb ? applications from states with the most limited ability to collect , analyze , and report individual student achievement data will have a priority...." according to ed , the program is designed to help seas meet the ayp and reporting requirements of nclb , as well as to conduct value - added or achievement growth research , including "meaningful longitudinal analyses of student academic growth within all subgroups specified by the no child left behind act of 2001. . there will also be an emphasis on encouraging data sharing among states , while at the same time protecting the security and privacy of data . what might be the major advantages and disadvantages of growth models of ayp , in comparison to status or improvement models ? these questions are addressed in the following pages . many proponents of growth models for school / lea ayp see them as being more fair — to both pupils and school staff — and accurate than status or improvement models , primarily because they can be designed to take into consideration the currently widely varying levels of achievement of different pupil groups . growth models generally recognize the reality that different schools and pupils have very different starting points in their achievement levels and recognize progress being made at all levels ( eg , from below basic to basic , or from proficient to advanced ) , giving credit for all improvements over previous performance . however , under some of these models , pupils need only be proficient or on track toward proficiency within a limited number of years as of 2013-2014 . growth models would likely increase the ability to attribute pupil achievement to their current school , as opposed to their past schools or background characteristics , especially ( but not only ) if controls ( and / or predicted growth elements ) are included in the model .