the bank secrecy act . what follows is an overviewof these laws . congress laid thefoundations of the federal anti - money laundering ( aml ) framework in 1970 when it passed thebsa , ( 8 ) the major moneylaundering provisions of which make up the currency and foreign transaction reporting act ( cftra ) . several othercommittees have potential relevance in the overall fight against terrorist financing . reform ofcongressional jurisdiction is an historically tricky issue , yet some argue that reevaluating howcongress oversees the fight against terrorism and terrorist financing may lead to more effectiveexecutive branch action . considering terrorists' increased use of alternative remittance systems , is thereany way to regulate these practices ? what would the costs be to register all informalmoney - transmitters and bring them in line with usa patriot act requirements ? many smallremittance services cater to immigrant communities without reliable access to the formal bankingsector . making alternative remittance systems illegal is likely impractical and could create a swellof resentment among the immigrant population in the united states . if the u.s. government wantsto license and regulate alternative remittance systems , some say it may be necessary to offer fundsand technical assistance to small remittance providers to help insure theircompliance . how effectively is the united states cooperating with other countries andinsuring their cooperation in implementing and enforcing national regulations to restrict terroristfinancing ? if a u.s. bank , charity , or remittance system is based in the u.s. , or has u.s. operations,it is subject to u.s. jurisdiction . when such entities lie outside u.s. jurisdiction , the united statesis often at the mercy of other governments to first enact legislation making terrorist financing illegaland , more importantly , rigorously enforce this legislation . creating a legal and regulatory system islikely meaningless if it is not enforced .