senate . select committee on pow / mia affairs . pow / mia ' s. report . january 13 , 1993 . washington , u.s. government printing office , 1993 ( 103 rd congress , 1 st session . 1223 p . all were released by late 1976 . since 1976 , some americans have been imprisoned in vietnam ( almost all for civilian offenses ) and eventually released . most americans now in vietnamese prisons for criminal offenses ( some of which would be characterized as "political" crimes by the vietnamese authorities ) are naturalized americans of vietnamese birth or ancestry . since 1973 , only one u.s. military member has returned alive from vietnam . marine corps pfc robert garwood was listed as a pow by u.s. authorities — but never by the vietnamese — in 1965 and returned voluntarily to the u.s. in 1979 . he was convicted of collaboration with the enemy , but his light sentence included no prison term . after the return of the 591 pows , 2,583 americans were unaccounted for ( not counting civilians trapped in vietnam after the south fell , or who later visited vietnam ) . identified remains of 768 americans have been returned from vietnam ( 540 ) , laos ( 197 ) , cambodia ( 28 ) , and china ( 3 ) since the war ended on january 27 , 1973 . of the 1,815 still listed as unaccounted for as of august 5 , 2005 , the department of defense ( dod ) is still actively seeking to account as fully as possible for the 1,148 . dod believes that , based on currently available information and its analysis , it will be unable to ever recover the remains of the other 667 . examples of the latter would include the 468 men lost over water , as stated in the note to table 3 , which summarizes data on americans currently unaccounted for in southeast asia . another example would be those crewmen of aircraft that , at the time , were observed by both vietnamese and americans to have exploded without any sign of the crew ejecting ; and similar situations . since the korean war ended in 1953 , there have been rumors americans captured by the north koreans or chinese were , or still are , held against their will in north korea , china , or russia / the former ussr . it is generally accepted that the communist powers involved in the war withheld significant amounts of information on pow / mia from the united states , probably with more withholding by north korea and china than russia . dpmo states that although there is no first - hand , direct evidence of korean war pows being transferred to the soviet union , the cumulative weight of circumstantial evidence is so compelling that they believe that at least small numbers of americans were in fact so transferred . there are indications that some sightings of caucasians by foreign nationals in north korea may be of several american soldiers who defected to north korea in the post - korean war era .