6701 note . the section numbers cited in this side - by - side are thusthose of the bill and law . table 1 . side - by side: terrorism risk insurance act of 2002 , initial senate - and house - passed legislation,andterrorism risk insurance extension act of 2005 notes: the initial house - passed s. 467 would strike essentially all of 15 u.s.c . 6701 note ( which sets out sections 101-108 of p.l . 107-297 ) and replaces it with a similar structure , including in some cases , identical language . the section numbers for this house - passed s. 467 citedin this side - by - side are , therefore , those that would appear in the code if the bill were enacted , except for the provision entitled "litigation management. in contrast , both the initial s. 467 and p.l . 109-144 simply amend 15 u.s.c . essentiallymost policyholders received this coverage for free . the attacks , and the more than $30 billion ininsured losses that resulted from them , caused a rethinking of the possibilities of future terroristattacks . in response to the new appreciation of the threat and the perceived inability to calculate theprobability and loss data critical for pricing insurance , both primary insurers and reinsurers pulledback from offering terrorism coverage . many argued that terrorism risk is essentially uninsurableby the private market due to the uncertainty and potentially massive losses involved . becauseinsurance is required for a variety of economic transactions , many feared that a lack of insuranceagainst terrorism loss would have wider economic impact , particularly on large - scale developmentsin urban areas that would be tempting targets for terrorism . congress responded to the disruption in the insurance market by passing the terrorism riskinsurance act of 2002 ( 1 ) ( tria ) , which was signed by the president in november 2002 . tria created the terrorism riskinsurance program , which was enacted as a temporary program , expiring at the end of 2005 , to calmthe insurance markets through a government backstop for terrorism losses and give the privateindustry time to gather the data and create the structures and capacity necessary for private insuranceto cover terrorism risk . terrorism insurance has become widely available under tria and the insurance industry hasgreatly expanded its financial capacity in the past three years . it appears , however , that less progresshas been made on creating terrorism models that are sufficiently robust for insurers to return tooffering widespread terrorism coverage without a government backstop , and that practically noprogress has been made on a private pooling mechanism to cover terrorism risk . some see the pastthree years as proof of the argument that the private market will never be able to offer insurance tocover terrorism risk and continue to see the possibility of wider economic consequences if terrorisminsurance again is unavailable . others , notably the u.s. treasury department , respond that triaitself is retarding the growth of this private market and should be allowed to expire , or at least bereduced from its current form . congress responded to the impending expiration of tria with two different bills thatinitially passed the respective houses .