pursuant to p.l . 105-200 , the federal incentive pool was capped , thereby forcing states for the first time to compete against each other for incentive payment dollars . under the revised incentive system , a state may be eligible to receive an incentive payment for good performance . the total amount of the incentive payment depends on four factors: the total amount of money available in a given fiscal year from which to make incentive payments , the state's success in making collections on behalf of its caseload , the state's performance in five areas ( mentioned earlier ) , and the relative success or failure of other states in making collections and meeting these performance criteria . moreover , unlike the old incentive system , which allowed states and counties to spend incentive payments on whatever they chose , the revised incentive system requires that the incentive payment be reinvested into either the cse program or some other activity that might lead to improving the efficiency or effectiveness of the cse program ( eg , mediation , parenting classes , efforts to improve the earning capacity of noncustodial parents , etc .

 ) usual cost accounting overlooks savings from the avoidance of welfare payments . many program analysts argue that indirect savings occur when child support collections keep a family off welfare , and that these savings make the cse program worthwhile , despite the apparent loss under the current accounting system . since the cse program's inception , the rules determining who actually gets the child support arrearage payments have been complex . it is helpful to think of the rules in two categories . first , there are rules in both federal and state law that stipulate who has a legal claim on the payments owed by the noncustodial parent . these are called assignment rules . second , there are rules that determine the order in which child support collections are paid in accord with the assignment rules . these are called distribution rules . many analysts and commentators were concerned that the distribution rules that were enacted as part of the 1996 welfare reform law ( p.l . 104-193 ) were difficult for states to follow , for staff to explain , for parents to understand , and for computers to implement . they generally agreed that the rules created accounting nightmares for customers , litigation from advocacy groups , headaches for computer programmers , and audit deficiencies for the states . according to one cse director , child support distribution rules became extremely complex once a family leaves welfare: most of the problems stem from the requirements that pre - assistance arrears be assigned to the state , and that certain arrearages otherwise owed to the former welfare family are deemed to be owed to the state when the collection is made by federal tax refund intercept . when a family leaves welfare , states are required to keep track of six categories of arrearages: permanently assigned , temporarily assigned , conditionally assigned , never assigned , unassigned during assistance , and unassigned pre - assistance . on the computer , these different categories are called "buckets.