( see discussion below. ) in an attempt to discourage unauthorized migrants from attempting to re - cross the border when they are returned to mexico , in september 2003 the border patrol instituted a pilot program that airlifted aliens from the arizona border to texas . the border patrol originally had attempted to reach an agreement with mexico to repatriate aliens to the interior of the country , but when the mexican government declined to participate , the agency instead began to involuntarily repatriate aliens laterally from arizona to texas . the texas border poses a challenge for would - be border crossers due to the rio grande river and the number of border patrol agents stationed along it . who should have access to the integrated data system and what is the appropriate level of access ? how will the privacy of information contained in the integrated data system be safeguarded ? much of the area along the southwest border lacks direct surveillance by border patrol personnel . recognizing the vulnerabilities posed on the southwest border , starting in 1994 , congress authorized several increases in the number of border patrol agents as well as appropriated funding to enhance technology deployed at the border . since the terrorist attacks , both the border patrol and inspectors saw a boost in their resources . despite the concentration of funding and resources at the border , critics contend that more should be done . for example , concerns about the lack of personnel at the border were expressed in a january 2003 government accountability office ( gao ) report . gao noted that the former ins would need additional staffing and resources in order to gain control of the southwest border . according to the border patrol , a needs assessment was conducted and it was determined that 22,000 border patrol agents were needed to secure the border , which would increase the border patrol twofold . regarding the staffing of the customs functions of cbp , in 1998 the former customs service commissioned pricewaterhousecoopers to develop a resource allocation model ( ram ) to determine the most effective deployment of its inspectors and canine enforcement officers at more than 300 international ports of entry . the ram report concluded that in order to meet its multifaceted mission in fy2002 , customs staffing needed to be increased by 14,776 positions over the fy1998 base ( 19,428 ) , to bring the total customs staffing to 34,204 positions . the largest increase would be in the inspector ( 6,481 ) , special agent ( 2,041 ) and canine enforcement officer ( 650 ) positions . while gao testified in april 2000 that it found some weaknesses ( data reliability issues ) with the ram study , it remains the most comprehensive staffing analysis to date . since the inspections function of the u.s. customs service was merged with the immigration inspections function from the former ins , it is not known what the appropriate staffing level should be for the various missions under cbp . as congress continues to exercise its oversight role , the issue of staffing and resources may continue to be of interest .