this report will be updated as circumstanceswarrant . for a broader discussion of all - hazards public health and medical preparedness , see crs report rl31719 , an overview of the u.s. public health system in the context of emergencypreparedness . eachkept responders from delivering aid . in some cases , victims were isolated without water andmedicines , and hospitals that had not been evacuated before the hurricane were unable to sustainoperations . each circumstance required the emergency evacuation of critically ill patients to a triagecenter , which then itself became overwhelmed . federal , state , and local governments , businessesand corporations , the faith community and other volunteers all pitched in to speed relief to katrina'svictims , but keeping all of it coordinated was a challenge . responding to a catastrophe of the scope of hurricane katrina requires that a variety ofpublic health and medical activities be carried out and coordinated . public health activities are thosethat identify , address or prevent health problems in populations . examples include assuring thesafety of food and water , preventing the spread of disease in shelters , evaluating the safety ofneighborhoods for rehabitation , and assuring the health and safety of responders . medical activitiesare those that deliver healthcare services to individuals . examples include treatment of injuries,continuity of care for those with chronic illnesses , mental health counseling , and cause - of - deathinvestigation . the medical response to hurricane katrina may have posed the greater challenge . the publichealth response required the coordination of variety of agencies , community - based organizations,and private parties at different levels of government , though these entities had generally workedtogether in the past . the medical response , in contrast , required the coordination of a broader mixof federal , state and local government agencies , private parties and others , with no comparable recentprecedent or experience in such an effort on this scale . over the past decade , in response to the oklahoma city bombing , the terror attacks of 2001and several serious natural disasters , congress and the administration created new authorities,structures and plans to assure that government at all levels can respond well to disasters likehurricane katrina . local and state governments are to be the first responders in a disaster . whentheir resources are overwhelmed , federal assistance is provided under the robert t. stafford disasterrelief and emergency assistance act ( the stafford act ) and other authorities . a new nationalresponse plan ( nrp ) places the secretary of homeland security in charge of coordinating theoverall federal response . the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) is in charge ofcoordinating the federal public health and medical response during a disaster . in the wake of hurricanes katrina and rita , congress is likely to review response efforts,recent public health preparedness laws and the nrp . while even the best plan and response maybe overwhelmed in a disaster of the scope of hurricane katrina , congress may nonetheless findopportunities to revisit management structures , programs and goals in order that national responsecapability can be steadily improved . this report will discuss relevant authorities and response plans that guided the public healthand medical response to the 2005 hurricanes .