how benefits are modeled . figure 1 , below , illustrates how these and other variables ( such as type of model used ) can influence the estimated costs of climate change legislation . measured by impact on gdp , the figure indicates impacts generally ranging from a positive 2% increase in gdp to a 4% decrease . interestingly , the variables used in projecting cost and benefits are sufficiently robust to obscure a strong correlation between reduction requirements and cost . the range indicated also reflects the perspectives and parameters assumed by the forecast authors . in a previous report , crs noted that cost analyses are influenced by the perspective ( or lens ) through which one views the problem . analysts viewing climate change policy through a technological perspective see it as an impetus for improved efficiency through technology improvements in the economy , consistent with concepts such as life - cycle costs . analysts viewing policy through an economic lens work through the boundaries of market economics and cost - benefit considerations . finally , analysts viewing the issue through an ecological lens look to the benefits of controlling greenhouse gases and are suspicious of "baseline" scenarios that suggest that "business as usual" is an acceptable yardstick from which to measure policy changes . each of these lenses implies fundamentally different ways of assessing policy actions and modeling potential costs and benefits . the quantitative results are cost estimates that range from actual savings to the economy ( from ghg reductions ) to substantial costs . an illustration of this can be seen in the contrast between two cost analyses of h.r . the results presented below were obtained by the american council for capital formation / national association of manufacturers ( accf / nam ) high cost case and the "high technology" sensitivity case conducted by eia using the same model: eia's nems model . table 2 summarizes the general approach of the two analyses according to the three perspectives identified above . in its sensitivity case , eia mimics h.r . 2454 's various technology and efficiency provisions by employing its high technology baseline that has more aggressive technology development assumptions than its reference case , and also includes banking , and phased - in offsets . in contrast , accf / nam is not confident that new technology , new energy sources , and market mechanisms ( eg , carbon offsets , banking ) will be sufficiently available to achieve h.r . 2454 's emission targets . accordingly , accf / nam's high cost case assumptions differ substantially from eia's high technology sensitivity analysis by discouraging banking , restricting the availability of offsets to half that allowed in h.r . 2454 , and significantly restricting availability of various low - and non - carbon technologies beyond what is embedded in the nems base case . as indicated by table 3 , the widely different cost assumptions provided the expected results , although both analyses remained in the 0-4% gdp range common for greenhouse gas reduction analysis . allowance price estimates diverge significantly by 2030 , but this cost measure tends to exaggerate differences between results and should not be confused with average costs or program costs . this is particularly true for analyses of h.r .