they also have been competitive . the benefits available under a preferential trade agreement usually induce other countries to seek the same trade advantages or risk losing business for their exporters or investors . in some cases , the arrangements ( or lack thereof ) are politically driven , particularly in the case of taiwan as beijing attempts to isolate it diplomatically while taipei tries to counter the diplomatic snubs that belie existing underlying trading relations . in other cases , politics and disputes over history ( especially between japan and china and south korea ) have hindered the conclusion of free trade agreements . realistically speaking , however , a 16-nation asian fta would be far into the future , if at all . china and south korea are lukewarm to the idea , and japan and south korea currently cannot agree on an fta between themselves , let alone one that includes china and 13 other nations . recently , however , china , japan , and south korea seem to be warming to the possibility of an fta among themselves . south korea , in particular , is pursuing several ftas . the ftas now being implemented between asean and the three major east asian nations on a bilateral basis has for now become a structure for regional trade: the asean +1 type of fta with asean as the center of a hub - and - spoke network of ftas and with the spokes ( asean trade with japan , china , south korea , and india ) having more weight than the hub . on the security side , the proposals for future direction go beyond the purview of this report . a direction of thinking by some , however , is that the united states needs to go beyond the threat - centric mode of bilateral security arrangements to one based more on multilateral security partnerships , or what is termed a "convergent security" approach . the reason is that the immediate danger to security appears to center more on terrorism and the threat of nuclear proliferation than on cold war style attacks by nation states . a "convergent security" approach differs from the concepts of offshore balancing and independent asian power centers in that it envisages the united states as working as an active partner with its bilateral allies to manage transitions in the region's security order that lead to multilateral stability rather than to geopolitical coalitions . the underlying assumption of this approach is that china has enough at stake in maintaining international stability that it will cooperate in financial and economic issues with the rest of the world and not engage in military action that would destabilize the system . a "convergent security" approach would , for example , call for greater engagement in new multilateral initiatives , such as the east asia summit and asia pacific community . another possible measure for u.s. policy could be to convene a conference to organize the northeast asia regional forum . current proposals for membership are to invite countries with strong interest in northeast asia , such as the united states , russia , china , japan , south korea , and north korea .