although p.l . 109-171 included significant changes to the cse program , it did not include many of the child support provisions discussed and considered within the four - year welfare reauthorization debate . this report provides a brief discussion of 12 child support provisions that were considered during 2002-2005 within the context of welfare reauthorization but not enacted in p.l . 109-171 or any other federal law . to the extent that some of these provisions had broad support , they may be considered again in the 110 th congress . the administration has included several of the provisions in its fy2008 budget . the child support provisions discussed below were all either passed by the house or by the senate finance committee ( or both ) , and many also were supported by the administration . although few of the provisions elicited controversy , they were not included in p.l . 109-171 or any other federal law . because the welfare and child support provisions were included in budget reconciliation legislation , there was concern that some provisions would be struck during the senate's consideration of the bill due to the byrd rule . this report describes these child support provisions and includes a table that highlights the major welfare reauthorization measures in which these 12 provisions were included during the 2002-2005 period . ( see table a - 1 . ) the 12 provisions below are not arranged with respect to importance or any other measure . this provision had many opponents . opponents of the provision contend that federalizing the multi - state financial institution levy process is not the appropriate answer . instead they say that federal law should be clarified / strengthened by stipulating that a state must have laws requiring all financial institutions doing business in the state to honor levies issued by any cse agency , regardless of whether it is an in - state or out - of - state financial institution . they argue that a federalized levy program would preempt state law governing property rights . they say that although the levy process should be made more uniform and easier to follow for financial institutions , states should continue to have exclusive control of the levy process . opponents of the provision also claim that customer service issues would arise from wrongly attached accounts , confusion regarding appeals , and lack of conformity regarding the priority of accounts for freezing and minimum / maximum amounts that are subject to seizure . the longshore and harbor workers' compensation act , administered by the u.s. department of labor , provides medical benefits , compensation for lost wages , and rehabilitation services to longshoremen , harbor workers and other maritime workers who are injured during the course of employment or suffer from diseases caused or worsened by conditions of employment . these benefits are paid directly by an authorized self - insured employer ; or through an authorized insurance carrier ; or , in particular circumstances , by a special fund administered directly by the division of longshore compensation . benefits paid by the federal special fund are subject to attachment or garnishment for payment of child support obligations .