bush administration . the initiative reportedly now is located in the korea desk at the state department . the proliferation security initiative ( psi ) is part of the larger counter proliferation effort worldwide and aimed at more countries and groups than just north korea — but the dprk does receive a particular focus . the psi activity has received support from more than 60 countries and more formal participation from 11 countries , particularly japan , australia , the united kingdom , france , germany , italy , and spain . under the psi , participating countries cooperate to prevent transfers of weapons of mass destruction - related items to or from nation states and non state actors of proliferation concern . it does this through intelligence sharing , diplomatic efforts , law enforcement , and interdiction . following the dprk's second nuclear test , south korea announced that it was joining the psi . pyongyang considered this to be equivalent to a "declaration of war" and indicated that it no longer is bound to the korean war armistice and will militarily respond to any foreign attempt to inspect its ships . the u.n. resolution being considered in june 2009 reportedly contains provisions for tightening provisions for searching ships ( under specific conditions ) suspected of carrying banned nuclear or missile cargo . if the obama administration imposes new financial sanctions on the dprk , they are likely to use counterfeiting of currency as one rationale for the sanctions . the role of congress in the counterfeiting issue is intertwined with the larger nuclear and proliferation issues . congress plays a role in oversight of obama administration actions , in holding hearings to clarify u.s. policy , or using the congressional pulpit to send messages to north korea . the united states has suggested to the dprk that it join the asia - pacific group on money laundering ( apg ) , a 30-member group ( including the united states , japan , and south korea ) launched in 1997 as a sub - organization of the organization of economic cooperation and development . it is aimed at preventing illegal financial activities in the asia - pacific region and would subsequently require the disclosure of all of the dprk's illicit financial activities . north korea experts believe , however , that it will not be easy for the north to join the 30-member group . the bda action ( combined with un sanctions prohibiting exports of luxury goods to the dprk ) seemed to generate results because they harmed the north korean elites , including kim jon - il , directly . policymakers reportedly are divided on the ultimate goal of squeezing north korea on its alleged illicit activities . a group of policymakers ( sometimes referred to as the "hawks" ) favoring regime change seeks ultimately to induce a crisis within the dprk that would lead to the downfall of kim jong - il . one way to achieve this is to cut off the money the dprk generates from counterfeiting , selling illicit drugs , and exporting missiles . both of these goals require funds . the implications for u.s. policy of the bda action go beyond the problems with the dprk .