amendments after sara have been narrowly focused . in 1992 and 1996 , congress enacted legislation allowing for easier transfer of military bases with contaminated areas to local entities . in 1996 and 1999 , congress provided conditional liability exemptions for financial institutions and recycling facilities . in 2002 , congress enacted the small business liability relief and brownfields revitalization act ( p.l . 108-118 ) , which added further liability relief and authorized the brownfields program . is the program receiving enough funding to meet its current and future obligations ? how does the statute interact with abandoned hardrock mining sites and animal feeding operations ? to supply the context for these issues , this report first provides a background and overview of the superfund program . this report discusses some of these questions: who should pay to clean up the nation's most contaminated sites if responsible parties cannot be found ? the program became known as "superfund" in reference to the trust fund established by the law . the fund was originally supported by taxes levied on specific petroleum products and chemicals , and a corporate environmental income tax . until recent years , the superfund taxes provided the majority of the funding for the needs of the program . at the time of cercla's enactment , other federal environmental statutes provided federal agencies with only limited authority to address contamination at abandoned sites . cercla gave the federal government the authority to take direct action to respond to instances involving uncontrolled releases of hazardous substances ( or pollutants and contaminants ) that may endanger public health or the environment . cercla also enables the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to compel the persons responsible to clean up their contaminated sites . if the potentially responsible parties ( prps ) cannot be located , or they are unable ( generally for financial reasons ) to perform cleanup , epa is authorized to use monies from the superfund trust fund to clean up the site . cercla was expanded and reauthorized by the superfund amendments and reauthorization act of 1986 ( sara , p.l . table 1 lists the various cercla amendments . the national oil and hazardous substances pollution contingency plan ( ncp ) contains the procedures and regulations for implementing the superfund program . generally , epa leads the response to releases on land and in inland waters , whereas the coast guard leads the response in coastal waters of the united states . this section of the report discusses four superfund issues that have received interest in recent years . the first two issues concern program funding , including who should fund the program ( industry or general taxpayers ) and how much funding is needed to meet the program's obligations . the second two issues concern cercla interaction at specific site types: abandoned hardrock mines and animal feeding operations . superfund issues , such as the four described above , continue to generate debate and interest . the selected topics discussed in this report are not mutually exclusive ; activity in one of the issues may influence policy in another . for example , if more abandoned hardrock mining sites are added to the npl , congress may consider increasing annual appropriations to the superfund program .