table 3 . importance of eu etstopics ( ranking ) source: european commission , review of eu emissions trading scheme ( november 2005 ) , p. 13 . at first glance , the ets would appear an effective vehicle for the eu to meetits kyoto protocol obligations during the second trading period . the anticipateddeficit between the second trading period for the original 15 member states can becovered by trading with the newer member states that anticipate a surplus . inaddition , potential cers and erus from the cdm and ji respectively may helpmaintain limits on allowance costs . table 6 provides one series of estimates ofavailable allowances for the kyoto protocol's five - year compliance period.obviously , not all these allowances may be available to the eu alone ; othercountries , such as japan and canada , may decide to incorporate emissions tradinginto their implementation strategies and acquire allowances from these sources . yet,the totals suggest that all else being equal , the supply of allowances would beadequate . table 6: international supply of emissionscredits and allowances ( cumulative total 2008-2012 , million metric tonsco 2 ) source: compiled by grubb and neuhoff , "allocation and competitiveness in theeu emissions trading scheme: policy overview," p. 20 . however , there are other considerations . the availability of surplus credits created via ji and cdm is restricted by the ec linking directive that requires thatsuch credits be "supplemental" to a country's domestic efforts . each country is tospell out what "supplemental" means in its nap for the second trading period.individual countries are likely to define that term differently - - restricting allowancetrades and purchases in some countries . another consideration is the overall commitment of the kyoto protocol . asnoted earlier , the ets only covers a percentage of the overall greenhouse gasemissions in the various member states of the eu . some sectors not covered by theets may grow faster than sectors covered by the ets , creating difficulties forcompliance . in particular , the transportation area is already a major source ofconcern . a final consideration for the ets is its suitability for directing long - terminvestment toward a low - carbon future - - the ultimate goal of any climate changeprogram . it is too early to tell whether the ets market signal and individualcountries' naps will move investment in the appropriate direction . the early signsare not particularly encouraging , with the 2005-2008 naps producing anover - allocation of allowances , and one major member state , germany , attemptingto direct its second nap toward carbon - intensive , coal - fired electric generatingfacilities rather than low - carbon alternatives . reluctance by countries to redirecttheir naps and an inconsistent price from the ets make the long - term effect of theets uncertain . norway , a non - eu country , also has an emissions trading system that beganoperating on january 1 , 2005 . norway's system covers 51 facilities in the energy andprocess sectors such as oil refining and iron and steel processing , and has severalfeatures in common with the eu ets . ( 48 ) these sectors account for about 10-15% of thecountry's emissions .