however , h.r . it did not rescind fy2006 funding . the cr did not specify an amount for the hope vi program , so it is funded at the fy2006 level ( $99 million ) . in addition , both funds would have been able to make up to $50 million in direct loans to facilitate the sale of hud - owned properties for occupancy or ownership by low - and moderate - income families . an appropriation of $8.6 million was requested for the credit subsidies associated with the gi / sri account . no fha reforms were enacted before the close of the 109 th congress or included in the cr . although no funding amounts were specified for the fha account in the cr , the fy2007 funding level is not the fy2006 funding level . the estimates of offsetting receipts from the gi / sri and mmi funds are lower for fy2007 than the amount collected for fy2006 . also , the total expenses amounts differ from the fy2006 amounts as a result of a scoring difference between fy2006 and fy2007 . each year , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) makes an estimate of how much additional authorized contract authority fha will use . 5121 , as passed by the house . an administrative provision in the house - passed version of h.r . 5576 included language from h.r . it would have amended the national housing act ( 12 u.s.c . 1709 ( b ) ( 2 ) ) to limit fha - insured home loans to the lesser of the median price for the area or the federal home loan mortgage corporation ( freddie mac ) conforming loan limit . the loan limit for low - cost areas would have been raised from 48% to 65% of the freddie mac limit . fha would have had authority to insure 100% mortgages , and hud would have been permitted to determine what , if any , down payment would be required based upon the likelihood of borrower default . the borrower's mortgage insurance premium would have been based upon the risk that the borrower poses to the mortgage insurance fund . the senate committee did not include these provisions because the committee stated that it did not believe that the proposal included the necessary reforms to allow hud to compete in the private market without increased financial risk to the fha insurance fund and without subjecting the program to significant risk of fraud and abuse . the prohibition on overleasing was continued . prior to fy2004 , phas were paid a fixed fee per voucher administered . beginning in fy2004 , at congress's direction , hud changed the way it distributed administrative fees , providing agencies with a pro - rata share of the amount appropriated for administrative fees , based on what they had received in the previous year . the change was designed to contain the cost of administrative fees , which were estimated to have grown to account for 10% of the cost of a voucher . for fy2007 , the administration requested $1.3 billion for administrative fees , $30 million of which would have been available to the secretary to use for special purposes .