here's what i meant by that . historically , when deterrence fails , it's our custom to amass large numbers of resources , leverage our allies for a coalition support and base access or over flight and build up an iron mountain of logistics , weapons and troops to apply overwhelming force at a particular space and time of our choosing . this approach of build up , rehearse and roll back has proven successful from operation overlord in the beaches of normandy in 1944 to operation iraqi freedom in the middle east . but the 21 st century operating environment is changing . future generations of american service men and women will not fight their parents' wars . and so i'll borrow a quote from abraham lincoln , written in a letter to this house on 1 december , 1862 when he said , "we must think anew , act anew . we must disenthrall ourselves from the past , and then we shall save our country. new military approaches are emerging specifically intended to counter our historical methods of projecting power . one of the witnesses — rear admiral upper half james g. foggo iii , assistant deputy chief of naval operations ( operations , plans and strategy ) ( n3 / n5b ) — provided the following overview of asb in his opening remarks: so let me begin by answering the question , what is the airsea battle concept ? the airsea battle concept was approved by the secretary of defense in 2011 . it is designed to assure access to parts of the global commons , those areas of the airsea , cyberspace , and space that no one necessarily owns but which we all depend on such as sea lines of communication . our adversaries' anti - access / area denial strategies employ a range of military capabilities that impede the free use of these ungoverned spaces . these military capabilities include new generations of cruise , ballistic , air to air , surface to air missiles with improved range , accuracy and lethality that are being produced and proliferated . quiet , modern submarines and stealthy fighter aircraft are being procured by many nations while naval mines are being equipped with mobility , discrimination and autonomy . both space and cyberspace are becoming increasingly important and contested . accordingly , airsea battle in its concept is intended to defeat such threats to access and provide options to national leaders and military commanders to enable follow - on operations which could include military activities as well as humanitarian assistance and disaster response . in short , it is a new approach to warfare . the airsea battle concept is also about force development in the face of rising technological challenges . we seek to build at the service level a pre - integrated joint force which empowers u.s. combatant commanders , along with allies and partners to engage in ways that are cooperative and networked across multiple domains — the land , maritime , air , space and cyber domains . pacific fleet .