non - u.s . coalition forces in afghanistan are distributed between the u.s. - led operation enduring freedom ( oef ) —which conducts counterterror and counterinsurgency operations—and the nato - led international security and assistance force ( isaf ) , which provides security and reconstruction support for all of afghanistan . in october 2006 , nato assumed command of isaf and all security operations in afghanistan—including oef ( oef's u.s. commander serves as a deputy isaf commander ) . some countries contribute forces to both oef and isaf , while others contribute strictly to isaf . at present , 21 nations contribute approximately 3,100 troops to oef while the united states contributes about 9,600 troops to oef . thirty seven nato and non - nato nations contribute about 36,000 troops to isaf . according to u.s. central command ( uscentcom ) , the united states contributes approximately 15,800 troops to support isaf . insurgent tactics and operations against coalition forces continue to evolve , and some maintain that they are becoming increasingly like the tactics employed in iraq . u.s. military officials have noted that cross - border attacks against u.s. and afghan forces have increased significantly since september 2006 , when pakistan signed a pact with tribal groups in the border region . according to officials , in the two months before the agreement , there were 40 cross - border attacks in khost and paktika provinces , but in the two months after the agreement , there were 140 attacks . u.s. military intelligence officials also provided statistics detailing the increase in insurgent attacks . in 2005 , there were a reported 27 suicide attacks and in 2006 , there were 139 attacks . in 2005 , there were 783 road side bombs and in 2006 , there were 1,677 . the insurgents conducted 4,542 direct attacks ( attacks using small arms , grenades an other weapons ) in 2006 , as compared to 1,558 such attacks in 2005 . taliban insurgents reportedly seized control of two towns in southern and southwestern afghanistan , largely attributed to a lack of presence of nato forces . on february 1 , 2007 , the town of musa qala in helmand province was taken over by taliban forces . about five months earlier , british forces vacated the town and handed over responsibility for its security to a tribal council and local police forces . on february 19 , 2007 , taliban forces seized a district in southwestern afghanistan . the attack occurred in the baqwa district of farah province where few nato and afghan troops are deployed . it is not known if taliban forces have retained control of baqwa district or have left the area . prts are small , civil - military teams designed to extend the authority of the afghan central government beyond kabul and to facilitate aid and reconstruction projects . prts have enabled coalition forces to extend a degree of security to outlying regions and have also permitted u.s. forces to establish personal relationships with local afghan leaders which some believe has helped to diminish insurgent influence in a number of regions . as of february 7 , 2007 , isaf had 25 prts operational—12 of which were u.s. teams .