they have nonetheless proven controversial . authorized generics ordinarily enter the market at about the time the brand - name drug company's patents are set to expire . some observers argue that such products may possibly discourage independent generic firms both from challenging drug patents and from selling their own generic products . the potential diminution in independent generic incentives may in turn lead to less desire on the part of brand - name firms to market authorized generics themselves . legal challenges to authorized generics practice have thus far been unsuccessful in the courts . legislation has been introduced regarding authorized generic practice , however . legislation introduced but not yet enacted in the 112 th congress , h.r . 741 and s. 373 , proposed to prevent pharmaceutical firms from selling authorized generics . this report presents an analysis of the innovation and public health issues relating to authorized generic drugs . the report begins with a review of the procedures through which independent generic drug companies receive government permission to market their products and resolve patent disputes with brand - name firms . it then provides detailed background information pertaining to the concept of authorized generics and assesses their potential impact upon patent challenges and consumer welfare . the report closes with a summary of congressional issues and possible alternatives . the practice of authorized generics has arisen within a complex statutory framework established by the drug price competition and patent term restoration act of 1984 , legislation more commonly known as the hatch - waxman act . under parameters established by that statute , a manufacturer that wishes to sell a generic drug must both obtain marketing approval from the food and drug administration ( fda ) and account for any patent rights that pertain to that product . this report first addresses fda marketing approval procedures for generic drugs , and then turns to possible patent implications . although congress made significant amendments to the hatch - waxman act as recently as 2003 , authorized generics were not subject to discussion at that time . the rise of this practice , as well as the vigor of the debate surrounding it , suggests both the pace of change within the industry and the prominence of the pharmaceutical industry within the national public health system . as discussion of authorized generics continues , congress may wish to have a sense of its legislative options . should congress conclude that authorized generics are appropriate , then it may simply take no action . the opinions of the d.c. and fourth circuits suggest that , as currently drafted , the hatch - waxman act does not allow the fda to restrict the ability of brand - name firms to sell or approve of authorized generics . absent legislative input , the fda may be unlikely to alter its interpretation of the hatch - waxman act in this respect in the future . alternatively , congress could simply disallow authorized generics practice . unenacted bills introduced in the 112 th congress , h.r . 741 and s. 373 , would have prohibited nda holders from manufacturing , marketing , selling , or distributing an authorized generic drug .