cir. 01-1485 , 4 / 8 / 03 ) the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia found that the fcc exceeded its statutory authority in enforcing certain of its slamming rules relating to customer verification . while not remanding the fcc's rules the court did vacate fines totaling $80,000 imposed on at&t . the fcc had imposed a fine on at&t for slamming when , despite compliance with the fcc's procedures , an unauthorized person , without the knowledge of the line subscriber , authorized the switch . the court found that the fcc's requirement that the telecommunications carrier verify that the actual subscriber , and not just the person answering the line and claiming to have authority to authorize a carrier switch , authorize the switch exceeded the fcc's statutory authority . the court stated that the statue does not require actual authorization but only requires that the carrier get verification . furthermore the court stated that the fcc's requirement that the carrier obtain "actual authorization" gives carriers "a virtually impossible task: guaranteeing that the person who answers the telephone is in fact authorized to make changes to that telephone line. on march 17 , 2003 , the fcc issued a second further notice of proposed rulemaking ( cc docket 94-129 ; fcc 03-42 ) strengthening requirements on third - party verification procedures . these rules became effective july 21 , 2003 . new initiatives are established to ease the filing of consumer complaints and speed their resolution . these include the establishment of a website to allow consumers to file complaints electronically and obtain on - line consumer protection information ; the establishment of a toll - free number at the fcc to enable consumers to file complaints over the telephone ; and the establishment of an electronic interface with carriers to improve industry response time and speed fcc resolution of complaints . the fcc , in conjunction with cc docket 98-170 , has also adopted rules that establish truth - in - billing and billing format principles to enhance a consumer's ability to detect slamming . these rules establish requirements that , according to the fcc , are "intended to protect consumers against inaccurate and unfair billing practices. a number of issues not addressed in the april 13 , 2000 reconsideration order were addressed in a subsequent fcc order adopted on july 21 , 2000 . these rules went into effect on april 2 , 2001 . these include permitting the use of internet loas in compliance with provisions contained in the e - sign act ( p.l . 106-229 ) , thereby allowing carrier changes to be made by consumers via the internet ; retaining the three - way call as a verification method but requiring the carrier's sales representative to drop off the call once the connection has been established between the subscriber and the third party verifier ; the institution of new complaint reporting requirements for carriers which require carriers to submit semiannual reports to the fcc's enforcement bureau containing , among other information , the number of slamming complaints they have received ; and adoption of carrier registration requirements that prevent slammers from evading detection simply by changing their names .