will those subsidies continue ? if so , will they continue to be paid from libraries' budgets , or will they come from research budgets — a source that would be more consistent with the view of open - access proponents that costs of publication should be part of the costs of conducting research ? or will external granting agencies , many of which already pay scientists' page charges and color - illustration fees , assume the full costs of their investigators' open - access publications ? no action was taken on this bill . those questions relate not just to academic libraries , but to the mission of colleges and universities . in addition to nih's public access policy and pmc , other federal agencies have engaged in open access activities . several federal agencies publish free , open access , peer reviewed , internet accessible journals . these journals include emerging infectious diseases , by the centers for disease control and prevention ; and agricultural research and the journal of agricultural research , maintained by the u.s. department of agriculture and the national agricultural library . others have free , searchable , electronically available repositories that include abstracts , links to full - text articles , and other research reports , some of which may be read online . however , some agencies have confronted serious obstacles to maintaining such systems and have been forced to terminate them . below is an overview of agency activities and a review of some of the general issues raised about federal involvement in open access publishing and databases . several international organizations and other countries are examining wider implementation of open access publishing . following the release in 2003 of the "berlin declaration" which called for open access to knowledge and its signing by representatives of selected european universities , research groups , and government sectors , the european union began a study on changes in markets for scientific and technical publishing in europe . among its topics of inquiry is the subject of "open access to research findings for all and the need to reconcile authors' rights and the economic interests of publishers. the report , study on the economic and technical evolution of the scientific publication markets in europe , january 2006 , endorsed but did not require open access to publicly funded research . in 2004 , the organization for economic cooperation and development's ( oecd ) science ministers declared their commitment to a "... principle that research data from public funding should be openly available" on the rationale that providing such access promotes long - term economic benefits , more informed governmental decisionmaking , and hastens the advancement of scientific research . the ministers asked oecd to develop guidelines to "facilitate optimal cost - effective access to digital research data from public funding ..." that would be balanced in terms of opening access while recognizing "the need for restriction of access in some instances to protect social , scientific , and economic interests. the guidelines will be released after approval by the oecd council . the 2004 oecd work was based , in part , on a report that was funded by the u.s. national science foundation .