it will be updated as warranted . the 1990s was the first decade in nearly half a century in which the u.s. military was deployed on missions that involved the reconstruction of governments , infrastructure , and economies after quelling the chaos of internecine conflicts . the post - world war ii occupations in germany , japan , italy and austria were the most prominent and successful mid - century precedents . before that , u.s. military troops were active in attempts to install more democratic governments in the phillippines , central america , and the caribbean in the last years of the 19 th and early years of the 20 th century . what tasks must be performed by the u.s. military in such operations and which can be delegated to other entities ? this report will provide an overview of these issues and references to other sources which explore them . the most recent round of such activity began soon after the end of the cold war in 1989 with a rise in the number of intrastate conflicts . such "peacekeeping" missions require limitations on the use of force by combat forces , as well as the assignment of numerous personnel to provide security and to carry out political and economic activities to construct or reconstruct state institutions . these requirements have been problematic for many policymakers and for the u.s. armed forces , which have preferred to confront an enemy with the degree of force necessary to quickly defeat armed opponents ( often referred to as "decisive" or "overwhelming" force ) and to reserve its highly - skilled troops for combat missions . nevertheless , in the post - cold war years of the 1990s , peacekeeping and related limited force operations became a staple of u.s. military forces , particularly the u.s. army . during the 1990s , the united states took a leading role in four large multinational operations with peacekeeping phases under u.s , or nato and u.n. auspices: somalia , haiti , bosnia , ( all under u.n. mandates ) and kosovo . at the same time , it provided varying degrees of support through the department of defense ( dod ) for u.n. missions in which few or no u.s. soldiers took part , eg , cambodia , angola , the western sahara and east timor . u.s. military involvement in this new era of state - building ( or "nation - building" ) missions began with the u.s. - led ad hoc multilateral coalition operation in somalia . the unified task force or unitaf with 25,800 u.s. troops at peak and over 10,000 from other countries , was launched in december 1992 as a humanitarian aid mission to provide protection for relief workers and food convoys . ( it was preceded by a smaller u.s. humanitarian relief mission from august - december 1992. ) nevertheless , contingents from other countries were active "in community development projects such as rebuilding schools , building roads , and repairing irrigation canals and tube wells..." and the "australians , canadians , and french worked hard to revive broad community leadership , encouraging the creation of local councils and somali police units.