cargo classification . the acedatabases identify cargos using two sets of standardized commodity codes - - aninternal wcsc code , and the united nations ( un ) international standard code . insome cases , these commodity codes do not consistently or uniquely correspond to theindividual hazardous chemicals in the epa / rmp list , which are identified by theirchemical abstract service ( cas ) registry numbers as assigned by the americanchemical society . such inconsistencies arise either from commodity aggregation ordifferences in definition . crs has attempted to identify and correct for theseinconsistencies to the extent possible through comparison of wcsc and un codes,and consultation with classification experts . for example , the wcsc systemclassifies lng and lpg under the same 5-digit code ( 34000 ) . using lng trade datafrom the department of energy , crs was able to separate the lng and lpgvolumes for this report . nonetheless , shipment estimates reported for a number ofother epa / rmp chemicals likely include some volume of other chemicals not on theepa / rmp list . alternatively , shipments of certain epa / rmp chemicals may beincluded in the shipment totals for a similar epa / rmp chemical . ( 96 ) cargo volumes . as noted earlierin this report , chemicals cargo vessels may load or unload partial cargoes at multiplelocations over the course of a single shipment . the ace data report the movementof cargo at each of these loading and unloading points , but cannot report the totaltonnage of cargo actually carried aboard a vessel at any time . source: 49 c.f.r . note that dot divisions are subcategories within a class . sources: 40 c.f.r . the army corps of engineers ( ace ) collects , processes , and archivesdetailed marine commerce statistics through its waterborne commerce statisticscenter ( wcsc ) . these statistics are used by the ace primarily to plan new capitalprojects and manage existing projects . the ace maintains separate domestic andforeign commerce databases . the domestic database records domestic and foreignvessel trips and tonnages by commodity for u.s. ports and waterways . the foreigndatabase records waterborne commerce between the u.s. and foreign countries byu.s . port , foreign port , foreign country , commodity group , and tonnage . vessel typesinclude dry cargo ships and tankers ; barges ( loaded and empty ) ; fishing vessels ; towboats ( with or without barges in tow ) ; tugboats ; crew boats and supply boats tooffshore locations ; and newly constructed vessels from the shipyards to the point ofdelivery . vessels remaining idle during a monthly reporting period are also reported.under federal law , vessel operators must report domestic waterborne commercialmovements to the ace . the ace waterborne commerce databases were not developed to support thetype of chemical - specific analysis presented in this report . however , they may beused for that purpose subject to certain significant limitations and caveats . at therequest of crs , the ace provided its best estimates of epa / rmp cargo statisticsderived from the available data . based on a review of more limited shipping andhazardous chemicals data from other sources , crs believes the ace estimates aresufficiently accurate to warrant inclusion in this report .