the sections below briefly identify a number of them . as noted in dod's brac report , however , "[c]oncerns about the implementation of brac decisions are numerous and based on very installation - specific circumstances . for many of these concerns , sufficient information may be available only after brac decisions are finalized and installation - specific implementation plans are developed. therefore , it appears that detailed information about these implications or options will emerge over time . implementation of dod's nsps could have implications in some respects for how dod employees are affected by the brac process . this amount is $3.1 billion less than the president requested . 1591 , emergency supplemental appropriations for fy2007 , as passed by the house and the senate , includes the $3.1 billion for the 2005 department of defense base closure account . eligibility for those programs and services is not affected by nsps . nevertheless , it is possible that nsps implementation might affect collective bargaining agreements and rifs , with attendant implications for employees , as discussed elsewhere in this report . it is not yet clear , however , if or when the nsps will be implemented for employees potentially affected by the brac process . according to dod , brac will not affect the "overall implementation" of nsps , and activities on the brac list will not automatically be excluded from "spiral one" ( the first phase ) of the nsps implementation . however , "[c]omponents will assess whether inclusion of a brac site in spiral one is appropriate , considering such factors as the anticipated time frame for the closure / realignment and impact on the mission and the workforce. dod employees are currently represented by 43 unions . although the secretary of defense has broad authority to take appropriate action to provide for the more effective and efficient operation of the agency , including the transfer and reassignment of any function or duty , the collective bargaining agreements that were negotiated by dod and the unions may include provisions that have implications for how dod employees are affected by the brac process . for example , an agreement may include a negotiated grievance procedure that could be invoked in connection with a rif action . in national federation of federal employees v. flra , a 2004 case involving non - professional employees at the u.s. army's letterkenny depot , whose activities were transferred following a decision by the brac commission , the collective bargaining agreement that was negotiated between the parties included a provision that permitted the union to request bargaining within 10 days after receiving notice of a change in working conditions . although a collective bargaining agreement may include provisions that affect the brac process , such provisions could arguably be nullified by the implementation of the nsps . section 9901.905 ( a ) of the nsps regulations indicates that any provision of a collective bargaining agreement that is inconsistent with the regulations or dod implementing issuances is unenforceable .