defamation . tucker v. fischbein was adefamation case for which judge alito wrote the third circuit's 2-to - 1 opinion . ( 47 ) the suit was brought bywilliam tucker and his wife , c. delores tucker , a crusader against "gangsta rap" lyrics , against theestate of rapper tupac shakur and several companies connected with the production of an album ofshakur's . the plaintiffs alleged that shakur on the album had attacked mrs. tucker "using 'sexuallyexplicit messages , offensively coarse language and lewd and indecent words' and that she hadreceived death threats because of her activities. ( 48 ) the plaintiffs sued for defamation , alleging that the husband hadsuffered a loss of consortium as a result of the lyrics . loss of consortium means loss by one spouseof the comfort and society of the other , and may , but does not necessarily , include the loss of sexualrelations . richard fischbein , the lawyer representing shakur's estate , was quoted in the press asexpressing skepticism about the claim that the lyrics could have destroyed mrs. tucker's sex life . the plaintiffs then amended their complaint to include fischbein as a defendant for having defamedthem by characterizing their loss of consortium claim as a claim for loss of sexual relations . in phillipsv . borough of keyport , a district court had dismissed a lawsuit before trial , but the third circuitruled that it should go forward and sent it back for trial . ( 31 ) judge alito concurred , but dissented with respect to allowingone of the claims to go forward . the lawsuit was over the denial of an application to open an adultbook and video store at a particular location . the denial was based on an ordinance that prohibitedsuch establishments from being located within 500 feet of a residence , church , school , playground,or the like . sexually explicit material is protected by the first amendment unless it constitutes obscenityor child pornography , neither of which was at issue in phillips . speech that is protected by the firstamendment may not be regulated on the basis of its content unless the regulation satisfies strictscrutiny . this means , as the court in phillips wrote , that content - based regulations "will be sustainedonly if they are shown to serve a compelling state interest in a manner which involves the leastpossible burden on expression. ( 32 ) now , it might appear that a regulation that limits the location of a bookstore because it sellssexually explicit material discriminates against the bookstore on the basis of the content of itsmaterial , and that such a regulation therefore should be subject to strict scrutiny . the supremecourt , however , has held that regulations that "are justified without reference to the content of theregulated speech" are to be regarded as content - neutral . ( 33 ) the regulation at issue in phillips was justified allegedly not onthe basis of animus toward sexually explicit material , but "to prevent the deterioration of thecommunity" and "to ensure [its] economic prosperity" and "well being of the quality of life. ( 34 ) regulations of speech that are regarded as content - neutral , however , are not necessarilyconstitutional .