tex. w - 04-ca - 118 , filed april 29 , 2004 ) , was brought against 14 dairies alleging various causes of action based on disposal of wastes from those operations . it was resolved by a settlement agreement early in 2006 . the third case , state of oklahoma v. tyson foods , inc. ( n.d. okla. , no . 4:05-cv - 00329 , filed june 13 , 2005 ) , was brought by the oklahoma attorney general , asserting various claims based on the disposal of waste from 14 poultry operations in the illinois river watershed . the state principally sought response costs and natural resource injuries under cercla due to release of wastes from these facilities . the case was dismissed in 2010 . the net result of these lawsuits has been growing concern by the agriculture community that other legal actions will be brought and that the courts will continue to hold that the cercla and epcra reporting requirements and other provisions apply to whole farm sites , thus potentially exposing more of these operations to enforcement under federal law . the court cases testing the applicability of cercla and epcra to poultry and livestock operations led to congressional interest in these issues . in 2004 , a number of senators wrote to the epa administrator to ask the agency to clarify the reporting requirements of the two laws so as to limit their impact on poultry operations . the senators' letter said that because of unclear regulations and a lack of scientific information about emissions , poultry and livestock producers are uncertain about the laws' requirements and are vulnerable to enforcement actions . in report language accompanying epa's fy2006 appropriations , the house appropriations committee urged epa to address the issues . the committee continues to be concerned that unclear regulations , conflicting court decisions , and inadequate scientific information are creating confusion about the extent to which reporting requirements in [cercla] and [epcra] cover emissions from poultry , dairy , or livestock operations . producers want to meet their environmental obligations but need clarification from the environmental protection agency on whether these laws apply to their operations . the committee believes that an expeditious resolution of this matter is warranted . also in 2004 , some in congress considered proposing legislation that would amend the definition of "release" in cercla ( ยง101[22] ; 42 u.s.c . ยง9601[22] ) to clarify that the reporting requirements do not apply to releases from biological processes in agricultural operations and to amend epcra to exclude releases of hazardous chemicals produced through biological processes in routine agricultural operations . some members sought to amend the fy2006 agriculture appropriations bill , h.r . 2744 , with a provision exempting releases of livestock manure from cercla and epcra . the proposal was promoted by senate conferees on the bill , but it was not accepted by house conferees . proponents , including senator larry craig , contended that the proposed language was consistent with current law , because in their view cercla and epcra were never intended to apply to agriculture .