not all businesses are subject to the corporate income tax . income earned by partnerships is "passed through" and taxed to the individual partners under the individual income tax without imposition of a separate level of tax at the partnership level . also , businesses that have no more than 100 stockholders and that meet certain other requirements ( "s" corporations ) , as well as certain other "pass through entities" are not subject to the corporate income tax , but are taxed in the same manner as partnerships . 107-147 ) contained temporary "bonus" depreciation provisions that permitted firms to deduct an additional 30% of the cost of property in its first year of service rather than requiring that portion to be depreciated over a period of years . the provision generally applied to machines and equipment ( but not structures ) and was limited to property placed in service after september 11 , 2001 , and before january 1 , 2005 . jcwa also temporarily extended the net operating loss "carryback" period ( the years in the past from whose income a firm can deduct losses ) to five years from two years . the provision only applied to losses in 2001 and 2002 . jcwa also temporarily extended a set of expiring tax benefits ( the "extenders" discussed above ) , many of which applied to business taxes . while a principal thrust of the jobs and growth tax relief reconciliation act ( jgtrra ; p.l . 108-27 ) was accelerating the effective date of individual income tax cuts enacted in 2001 , the act also contained a number of business provisions . jgtrra's tax cuts for dividends and capital gains applied to individual income taxes , but nonetheless reduced the tax burden on stockholders' corporate - source income . under the u.s. classical method of business taxation , corporate source income is taxed twice: once under the corporate income tax and once under the individual income tax — an instance of double - taxation that is thought by economists to inefficiently restrict the flow of capital to the corporate sector . jgtrra's reductions were an incremental step in the direction of removing the double - taxation — a reform economists term tax "integration. the reductions were temporary , and were originally scheduled to expire at the end of 2008 . in addition to its capital gains and dividend reduction , jgtrra increased bonus depreciation to 50% and extended its coverage to the period between may 5 , 2003 , and january 1 , 2005 . jgtrra also temporarily ( for 2003 , 2004 , and 2005 ) increased the "expensing" allowance for small - business investment from $25,000 to $100,000 . the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( ajca ; p.l . 108-357 ) grew out of legislation designed to end a dispute between the european union ( eu ) and the united states over a u.s. tax benefit for exporting ( the extraterritorial or eti provisions ) that had been determined to contravene the world trade organization agreements' prohibition on export subsidies . the eu objected to the eti benefit , and imposed countervailing tariffs authorized by the wto .