mission pressures . aviation safety experts havealso pointed to pressures to complete the mission as factors that can lead to poor judgment amongair ambulance pilots and contribute to accidents . in 1988 , the ntsb found that mission pressurescould be exacerbated by a lack of on - site supervision among operators , particularly those operatorsthat service a broad geographic area . in many of these instances , the ntsb found that a pilot'simmediate supervisor was not located at the pilot's base station or hospital , and in some cases , waslocated in a distant city . the ntsb concluded that isolation from management forces pilots to lookfor structure and guidance from other sources , particularly hospital emergency service administratorsand personnel . this arrangement can result in pilots placing greater importance on the medicalmission and potentially may compromise sound judgment with regard to flight safety . the ntsbnoted that: [h]ospital management , the ems medical personnel,and the dispatchers can all intentionally or unintentionally put pressure on the pilots to take a flightin marginal weather conditions . the reasons for these pressures include misunderstanding or lackof understanding of weather - related considerations , genuine zeal to get a job done , or evencompetition between ems programs . ( 30 ) the ntsb also found that , besides the pressures to complete missions based on medical needinfluencing flight safety considerations , the relationship between air ambulance operators andhospitals can play a role in decisions regarding whether to accept or continue a mission . pilots mayfeel pressured to accept or continue missions in marginal weather conditions in order to satisfyhospital administrators and maintain good business relations with them . in privately - operated airambulance services , the hospital is , in essence , a customer of the air ambulance service , and pilotsmay feel compelled to satisfy their customer by accepting and completing a maximum number ofmissions . these pressures may be even greater at hospitals and in regions where there is directcompetition among air ambulance providers . a survey of helicopter air ambulance pilots found that while pressure to accept or continuemissions is a significant concern , pilots more frequently cited pressure to speed up response time asthe most significant pressure factor affecting mission safety . internal and external pressures to speedup response time could cause pilots to miss important risk factors and fail to obtain a fullunderstanding of the weather , route of flight , obstacles and obstructions en route , and other keypieces of information during the flight preparation process . policymakers may consider options to require specific training and implementation of riskmanagement techniques for air ambulance operators dealing with the specific operationalenvironment and operational pressures of the air ambulance industry . while the faa has provideda variety of training materials and resources on aeronautical decision making that are both generalin nature as well as specific to unique considerations for helicopter and air ambulance operations,decision making and various external pressures that may effect pilot judgment on air ambulancemissions is often not covered in depth during initial and recurrent pilot training . therefore,policymakers may consider more formal training and testing of aeronautical decision makingconcepts specific to air ambulance operations as a possible option for mitigating accidents relatedto poor judgment and decision making errors .