not all vulnerable youth experience negative outcomes . however , reviews of social science literature have identified multiple factors that can influence whether youth face negative outcomes in adolescence and as they transition to adulthood . such factors include the following: poverty: poverty is linked to a number of potential future problems among youth , including chronic health conditions , low educational attainment , and engagement in delinquent behaviors . the federal government has not adopted a single overarching federal policy or legislative vehicle that addresses the challenges that young people experience in adolescence or while making the transition to adulthood . rather , federal youth policy today evolved from multiple programs and initiatives that began in the early 1900s to assist children and youth . from the turn of the 20 th century through the 1950s , youth policy was generally subsumed under a broad framework of child welfare issues . the children's bureau , established in 1912 , focused attention on child labor and the protection of children with special needs . the age boundaries of "youth" were not clearly delineated , but on the basis of proposed child labor reform legislation at that time , "child" referred to those individuals age 16 and under . also during this period , work and education support programs were created to ease the financial pressures of the great depression for older youth ( ages 16 to 23 ) , and increasingly , federal attention focused on addressing the growing number of youth classified as delinquent . the subsequent period , spanning the 1960s and 1970s , was marked by the creation of programs that targeted youth in six policy areas: workforce development and job training , education , juvenile justice and delinquency prevention , social services , public health , and national and community service . finally , from the 1980s until the present , many of these programs have been expanded ; others like them have been eliminated . other coordinating efforts , such as the coordinating council on juvenile justice and delinquency prevention and shared youth vision initiative , may have the resources and leadership to create a more unified federal youth policy , albeit the council has a primary focus on juvenile justice - involved youth . in addition to the federal youth coordination act , the few youth - targeted acts over the over the past several years have not passed or have passed without full implementation . the unfunded claude pepper young americans act of 1990 sought to increase coordination among federal children and youth agencies by creating a federal council on children , youth , and families that would have streamlined federal youth programs and advised the president on youth issues . though federal legislation targeted at vulnerable young people has not been passed or implemented in recent years , executive order 13459 and current collaborations ( my brother's keeper and the coordinating council on juvenile justice and delinquency prevention ) appear to have begun addressing , even in small measure , the needs of this population . exposure to violence in the community: witnessing violence in a community is linked to several negative outcomes such as depression , aggressive behavior , anxiety , posttraumatic stress , psychological trauma , and antisocial behavior .