policy. while bush administration officials tried to allay these congressional concerns , other witnesses , including david goldwyn , a private energy analyst , pointed out several key threats to u.s. interests that have emerged in latin america . he described how companies and their shareholders are seeing their asset values cut in half as a result of resource nationalism , oil and gas production is leveling off or declining , and u.s. influence in the region is declining ( as venezuela's power has increased ) . another theme that emerged was the need for improved investment climates in the region in order to increase investment in energy sectors . at a march 2 , 2006 hearing of the house western hemisphere subcommittee , eric farnsworth of the council of the americas , asserted that countries in the region need to improve their investment climates in order to attract foreign investment and boost their competitiveness , echoing the recommendations of the council's october 2005 report described above . department of energy assistant secretary for policy and international affairs karen harbert warned about the negative effects of unpredictable and non - transparent legal and regulatory frameworks , resource nationalism , and a lack of investment in exploration and maintenance on regional energy markets . at a june 22 , 2006 hearing by the senate foreign relations committee , luis giusti , former chairman of pdvsa and currently an adviser with the center for strategic and international studies , asserted that unless investment climates across latin america improve dramatically , foreign investment will continue to move to other regional energy markets . a third theme that emerged from the hearings focused on identifying obstacles and generating possible solutions to improve hemispheric cooperation on energy - related issues . at a june 22 , 2006 hearing of the senate foreign relations committee , senator richard lugar asserted that his proposed energy diplomacy and security act would stimulate energy partnerships among energy producers and consumers . senator ken salazar testified that our shared interests with countries in the western hemisphere "should be obvious , but too often they are obscured by politicized rhetoric , mis - perceptions , and old grievances. another witness suggested that u.s. energy diplomacy , which thus far has been focused on engaging canada and mexico , should be expanded , focusing on finding common ground with energy producing and consuming nations across the region . two legislative initiatives in the 110 th congress would increase hemispheric cooperation on energy . although global in scope , s. 193 ( lugar ) , the energy diplomacy and security act of 2007 , has provisions calling for the establishment of a western hemisphere energy crisis response mechanism and a regional - based ministerial forum known as the hemisphere energy cooperation forum that would be involved in responding to temporary energy supply disruption , fostering long - term supply security , and promoting energy access for undeveloped areas . the bill also calls for the establishment of a hemisphere energy industry group to increase public - private partnerships , foster private investment , and enable countries to devise energy agendas that are compatible with industry capacity and cognizant of industry goals .