further uprate requests are pending . the improved operation of nuclear power plants has helped drive down the cost of nuclear - generated electricity . average operations and maintenance costs ( including fuel but excluding capital costs ) dropped steadily from a high of about 3.5 cents / kilowatt - hour ( kwh ) in 1987 to below 2 cents / kwh in 2001 ( in 2001 dollars ) . by 2005 , the average operating cost was 1.7 cents / kwh . falling operating costs have improved the outlook for the nation's existing fleet of nuclear power plants . from 1989 to 1998 , 12 commercial reactors were closed before reaching the end of their 40-year licenses — california's rancho seco plant and oregon's trojan plant after only 14 and 16 years of operation , respectively . by the late 1990s , there was real doubt about whether any reactors would make it to 40 years . since 2000 , however , 48 commercial reactors have received 20-year license extensions from nrc , giving them up to 60 years of operation . license extensions for seven more reactors are currently under review , and many others are anticipated , according to nrc . the license extension trend has been spurred partly by favorable rate treatment of nuclear plants' unrecovered capital costs ( "stranded costs" ) in states that have deregulated the power generation sector . industry consolidation could also help existing nuclear power plants , as larger nuclear operators purchase plants from utilities that run only one or two reactors . several such sales have occurred , including the march 2001 sale of the millstone plant in connecticut to dominion energy for a record $1.28 billion . the merger of two of the nation's largest nuclear utilities , peco energy and unicom , completed in october 2000 , consolidated the operation of 17 reactors under a single corporate entity , exelon corporation , headquartered in chicago . although no new u.s. nuclear power plant has opened in the past 10 years , commercial reactor construction has continued elsewhere in the world , particularly in asia . since the most recent u.s. reactor began operating in 1996 , 37 have started up in other countries , an average of about four per year . twenty - five reactors are currently under construction outside the united states . with the energy policy act of 2005 , the federal government has adopted aggressive incentives for building new reactors — including tax credits , loan guarantees , and compensation for regulatory delays . these incentives build on previous regulatory and legislative initiatives , particularly a more streamlined nrc licensing process and doe's nuclear power 2010 program to test that process . to examine the potential competitive position of new nuclear plants , the future market price for electricity must be estimated . in the long run , the marginal cost of bringing on new electric generating capacity will tend to be set by the cost of the least expensive newly constructed generating plant . however , power plants are long - lived facilities with lifetimes estimated at around 65 years , and current maintenance practices can extend that life almost indefinitely .