appendix a . family living arrangements — effects on income and poverty measurement this report has principally focused on parents and their children . young families . the principal earner of families headed by a parent under the age of 25 had median earnings of $11.06 per hour — a wage rate that would classify the three person benchmark family used in this analysis as low - income , but just slightly above the cut - off that would classify the family as economically fragile ( i.e. , 150% of poverty ) , based on full - time full - year work . the low earnings of these young parents is a logical consequence of being at the beginning of their adult work careers and not yet having accumulated job experience that raises earnings capacity . the figure shows , for example , that 91% of married couples with children live as independent nuclear family units , with no other extended family members or unrelated members residing in the household . in contrast , only about 60% of lone - mother families and just 41% of families headed by lone fathers live as independent nuclear family households . among married - couple families with children , about 8% live in households with extended family members . in comparison , about one - quarter of lone - mother families and nearly an equal share of lone - father families live in households with extended family members . in some of these extended family member households , other nonrelatives may also reside . about 18% of lone - mother families and more than twice that share of lone - father families ( 41% ) reside in households with unrelated household members ( the top two tiers of each bar ) ; among lone - mother families , 15% live only with unrelated members , and a small fraction ( 3% ) also include extended family members in the household . among lone - father families , 36% live only with unrelated members , and 5% also include extended family members in the household . in this report , we considered at times only nuclear family members' income and needs when assessing family economic well - being . in other instances , extended family members' income and needs were also included in the analysis . as noted above , some nuclear and related extended families live in households with unrelated members as well . however , the potential effect of unrelated household members' income and needs on nuclear or extended family well - being may vary to the extent that resources are shared among household members . in some cases , unrelated household members , such as unmarried partners , may make significant economic contributions to the nuclear family co - residing in the household . in other cases , the sharing of economic resources among unrelated household members may be minimal . however , there is no clear means of determining the extent to which unrelated household members share income and represent a joint economic unit . in this analysis , we excluded unrelated household members' income and needs when considering family economic well - being .