nepa itself does not require compliance with them . theoretically , if the requirement to comply with nepa were removed , compliance with each applicable law would still be required . the use of nepa as an umbrella statute can lead to confusion in this regard . these include the initial lack of binding regulations applicable to the eis preparation process , the absence of an agency authorized to enforce its requirements , and nepa's requirement to involve the public in the decision - making process . with regard to the latter , when members of the public oppose a project or feel that their opinions are not given sufficient weight , their involvement may result in turning to the courts to halt the project until their concerns are addressed . during the past 35 years , interested stakeholders have challenged the adequacy of nepa documentation and agency compliance with nepa in court and , in some instances , used nepa litigation to try to halt or slow projects to which they were opposed . as a result , the progress of some federal projects was slowed . however , particularly in the past 10-15 years , the number of projects affected by nepa - related litigation is very small . also , unlike other environmental laws , nepa itself cannot stop a project altogether . this does not mean that , during the course of a nepa - related lawsuit , an agency may not decide to abandon a given project or project alternative . as a policy statute , nepa supplements other statutes . consequently , agencies often are required to comply with provisions of other state , tribal , and federal environmental requirements before they can proceed with a given action . this requirement can lead to confusion when procedures to comply with other laws are integrated with nepa compliance , and it can give the impression that nepa alone is responsible for the time it takes to obtain the appropriate authorization or approval for a federal project . although stakeholders disagree about the extent to which nepa currently halts or delays federal actions , few disagree that agencies can improve their methods of nepa compliance . many elements of recent legislative proposals intended to streamline nepa compliance already exist in ceq's regulations . those include integrating nepa early in the planning process , integrating nepa requirements with other environmental requirements , eliminating duplication with state and local procedures , swiftly addressing disputes with other agencies , and establishing appropriate time limits on the eis process . debate is likely to continue with regard to if or to what degree further streamlining may be accomplished . bear , dinah . "nepa at 19: a primer on an 'old' law with solutions to new problems," 19 environmental law reporter 10060 , february 1989 . caldwell , lynton . the national environmental policy act: an agenda for the future . bloomington , in: indiana university press , 1998 . council on environmental quality . "forty most asked questions concerning ceq's national environmental policy act regulations," 46 federal register 18026 , march 23 , 1981 . council on environmental quality . "memorandum for general counsels , nepa liaisons and participants in scoping," april 20 , 1981 . council on environmental quality .