they are unacceptable. the u.s. and brazilian governments have gradually moved past the surveillance dispute over the past year and a half . in october 2014 , they signed a memorandum of understanding designed to resolve a long - running trade dispute over u.s. cotton support programs ( see " cotton dispute " ) . rousseff appointed her former ambassador to the united states as foreign minister following her reelection and asserted that "it is of great importance that we improve our relationship with the united states" during her january 2015 inaugural address , which was attended by vice president biden . she also rescheduled her visit to the united states that had previously been postponed , meeting with president obama at the white house in june 2015 . in the lead up to rousseff's visit , the brazilian congress approved two pending defense cooperation agreements ( see " defense " ) and a tax information exchange agreement that meets the requirements of the foreign account tax compliance act ( fatca , p.l . brazil and the united states are currently working together to address an outbreak of zika virus in brazil and other western hemisphere nations ( see " zika virus response " ) . as a middle - income country , brazil does not receive large amounts of u.s. assistance . the united states provided brazil with $18 million in fy2012 , $15.2 million in fy2013 , $13.9 million in fy2014 , and $11.6 million in fy2015 ( see table 1 ) . the obama administration requested $1.4 million in assistance for brazil in fy2016 . $500,000 would be used to support brazil's national hiv / aids strategy and the goals of the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) . another $625,000 would be used to provide professional training to members of brazil's military . the remaining $240,000 would be used to enhance brazil's strategic trade control compliance and enforcement of maritime and port security . the actual level of assistance in fy2016 will be much higher as congress included $10.5 million to support environmental programs in the brazilian amazon in the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l . 114-113 ) ; the administration did not request any funding for such programs . the administration's fy2017 budget request includes at least $925,000 for brazil . in addition to supporting aid programs in brazil , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) has begun working with brazil's development agency , the brazilian cooperation agency ( agência brasileria de cooperação , abc ) , in third countries . under these so - called trilateral development initiatives , the united states and brazil share expertise and funding in order to accomplish common goals . in haiti , honduras , and mozambique , for example , usaid and the abc have collaborated on agricultural productivity and food security programs designed to reduce poverty , hunger , and malnutrition . the administration's fy2016 foreign aid request included some funding to collaborate with brazil on renewable energy and citizen security programs in central america .