this decision had implications for the tariff formula . because bound tariffs are often significantly higher than applied tariff levels , reductions from applied rates would result in greater cuts to actually applied tariffs . thus for the negotiations to provide actual market access , as opposed to just cutting the binding rate , the formula coefficient must be lower . higher coefficients would work to exclude some tariff lines from any actual cuts in applied tariffs , especially in developing countries . a second goal of the doha negotiations in this area concerns the binding of tariffs by developing countries . because the binding process commits a country not to raise tariffs beyond a certain level , binding has been seen as the first step in tariff reduction . under the 2004 framework agreement , reductions in unbound tariff lines would be calculated from twice the currently applied rate . however , the hong kong ministerial declaration adopted a "constant non - linear mark - up approach," but did not adopt any particular formula . other proposals suggested a range of figures . new zealand has suggested that the difference between the two should be no more the five percentage points . developing countries contend that they should be afforded a higher coefficient based on language in the doha ministerial declaration affording them "less than full reciprocity in reduction commitments. an alternate developing country proposal distinct from the swiss formula with multiple coefficients was one put forth by argentina , brazil , and india , known as the abi proposal . abi also used the swiss formula , but it proposed the coefficient to be the tariff average of each country , thus each country would have its own coefficient . abi would not result in tariff harmonization among countries because there would not be a common coefficient ; however , it would result in harmonization across products within each country's tariff schedule . just prior to the ill - fated june 30-july 1 , 2006 , mini - ministerial in geneva , pascal lamy suggested a possible compromise in the form of the 20-20-20 proposal . in addition to advocating a ceiling of $20 billion in u.s. domestic agriculture support and the use of the g - 20 agricultural market access proposal for developed countries , lamy advocated a developing country of coefficient of 20 for the nama swiss formula . the nama element of the proposal was criticized by u.s. and eu officials as lacking ambition . u.s. manufacturing groups scored the proposal as failing to provide sufficient market access to make a deal worthwhile to u.s. manufacturers . brazil , for its part , attacked the proposal as too ambitious , and renewed its call for a coefficient of 30 for developing countries . the nama chairman's negotiating draft of july 2007 ( and reaffirmed in february 2008 ) suggested a swiss formula coefficient of [8-9] for developed countries and between [19-23] for developing countries . the chairman calculated that such a coefficient range would yield an average tariff of 3% , 90% of tariffs below 5% , and tariff peaks of 7% - 8.5% for the united states and europe .