pursuant to h.res . 1100 , the bill was then coupled with a tax - extension bill ( h.r . 6111 ) and sent to the senate . the senate passed the combined bills ( 79-9 ) on december 8 . on december 20 , 2006 , president bush signed the bill into law ( p.l . 109-432 ) and , per the law , proclaimed pntr for vietnam on december 29 , 2006 . the legislation also codified a provision of the u.s. - vietnam bilateral agreement on vietnam's accession to the world trade organization ( wto ) authorizing the reimposition of quotas on imports of textiles or wearing apparel , if vietnam subsidizes those industries in violation of wto rules . on november 7 , 2006 , vietnam completed the multilateral component of its wto membership bid when the wto general council approved vietnam's accession package , the core of which is a combination of all the bilateral agreements that vietnam negotiated . on november 28 , 2006 , vietnam's national assembly ratified the deal . this move puts vietnam on track to join the wto on january 11 , 2007 . the united states was a major player in vietnam's accession process . on may 31 , 2006 , u.s. and vietnamese negotiators signed an agreement on the conditions for vietnam's accession ( entry ) into the world trade organization ( wto ) . the agreement was just one in a number of steps that vietnam had to take to complete its quest to join the multilateral trade body . however , the agreement with the united states was the last and , seemingly , the most difficult of the bilateral agreements that vietnam had to negotiate with twenty - eight wto members ( including the european union ( eu ) counting as one but representing twenty - five countries ) . u.s. - vietnam diplomatic and economic relations remained essentially frozen for more than a decade after communist north vietnam's victory over u.s. - backed south vietnam in 1975 . relations took major steps forward in the mid - 1990s , particularly in 1995 , when the two sides re - established formal diplomatic relations . since then , the normalization process has accelerated and bilateral ties have expanded , particularly on the economic side of the relationship . the most important step toward normalization since 1995 was the signing of a sweeping bilateral trade agreement ( bta ) , which was approved by congress and signed by president bush in 2001 ( p.l . 107-052 ) under the bta , the united states and vietnam extended mutual mfn ( ntr ) to one another , that went into effect on december 10 , 2001 . in return , hanoi agreed to a range of trade liberalization measures and market - oriented reforms . the climate in trade relations between hanoi and washington has sobered considerably since the heady days after the bta was signed , in part because of difficult bilateral negotiations over the terms of vietnam's accession to the world trade organization ( wto ) and anti - dumping duties the united states has leveled against imports of vietnamese shrimp and catfish .