a number of goals and justifications have been offered . some argue that greater efforts should be made to require china to afford u.s. firms the same market access chinese companies enjoy in the united states . others contend that wto agreements do not cover ( or adequately cover ) many of the policies and practices that china employs to protect and support its industries and therefore argue that the united states should act unilaterally ( including the threat of sanctions ) when u.s. economic interests are at stake . others argue that u.s. trade remedy laws should be more aggressively used to stop imports of chinese products that have been dumped in the united states or subsidized by the chinese government , in order to afford greater protection to u.s. firms and workers from china's unfair trade practices . finally , some policymakers have advocated for a more forceful response to chinese industrial policies that seek to force foreign firms to transfer technology or lock u.s. technology firms out of china's markets through domestic content requirements . a number of congressional members have expressed concerns over the efforts of chinese to acquire u.s. high technology firms or assets , and many have called for reforms to the cfius review process to flag chinese mergers that may impact the global competitiveness of u.s. economic sectors . others support a more balanced approach to dealing with china that seeks to use the multilateral process in the wto to resolve major trade disputes , high - level forums to address complex and long - term economic and trade issues , and negotiated trade agreements to boost market access in china . supporters of this view contend that the imposition of unilateral trade sanctions by the united states ( outside the wto process ) against china could result in rounds of economically damaging retaliation and counter - retaliation . some critics of the trump administration's approach to trade policy contend that focusing too much on bilateral trade imbalances to judge the benefits or fairness of u.s. trade relations with various countries contradicts basic economic theory that only the overall trade balance matters and is the result of macroeconomic forces , not unfair trade policies . in addition , u.s. trade data is a poor measurement of who benefits from trade because it fails to reflect the value that was added in each country before it was shipped to its final destination . many u.s. products imported from china ( such as iphones ) contain inputs from numerous countries , which are not reflected in u.s. trade data . therefore , some contend , it makes little sense to make reducing trade imbalances the top priority in trade negotiations with china ( and other countries ) . rather , the central focus of trade negotiations , they argue , should be the reduction of trade and investment barriers that are deemed by the united states as having the most significant impact in limiting u.s. trade flows , measuring the impact from a reduction of those barriers , but refraining from using trade balance data to measure the success or failure of such actions .