in the 110 th congress , h.con.res . 137 ( berkley ) was introduced on may 1 , 2007 calling for the launch of fta negotiations with taiwan . the following briefly reviews the notification and consultation requirements . 5724 ) and the senate ( s. 2830 ) . for over 50 years , u.s. trade officials have negotiated multilateral trade agreements to achieve lower trade barriers and rules to cover international trade . during the 108 th congress , u.s. officials negotiated and congress approved four bilateral free - trade agreements with australia , chile , morocco , and singapore . in the 109 th congress agreements were concluded and congress approved the central american - dominican republic fta and bilateral agreements with bahrain and oman . the bush administration is making bilateral and regional free - trade agreements more important elements of its trade policy . the ustr has stated that ftas with middle eastern countries are consistent with the 9 / 11 commission recommendation that the united states encourage development in the middle east by expanding trade . the administration's rationale for this potential fta is to provide the incentive for the transformation of the economies of the middle east and their integration into the world economy . one study reports that , since 1980 , the share of world exports emanating from middle eastern countries has dropped from 13.5% to 4% , and that per capita income has fallen by 25% in the arab world . this initiative , announced by president bush on october 26 , 2002 , provides the impetus for the negotiation of bilateral ftas with individual countries of the association of southeast asian nations , or asean ( brunei , cambodia , indonesia , laos , malaysia , myanmar , philippines , singapore , thailand , and vietnam ) . the first stage of this process is expected to be the negotiation of a region - wide trade and investment framework agreement ( tifa ) , which is seen as the first step in the process of negotiating individual ftas with asean member states . thailand is the first candidate for an fta under this initiative ( see earlier section on " thailand " ) . as seen by the administration , the principal benefits to the united states of ftas with asean member states are the potential to reduce high tariffs on agricultural products and to eliminate restrictive tariff - rate quotas on other u.s. exports , while the major benefit to asean countries would be improved access to the u.s. market . the initiative is also seen as a way of countering growing chinese influence in the region . two - way trade with asean countries reached $166.9 billion in 2007 , consisting of imports of $111.7 billion and exports of $55.2 billion . egypt was the 51 st largest trading partner of the united states with u.s. imports in 2007 of $2.4 billion , u.s. exports of $5.3 billion , and two - way trade totaling $7.7 billion . major export to egypt include cereals , aircraft and parts , machinery , vehicles and parts , telecommunications equipment , and arms ; imports include textiles , apparel , carpets , petroleum , and iron and steel .