emissions reductions . should carbon sequestration efforts be balanced by incentives to obtain additional emissions reductions in the agriculture sector through improved conservation and farm management practices , which could have a more immediate , direct , and lasting effect on overall ghg emissions ? how might the existing regulatory framework for controlling air pollutants affect the climate change debate ? what are the potential options for reducing ghg emissions at u.s. farming operations ? how might cost concerns be addressed that limit broader adoption of manure management systems and also feed management strategies at u.s. livestock operations ? carbon sequestration . for example , might previously retired land be brought back into corn production or might this result in more intensive corn production , including fewer crop rotations and planting area setbacks , which could raise emissions and reduce the amount of carbon sequestered ? what are the upper limits of carbon capture and storage initiatives in the agriculture sector ? for example , are such carbon sinks temporary or long - lasting , and what limits exist on their storage value ? what are the opportunities for improved on - farm energy efficiency and conservation ? do they rely appropriately on the willingness of landowners to adopt or continue to implement a particular conservation practice ? some u.s. production regions are likely to fare better than others . are additional initiatives needed in the u.s. agriculture sector to prepare for the potentially effects of global climate change that might impact u.s. agricultural production and food security ? which regions and crops might be "winners" or "losers" and how can transitions be eased ? do they rely too heavily on the willingness of landowners to convert existing farmland to open space or prevent the conversion of existing farmland to non - farm uses ? are they cost - effective when compared to sinks in other sectors ? how might concerns regarding uncertainty be addressed when measuring and estimating the amount of carbon sequestered in agricultural soils ? carbon offset or credit markets . this report is organized in three parts . first , it discusses the extent of ghg emissions associated with the u.s. agriculture sector , and cites current and potential estimates for u.s. agricultural soils to sequester carbon and partly offset national ghg emissions . second , the report describes the types of land management and farm conservation practices that can reduce ghg emissions and / or sequester carbon in agricultural soils , highlighting those practices that are currently promoted under existing voluntary federal agricultural programs . the appendix provides a summary primer of the key background information presented in these first two sections . finally , the report provides a brief overview of legislative action within the ongoing energy and climate debate in congress to enact changes to existing laws and regulations affecting primarily the energy - producing sectors and other sectors thought to be contributing to ghg concentrations . many of these energy and climate bills include provisions that could involve farmers and landowners by allowing agriculture and forestry - based carbon offsets and allowances and / or by allowing for farm - based biofuels , biomass residues , and dedicated renewable energy crops . more detail on these bills is available in other crs reports .