circuit's opinion stand . the obama executive order revoked the bush administration presidential statement of august 9 , 2001 , limiting federal funding for research involving human embryonic stem cells , and executive order 13435 of june 20 , 2007 , "which supplements the august 9 , 2001 , statement on human embryonic stem cell research. president george w. bush had announced on august 9 , 2001 , that for the first time federal funds would be used to support research on human embryonic stem cells . however , the bush decision limited funding to research on 21 stem cell lines that had been created prior to the date of the august 2001 policy announcement . in contrast , as of january 8 , 2013 , a total of 200 stem cell lines are listed in the new nih stem cell registry . legislation introduced but not passed in the 111 th and 112 th congresses would have codified the obama stem cell policy , preventing reversal by future administrations . however , even if such legislation had been enacted , the use of federal funds for the derivation of new human embryonic stem cell lines would still not be permitted as long as the dickey amendment remains in effect . the amendment states federal funds cannot be used for the creation of human embryos for research purposes or for research in which human embryos are destroyed . this report provides background information on stem cell research and its potential applications as well as a history of federal policy decisions related to research on human embryos and stem cells . most cells within an animal or human being are committed to fulfilling a single function within the body . in contrast , stem cells are a unique and important set of cells that are not specialized . stem cells retain the ability to become some of the more than 200 different cell types in the body , and thereby play a critical role in repairing organs and body tissues throughout life . the term stem cells is often used in reference to these repair cells within an adult organism , but a more fundamental variety of stem cells is found in the early - stage embryo . embryonic stem cells have the ability to become all the different types of cells found in the human body . this section discusses background , history , and potential applications of stem cell research . legislation introduced in the 111 th and 112 th congresses would have codified the obama stem cell policy and prevented reversal by future administrations . in addition , the legislation would have banned funding for reproductive human cloning , and required that stem cell lines meet ethical guidelines established by the nih and that the guidelines be reviewed every three years . there was no further action on such legislation during the 111 th congress or the 112 th congress . the table below depicts action during the 109 th and 110 th congresses on human embryonic stem cell research legislation . president obama also issued a memorandum on scientific integrity directing the head of the white house office of science and technology policy "to develop a strategy for restoring scientific integrity to government decision making.