each of these is discussed below . cna is a federally funded research and development center ( ffrdc ) that does much of its analytical at the navy's request . the cna report's discussion of how crew rotation may alter force - level requirements for maintaining day - to - day forward deployments is somewhat detailed and may have been adapted from other work that cna has done on the topic for the navy . the oft report was prepared under the direction of retired navy admiral arthur cebrowski , who was the director of oft from october 29 , 2001 until january 31 , 2005 and the president of the naval war college ( nwc ) from july 24 , 1998 to august 22 , 2001 . during his time at nwc and oft , cebrowski was a leading proponent of network - centric warfare and distributed force architectures . the csba report was prepared by robert work , csba's analyst for maritime issues . csba describes itself as "an independent , policy research institute established to promote innovative thinking about defense planning and investment strategies for the 21 st century . csba's analytic - based research makes clear the inextricable link between defense strategies and budgets in fostering a more effective and efficient defense , and the need to transform the us military in light of an emerging military revolution. csba's executive director is dr. andrew f. krepinevich , jr. , whose previous experience includes work in dod's office of net assessment , the office directed by andrew marshall . krepinevich is generally considered a major writer on defense transformation . the cna report grounds its analysis in traditional dod force - planning considerations and campaign modeling . the report cites past dod force - planning studies that reflect similar approaches . the implicit argument in the cna report is that its findings have weight in part because they reflect a well - established and systematic approach to the problem . in contrast to the cna report , the oft report "calls into question the viability of the longstanding logic of naval force building. the oft report grounds its analysis in four major force - design principles that the report identifies as responsive to future strategic challenges and technological opportunities . the report then seeks to design a fleet that it is consistent with these principles , and assesses that fleet using a new set of metrics that the report believes to be consistent with these principles . the implicit argument in the oft report is that its findings have weight in part because they reflect major force - design principles that respond to future strategic challenges and technological opportunities . the csba report employs an extensive historical analysis of the missions and structure of the u.s. navy and other navies . the report argues that the structure of the u.s. navy has shifted over time in response to changes in technology and u.s. security challenges , and that u.s. military forces have entered a new security era ( which the report calls the "joint expeditionary era" ) during which the u.s. navy will need to do three things .