referred to the committees on energy and commerce and on agriculture . other broadband technologies include fixed wireless and satellite . referred to the committees on energy and commerce and on agriculture . broadband access enables a number of beneficial applications to individual users and to communities . meanwhile , the fy2002 agriculture appropriations bill ( p.l . it is becoming generally accepted that broadband access in a community can play an important role in economic development . on july 8 , 2002 , rus announced the availability of $20 million for a pilot grant program for the provision of broadband service in rural america . the program was specifically targeted to economically challenged rural communities with no existing broadband service . grants were made available to entities providing "community - oriented connectivity," which the rus defined as those entities "who will connect the critical community facilities including the local schools , libraries , hospitals , police , fire and rescue services and who will operate a community center that provides free and open access to residents. the pilot program was extended into fy2003 , as the consolidated appropriations resolution of 2003 ( p.l . 108-7 ) allocated $10 million for broadband grants . currently , rus has four ongoing programs that have been established to incentivize and subsidize broadband infrastructure investment in unserved and underserved rural areas . these include the following: rural broadband access loan s — funds the costs of construction , improvement , or acquisition of facilities and equipment needed to provide service in eligible rural areas . also would raise the broadband loan program authorization from $25 million to $50 million . the fcc , in an october 2011 decision , adopted an order that calls for the usf to be transformed , in stages , over a multiyear period — from a mechanism to support voice telephone service to one that supports the deployment , adoption , and use of both fixed and mobile broadband . s. 2654 ( smith ) , introduced on april 12 , 2018 , as the community connect grant program act of 2018 , would amend the rural electrification act of 1936 to authorize the community connect grant program at an annual level of $50 million per year . more specifically , the high cost program is being phased out and a new fund , the connect america fund ( caf ) , which includes the targeted mobility fund and new remote areas fund , is replacing it . community connect grants — funds broadband deployment into rural communities where it is not yet economically viable for private sector providers to deliver service . telecommunications infrastructure loans and loan guarantees — funds the construction , maintenance , improvement , and expansion of telephone service and broadband in extremely rural areas with a population of 5,000 or less . the rural broadband access loan and loan guarantee program , the community connect grant program , the telecommunications infrastructure loan and loan guarantee program , the rural broadband reconnect program , and the distance learning and telemedicine grant program are funded through the annual agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations act .