other countries have done the same . at the same time , the united states and other external parties have expressed support for multilateral initiatives to encourage compromise and consensus in support of libya's transition . some foreign observers have praised the role of the united nations and other third parties in promoting national reconciliation , but have argued that continuous efforts are needed to engage all libyan actors with influence or direct control over security , natural resources , infrastructure , and sources of revenue if stability is to be achieved . various libyans have at times accused the u.n. and other third parties of unwarranted interference in libya's domestic affairs , particularly when they perceive outside interventions to undercut their interests or serve those of their rivals . for the united states and other outsiders , key issues related to post - qadhafi libya have included transnational terrorist and criminal threats emanating from libya ; the security and continued export of libyan oil and natural gas ; libya's role as a transit country for europe - bound refugees and migrants ; the security of weapons stockpiles and unconventional weapons materials ; and the country's orientation in various region - wide political competitions . for a more detailed description of libya's history and political evolution , see ‎ appendix a . for a description of select libyan political actors , see appendix d . conflict and instability in libya have taken a severe toll on the country's economy and weakened its fiscal and reserve positions since 2011 . as of 2014 , libya was estimated to have the largest proven crude oil reserves in africa and the ninth largest globally . oil and natural gas supply 97% of the government's fiscal revenue , and a combination of supply disruptions and market forces caused oil production and revenue to plummet from 2014 through 2016 , devastating state finances . although state revenue has declined from its post - 2011 high points , state financial obligations have increased , with public spending on salaries , imports , and subsidies all having expanded . libyan officials have identified more than 1.75 million state employees ( equivalent to more than 25% of the population ) and estimate that salaries consume nearly 60% of the state budget . government payments to civilians and militia members have continued since the outbreak of conflict in 2014 , and central bank authorities have simultaneously paid salaries for military and militia forces aligned with opposing sides in the internal conflicts . to manage deficits and continue payments of salaries and subsidies , libyan officials have drawn on state financial reserves , but reports of delays in salary payments persist . world bank / international monetary fund statistics and u.n. estimates suggest that foreign exchange reserves have fallen from their high point of $124 billion in 2012 to an estimated $69 billion in 2017 . in august 2017 , the u.n. secretary - general reported that the budget deficit was then "much higher than previously projected" and predicted that foreign currency reserves would remain dangerously low through the end of 2017 .