this was the case after the northridge earthquake . many families with temporary vouchers were still using them when the assistance was set to expire , and , fearing the social and political implications of evicting families , congress extended the assistance several times before it was eventually made permanent . given recent concerns voiced by congress about the cost of the section 8 program and administration initiatives to replace it with a new program , there may be political reluctance to expand it . after the storm , the president did not request section 8 vouchers for displaced families outside of the limited kdhap / dvp assistance . instead , fema provided cash grants to families to use for housing costs . referred to as transitional housing assistance , these payments are governed by the individual and household assistance authority provided in the stafford act . the first of these payments , at the amount of $2,358 , was made in september 2005 . the grant amount was meant to represent three months of housing costs , and was calculated using the national average fair market rent for a two - bedroom apartment . families who received the assistance were required to show receipts to prove that it was used for eligible housing expenses ; however , those rules were loosened for the first grant because fema acknowledged that families were given payments without sufficient direction as to how it was to be used . the grants count against fema's $26,200 limit on assistance provided to an individual household . fema indicated that the housing assistance could be extended for up to 18 months , and that future amounts might be adjusted to reflect regional rent variations . families' eligibility for this assistance was determined when they registered with fema , and was based on the amount of damage to their homes . as of august 14 , 2006 , 718,976 applicants had received rental assistance and as of august 23 , 2006 , 632,808 of those applicants , at their last recertification , were still eligible for ongoing rental assistance . in addition to transitional housing assistance payments , fema can provide several other forms of housing assistance . fema can provide trailer homes to families for up to 18 months after a disaster . as of august 29 , 2006 , fema had provided more than 116,000 trailers and mobile homes to hurricane victims , of which more than 115,000 were occupied . fema can also pay the cost of hotel rooms for hurricane evacuees . at its peak , fema was paying for 85,000 rooms , for katrina and rita evacuees ; by the end of february 2006 , the agency was making payments for 10,000 rooms . fema announced that hotel payments were only a temporary solution , and initially stated that it would cease such payments by december 1 , 2005 , with the exception of short - term extensions for the 12,000 hotel rooms occupied by evacuees in louisiana and mississippi . that deadline was later extended to december 15 , 2005 , with 10 states eligible for extensions to january 7 , 2006 .