, for reasons other than poor performance ) . researchers have begun to utilize the administrative records of the unemployment insurance ( ui ) system as well . its major benefit over survey data is that it offers virtually universal coverage of workers on the payrolls of employers in a given state . definitions differ by the variables available in surveys and by statute . shortly after the issue of worker dislocation emerged , the u.s. bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) developed the displaced worker supplement ( dws ) to the current population survey ( cps ) which queries different groups of households over time . every two years since the mid - 1980s , the dws has been administered with the january or february cps to determine the number , characteristics , and labor market outcomes of adults who reported that they had lost or left jobs as a result of a plant / company shutdown or move , insufficient work , or position / shift abolished . in its definition of displaced workers , bls includes only workers who had worked for their employers for at least three years before being discharged , as they are expected to have greater difficulty becoming reemployed than more recent hires . when utilizing the dws or other databases , analysts sometimes do not apply a tenure screen . similarly , some researchers may define older workers as having attained a given age minimum ( eg , at least 40 or 55 years old ) , while others also set an upper limit ( eg , below age 65 ) to avoid the complexities introduced by eligibility for public and private retirement benefits . begun in 1992 , the longitudinal health retirement study ( hrs ) survey focuses specifically on older individuals , which it defines as persons over the age of 50 . analysts are able to utilize the hrs to examine displacement among older workers because it asks individuals whether their jobs ended as a result of business closings and permanent layoffs ( i.e. having very large database , even when limiting the analysis to older workers , enables analysts to make detailed estimates ( eg , by industry ) . in addition , the ui records contain earnings histories over several years , which allows determination of long - term changes in earnings . and , unlike the dws and hrs , the information in ui records is not self - reported . the dislocated worker program under title i of the workforce investment act ( wia ) and the trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) program are meant to help displaced workers obtain new employment by providing job search assistance and training among other services . those eligible for the dislocated worker program are more broadly defined than the group examined in this report . the taa program , in contrast , is limited to workers who have lost jobs due to imports of articles that compete with u.s. - produced goods and to shifts of production outside the united states . the wia program does not reserve a portion of its funding for older displaced workers .