unemployment has remained low , at 4.4% in 2017 . in any case , observers have noted considerable unease among some of the many multinational corporations that have chosen the uk as their eu headquarters ; these corporations face a period of uncertainty about the uk's trade and economic arrangements and the corresponding legal and regulatory frameworks . the government of the uk is led by prime minister theresa may of the conservative party . she became prime minister in july 2016 , after david cameron resigned in the wake of leading the unsuccessful campaign for the uk to remain in the european union ( eu ) . cameron's departure came after having been reelected in may 2015 with an absolute majority for the conservatives . the european commission ( the eu's executive institution ) serves as the eu's negotiator , with michel barnier , a former eu commissioner for financial services and former french foreign minister , leading talks for the eu . the eu's negotiating guidelines adopted at the leaders' summit in brussels in april 2017 presented a two - phase approach to the talks . the first phase would deal with the terms of a withdrawal agreement , focusing initially on three priority topics: the status and rights of eu citizens living in the uk and uk citizens living in the eu , a financial settlement addressing remaining uk obligations to the eu , and arrangements for the border between northern ireland and the republic of ireland . given sufficient progress on these topics , the second phase would discuss possible transitional arrangements and the framework for future relations between the uk and the eu . this issue of "sequencing" became an early point of tension in the negotiations , as the eu resisted opening negotiations on its future economic and trade relationship with the uk until at least some of the main terms of withdrawal had been agreed . throughout 2017 , continued discord in the uk about the desired shape of brexit fueled criticism from eu officials and outside observers that a lack of clarity and unity on the british side had hindered the progress of withdrawal negotiations . the uk government pushed back against such charges , noting that it has produced a series of position papers detailing its approach to numerous items on the negotiating agenda . after seven months and six rounds of discussions , the two sides reached an agreement in principle covering main aspects of the three priority topics and released a joint report on december 8 , 2017 , that describes their common understanding and joint commitments . with some specific aspects yet to be finalized , the report notes that "nothing is agreed until everything is agreed," and that joint commitments "shall be reflected in the withdrawal agreement in full detail. on december 15 , 2017 , the european council determined that sufficient progress had been made on the three priority topics to open the second phase of negotiations , dealing with the transition period and framework for future relations .