goods . the european union and canada have been imposing tariff surcharges since may 2,2005 ; mexico began doing so on august 18 , 2005 , and japan introduced its measures effectiveseptember 1 , 2005 . ( 2 ) congressional action is required in order for the united states to comply with the wtodeterminations , and , notwithstanding the strong congressional support enjoyed by the cdsoa inboth chambers , ( 3 ) severalefforts to repeal or amend the measure were introduced in the 109th congress , first session . mostrecently , repeal of the cdsoa was included in s. 1932 , the deficit reduction act of2005 , which was passed by the senate on november 3 , 2005 , and by the house on november 18 . in conference , language was negotiated that would repeal the cdsoa as of the date of enactmentof the deficit reduction act , while allowing distribution of duties on all subject merchandise enteredbefore october 1 , 2007 . the conference report , with the cdsoa language included , subsequentlypassed the house on december 19 , 2005 , and the senate on december 21 . a point of order upheldin the senate against inclusion of medicare and medicaid language in a budget bill caused a slightlydifferent version of the conference report to be passed in the senate ; therefore , the house will needto consider the measure once again in 2006 . there have been three other efforts to repeal the cdsoa in the 109th congress . inmid - september 2005 , two amendments offered by senator grassley to h.r . 2862 , abill that included appropriations for the office of the united states trade representative , would havelimited implementation of the cdsoa ( s.amdt . 1680 ) and removed a negotiationrequirement in the senate - reported bill aimed at preserving the statute ( s.amdt . neither was voted upon , however . 1121 ( ramstad ) , a bill that would repeal themeasure , was proposed for inclusion in a larger miscellaneous duty suspension bill now expectedto be considered later in 2006 . in congress , the controversy over the byrd amendment is one component of a larger debateover the future direction of u.s. trade policy . although many in congress acknowledge that benefitsare received through liberalizing trade , there is sometimes disagreement over the proper balancebetween these benefits and the costs incurred to domestic industries , firms , and workers by theresulting increase in global competition - - especially if unfair foreign competition is perceived orfound to be the cause of job losses and plant closings . an overall assessment of the united states'wto membership , including issues of u.s. compliance with certain wto dispute settlement rulingsdeemed controversial by some , has already received significant attention in the 109th congress . this report discusses the controversy over the cdsoa in three parts . first , it covers brieflythe background of the law , its effects , and the wto dispute settlement case . second , it discussesthe congressional debate on the pros and cons of repealing the measure . third , options for congressare discussed .