the nrc committee's major findings are reviewed below . these analyses potentially could become the basis for a new , more protective fluoride standard . however , in addition to health effects , epa is required to consider compliance cost , risk reduction benefits , contaminant occurrence , technical feasibility , and other factors when setting standards . consequently , it remains to be seen exactly how these factors , when taken together , might influence a new fluoride standard . although the purpose of the nrc study and subsequent analyses is to advise epa on the adequacy of the fluoride drinking water standards , the evaluation of the available science and exposure led hhs to propose to change recommended levels for community water fluoridation . in 2011 , hhs proposed that community water systems use a fluoridation level of 0.7 milligrams per liter , which is the lower end of the current recommended range of 0.7 mg / l to 1.2 mg / l . the new analyses may also be useful to states and communities that are assessing whether or not to fluoridate their public water supplies . opposition to water fluoridation often has been driven by concerns about the potential health risks of exposure to fluoride in drinking water ; however , social and political concerns also influence decisions about water fluoridation . a central issue for some fluoridation opponents is lack of choice , and they oppose the addition of any chemicals to the water supply other than those needed to make water safe ( eg , chlorine ) . in contrast , many public health professionals and government officials have held the view that water fluoridation offers the most equitable and cost - effective way to protect dental health across socially and economically diverse communities . the conflict between individual liberty and social policy is one that is unlikely to be fully resolved by more research . additional scientific evidence can help inform the decision to fluoridate a community's water , but such choices often are not made purely on the basis of science . to develop estimates , epa looked at concentrations of fluoride in foods and beverages , and estimated dietary exposures , concentrations in drinking water , and estimated fluoride intakes from toothpaste and pesticides , including sulfuryl fluoride . ( when setting the current standard for fluoride , epa assumed that 100% of the exposure to fluoride came from drinking water. ) based on the exposure and relative source analysis , epa reported the following conclusions: - some young children are being exposed to fluoride up to about age 7 at levels that increase the risk for severe dental fluorosis . - the contribution of residential tap water to total ingested fluoride is lower than it was in the past . - use of fluoridated water for commercial beverage production has likely resulted in increased dietary fluoride in purchased beverages , adding to the risk for over - exposure . - the increase of fluoride in solid foods because of fluoridated commercial process water is more variable than that for beverages . as noted , the safe drinking water act requires that , every six years , epa must review and , if appropriate , revise each drinking water regulation .