entrepreneurship is one such factor . although business owners ( the self - employed or entrepreneurs ) are a small proportion of the population , the group comprises a much larger share of the wealthiest families — more than one - half of the top 1% of the wealth distribution . researchers estimated that entrepreneurs are more motivated than others to save because they encounter difficulty borrowing funds to start or expand firms . in other words , those who want to start their own businesses have learned they typically need to fund it from their own savings . another contributory factor may be the desire of wealthier families to bequeath assets to their children . analysts estimated that this desire prompts wealthy families to save at a high rate and helps to explain why families in the upper end of the wealth distribution even in old age do not consume all their assets . researchers further suggest that bequests take the form not only of financial capital ( i.e. , assets ) , but also of human capital ( i.e. , years of education ) . wealthy parents may be able to pass on greater earnings abilities to their children because wealthier families are less affected by educational borrowing constraints than families further down the wealth distribution . in other words , wealthy parents can more easily finance their children's post - secondary education compared with parents who have amassed less savings , increasing the probability that children of the wealthy will earn more , save more , and accumulate more wealth . wealth is a store of future income that serves a critical economic security function . in times of economic hardship , such as unemployment , illness , or divorce , wealth is an additional source of income to help pay expenses and bills . for older individuals , wealth is an important source of retirement income . in addition , wealth is a significant factor influencing the strength of economy - wide consumer spending , which in turn sets the pace of economy - wide recovery and job creation . moreover , deliberations by congress on such issues as taxation , education , housing , and entitlements could have implications for the accumulation of wealth by families . the ratio of the mean to median is an indicator of the degree of concentration in a distribution because , as previously mentioned , the mean can be greatly affected by a few high - value observations . evidence from the 2013 scf indicates that families' mean income was 1.9 times more than median income whereas families' mean net worth was 6.6 times more than median net worth — almost 3.5 times the mean to median income ratio . the larger mean - to - median ratio reflects the survey result that wealth is more concentrated than income among families at the upper end of the respective distributions . analysts have sought explanations for the greater concentration of wealth than income across families . a common explanation is that as individuals' incomes rise during their working lives they save ( accumulate wealth ) for their retirement years . upon retirement , income falls and so does saving as retirees draw down wealth to maintain living standards .