what should be done in such instances ? some suggest that considerations other than species conservation should prevail ; others seek to change the current posture of the law by changing the role of science . these considerations are complicated by the costs and time required to acquire more complete data , particularly in connection with many lesser - known species . esa does not elaborate on this question , but some assert that , given the protective purpose of esa — to save and recover species — and the wording of "best ... data available ," arguably dwindling species are to be given the benefit of the doubt and a margin of safety . this is the position taken on pages 1-7 of the joint fws / nmfs endangered species consultation handbook , which states that efforts should be made to develop information , but if a biological opinion must be rendered promptly , it should be based on the available information , "giving the benefit of the doubt to the species," with consultation possibly being reinitiated if additional information becomes available . this phrase is drawn from h.rept . 96-697 , p. 12 ( 1979 ) , which states that the "best information available" language was intended to allow fws to issue biological opinions even when information was incomplete , rather than being forced to issue negative opinions . the report also states that if a biological opinion is rendered on the basis of inadequate information , the federal agency proposing an action has the duty to show its actions will not jeopardize a species and a continuing obligation to make a reasonable effort to develop information , and that the statutory language "continues to give the benefit of the doubt to the species. in the 110 th congress , the house committee on natural resources held an oversight hearing on may 9 , 2007 , on political influence and scientific integrity in esa implementation . in addition , several bills were introduced: h.res . 487 expressed the sense of the house recognizing the contributions of modeling and simulation technology ; the house agreed to this measure on july 16 , 2007 . 3459 would have amended esa to require fws to publish a summary statement of the scientific basis for a listing or delisting decision or the designation of ch . section 515 of p.l . 106-554 , known as the information quality act or the data quality act , directs the office of management and budget ( omb ) to issue government - wide guidelines to federal agencies to ensure and maximize the quality , objectivity , utility , and integrity of information disseminated by federal agencies . omb published final guidelines on february 22 , 2002 . the department of the interior and fws have both issued additional guidelines that are available through their websites , and a process is established for interested persons to seek correction of information . even before these latest guidelines , fws had promulgated guidance on information quality and peer review procedures — issues that also have been addressed in recent legislation . fws and nmfs developed an interagency cooperative policy on information standards under the endangered species act .