appendix b . legislation in the 110 th congress several bills in the 110 th congress — h.r . 4065 — would have codified the current policy applying expedited removal to aliens encountered within 100 miles of an international land border who have not been in the united states more than 14 days . 2413 was introduced by representative daniel lungren on may 21 , 2007 . 2954 was introduced by representative peter king on july 10 , 2007 , and h.r . would the alien be released to gather documents to prove that he is not subject to expedited removal ? since those in expedited removal are subject to mandatorily detention , would the alien be detained ? in addition , what happens to aliens who are unable to be returned to their home countries because the country will not produce travel documents ? would these aliens be subject to the same post - order - custody reviews as those who were given final orders of removal and are unable to be returned to their native country ? for example , in 1999 , ins published an advance notice that it intended to apply expedited removal on a pilot basis to certain criminal aliens beings held in three correctional facilities in texas . furthermore , to expand expedited removal , proper training would have to be provided to immigration officers implementing expedited removal . dhs stated that training was one of the reasons that expedited removal was implemented in stages along the southwest border . appendix a. overview of §240 formal removal procedures when dhs encounters an alien that dhs thinks should be removed from the united states , the alien is presented a notice - to - appear ( nta ) , which commences the removal proceeding . the nta is comparable to a charging document in criminal courts . the nta outlines the charges against the alien , and identifies which part of the immigration statute the alien is being charged with violating . if the alien's nta is issued by the border patrol and the alien is not taken into custody , the alien is released on his own recognizance . if the nta is issued by ice , an alien not subject to mandatory detention may be released on bond . if the alien is not a mandatory detainee and is not released on bond , the alien may request a bond redetermination hearing before an immigration judge to have the bond lowered , or to be given bond . during the bond hearing , the alien must prove that he is not a flight risk or a danger to society . bond hearings are not considered part of the removal process . the alien's first appearance in immigration court is at the master calendar hearing , a preliminary hearing to review the case . in absentia cases , and cases where the respondent concedes removability and does not apply for relief , are decided at the master calender hearing . relief from deportation can be granted at the master calender hearing if both the government and the alien agree to the relief . frequently the cases of detained aliens are also concluded at the master calender hearing .