this assistance may last for many years . refugees and idps may be stranded in camps , urban areas , or informal settlements and separated from their homes for long periods . conducting a humanitarian operation in an area of conflict often means that access to populations in need and the distribution of emergency relief supplies is hampered by security concerns , not only for those needing assistance but for humanitarian personnel as well . thus , providing humanitarian and refugee assistance is increasingly complicated and expensive — sources of funding , civil - military relations and operations , human rights concerns , aid worker security , protection , and access are just some of the central issues facing the aid community . the ongoing conflicts in and around syria and iraq demonstrate some of these challenges . in addition , natural disasters affect millions of people each year who require prolonged and urgent assistance . categories of humanitarian assistance can be broken down into several main elements including relief and rehabilitation , food assistance , refugee programs , and logistical and operational support . usaid , the state department , and the department of defense provide humanitarian assistance and cover a mix of these activities as described below . usaid is the central u.s. agency charged with coordinating u.s. government and private sector foreign assistance . the united states responds with varying amounts of relief and recovery assistance , typically in coordination with its international partners . the sheer number of players in the field , representing a range of actors and interests , creates a complicated coordination challenge and often contributes to duplication of efforts or competition over the same sources of money and projects . congress has consistently supported humanitarian efforts as a means of responding to natural disasters ( such as floods and earthquakes ) and man - made crises ( such as war ) in the short term , mitigating humanitarian impacts , and promoting a u.s. presence . from fy2008 to fy2012 , the u.s. government contributed more than $4 billion annually to disaster relief worldwide . in fy2013 , the u.s. contribution was more than $5.6 billion , and in fy2014 this number rose to $6.4 billion . the recent increases largely reflect humanitarian needs related to the crisis in syria . humanitarian assistance generally receives strong bipartisan congressional support . congress has given the president broad authority in this area . the united nations works with a wide number and variety of aid organizations and donors . within the u.n. system , in addition to the office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs ( ocha ) , the world food program ( wfp ) , the world health organization ( who ) , the u.n. children's fund ( unicef ) , the u.n. high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) , and the u.n. development program ( undp ) all contribute to efforts to respond to a crisis . the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( p.l . in addition , other internationals — governments , militaries , intergovernmental entities such as the european union — are often part of the response network .