these efforts are described below . the nshapc data resulted in demographic , income , and other information about homeless individuals in 1996 . among the findings were that homeless clients were predominantly male ( 68% ) and nonwhite ( 53% ) ; 23% of homeless clients were veterans . large proportions of homeless adults had never married ( 48% ) and had not received a high school diploma ( 38% ) . the nshapc also found that although 48% of homeless adults had minor children , only 31% of those with children lived with them . thirty - eight percent of homeless clients reported alcohol problems during the past month , and 39% reported mental health problems during that period . over one - quarter ( 27% ) of homeless clients had lived in foster care , a group home , or other institutional setting for part of their childhood . twenty - five percent reported childhood physical or sexual abuse . the census bureau released a report using data collected during the 2000 census of individuals living in emergency and transitional housing . the information was collected on one day in march 2000 and captured information from nearly 171,000 respondents . the report described some basic demographic characteristics of those who were included in the survey . of those persons who were interviewed , 74% were adults ( age 18 and older ) , and of the entire population ( adults and children ) , 61% were male and 39% were female . the most respondents were white ( 41% ) , slightly fewer were african american ( 40% ) , and 20% reported that they were hispanic . the u.s. conference of mayors has issued an annual report since 1984 , in which between 20 and 30 large cities survey their social service providers' efforts to combat hunger and homelessness and provide housing . in 2008 , the u.s. conference of mayors appointed 27 mayors to serve on its task force on hunger and homelessness . the cities where those 27 mayors serve were asked to respond to a survey for the organization's annual report on hunger and homelessness for the time period between october 1 , 2007 , and september 30 , 2008 ; 25 cities responded . regarding the demographics of the homeless population , the 2008 report focused on the living situation of single adults compared to families . the surveyed cities reported that the population living on the streets consisted overwhelmingly of single adults ( 94% ) . persons living in families made up approximately 4% of the total population living on the streets , and unaccompanied youth about 2% . single adults also made up the greatest share of the population living in emergency shelters ( nearly 67% ) , with members of families making up 29% of those in shelters and unaccompanied youth 1% . those individuals living in families made up the majority of the transitional housing population – approximately 56% versus 43% who were single adults . in permanent supportive housing , however , single adults represented 60% of the population , compared to slightly less than 40% who were people living in families .