not all mandatory spending funds entitlement programs . such entitlement spending is referred to as appropriated entitlements . the level of spending for appropriated entitlements , like other entitlements , is based on the benefit and eligibility criteria established in law . the amount of budget authority provided in appropriations acts for these specific programs is based on meeting projected spending levels . such laws generally take the form of authorizing legislation . authorizing legislation establishes or continues the operation of a federal program or agency , either indefinitely or for a specified period . mandatory spending typically is provided in permanent or multi - year appropriations contained in the authorizing law , and therefore , the funding becomes available automatically each year , without further legislative action by congress . ( see list in table 1 . ) mandatory spending also includes many smaller budgetary items , such as salaries of members of congress and the president . congress sets eligibility requirements and benefits for entitlement programs . if the eligibility requirements are met for a specific mandatory program , outlays are made automatically . in fy2014 , mandatory spending — totaling 12.2% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) — exceeded discretionary spending's 6.8% share of gdp . in addition , federal net interest payments accounted for 1.3% of gdp . together , total federal spending represented 20.3% of gdp . mandatory spending composed nearly 60% of all federal spending in fy2014 . social security , medicare , and the federal share of medicaid alone composed nearly 50% of all federal spending . mandatory spending plays a major role in larger fiscal trends . during economic downturns , government revenues fall and expenditures rise as more people become eligible for mandatory programs such as unemployment insurance and income security programs , causing deficits to increase or surpluses to shrink . these effects , known as "automatic stabilizers," provide a countercyclical fiscal stimulus in the short run without the need for new legislative action . as a result of the recent economic downturn and federal actions taken in response to it , mandatory spending was higher than its historical levels ( as a percentage of gdp ) between fy2009 and fy2011 . since then , mandatory spending has remained relatively constant around 12% of gdp . the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projects mandatory spending will increase slightly from its current levels and then will remain relatively constant , as a share of gdp , through fy2020 ( around 13% of gdp ) . after fy2021 , mandatory spending is projected to account for nearly 14% of gdp between 2022 and 2024 before topping 14% in 2025 . for example , federal student loan programs , like other federal loan and loan guarantee programs , are scored under terms of the federal credit reform act of 1990 ( fcra ; p.l . rather than being accounted for on a cash basis , fcra programs are accounted for on a net subsidy basis . fcra required that the reported budgetary cost of a credit or loan program equal the estimated subsidy costs at the time the credit is provided .