what are the effects of conversion on soil moisture ? what sustainable production techniques , such as longer cropping cycles , are possible with grassland conversion in the region ? how do concerns about dealing with dry conditions affect economic incentives to convert grassland to cropland ? economics: how would various farm bill proposals alter the marginal value of converting land from grass to crops ? significant conversions also may be occurring in other areas of the country . however , this report discusses only conversions in the northern plains . data are limited , mainly because not enough time has passed to document these very recent trends in periodic surveys . however , anecdotal evidence from numerous sources suggests grassland conversion to cropland is being observed more frequently in the northern plains than in previous years . the actual amount of grassland converted to cropland ( also referred to as "busting out" land ) in the northern plains is difficult to ascertain . these concerns are expressed most strongly by advocates of wildlife protection and enhancement . those concerned fear that landowners in the region will continue to convert grasslands to crop production , especially to corn production , as long as commodity market prices remain high . this report examines these concerns , focusing on the available evidence , which is limited , about rates and patterns of land conversion . it also presents additional questions on policy options that would respond to these concerns , most likely in the context of the 2007 farm bill . the issue of increased land conversion activity in the northern plains over the past year , with a particular focus on central south dakota , has been brought to the attention of congress through field hearings and constituent correspondence . constituents who object to visual indications that more land is being converted to crop production view the continuing pressure to convert land in the future , and at a rapid rate , as the larger issue . on the other hand , agricultural production is market driven . landowners are responding to higher market prices by converting grassland into crop production . rising corn prices and the emergence of national policies that encourage additional production of crops as a domestic source of energy have created additional incentives for landowners to convert to crop production . the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) currently estimates that 90.5 million acres nationwide will be planted in corn during the 2007 crop year . these acres will come from several sources , including land that had been planted to other crops and idled land that will be returned to production ; some portion of the expansion may occur in grassland that is converted to crop production , though exactly how much remains to be seen . many forces that may be encouraging the conversion of land in the northern plains have intensified recently . the recent push for renewable energy from biofuels and rising market prices for corn since august 2006 , as a growing portion of this crop is used as a bioenergy feedstock , appear to be providing economic incentives to convert land .