, business ) level . recent data on the share of corporate investment subject to the tax are not available . the numbers that are available show that prior to 1999 , the amt was important: in 1998 , more than one - quarter of corporate assets were held by firms paying the amt , and within the manufacturing sector over one - half of firms were amt firms . beginning in 1999 , however , new , more generous amt depreciation rules likely reduced the portion of investment affected by the amt . the level of corporate tax receipts has fluctuated over time . this review of the data focuses primarily on the corporate income tax ; there are a variety of ways to gauge its size . first , the general importance of the tax in terms of any economic effects it has can be assessed by looking at the level of the tax compared to the size of the economy — that is , by assessing corporate tax revenue as a percent of gross domestic product ( gdp ) . second , while taxable corporate profits were artificially inflated during the 1970s by a rising price level , firms were also permitted to claim investment tax credits . third , the economic recovery tax act of 1981 provided accelerated depreciation deductions , which likely played a prominent role in the sharp drop in tax rates in the early 1980s . following the reduction , rates increased again in the mid - 1980s . part of the increase was likely due to timing results from the 1981 act , but the tax reform act of 1986 was also likely responsible for part of the increase . the act reduced statutory tax rates , but also repealed the investment credit and scaled back depreciation allowances . aetrs have their own shortcoming as a gauge of the corporate tax burden . they provide only one - year snapshots of a firm's tax burden , while according to economic theory , taxes impose a burden on capital income by reducing the expected rate of return over the life of new investment . for example , the tax burden on an investment consists not only of taxes paid in its first year , but also those paid in , say , the fifth year of its life . in addition , because of discounting , the tax burden on investment depends partly on how taxes are distributed over an investment's life ; a given amount of taxes matters more to a firm the sooner it is paid . the same is true of deductions , but in reverse ; a given deduction is more valuable the sooner it is claimed . figure 1 , below , presents such data for fiscal years 1934 to 2009 , thus showing the position of corporate revenues from well before world war ii to the latest year available . clearly , the chart shows that corporate tax revenues have declined from their peak during world war ii ( 7% in fy1945 ) and from another peak that coincided with the korean war ( 6.1% in fy1952 ) .