crs report 97-960 . terrorism , the media , and the government: perspectives . trends , and options for policymakers , by raphael perl . ( archived: available from the author. ) crs report rl32758 , u.s. military operations in the global war on terrorism: afghanistan , africa , the philippines , and colombia , by [author name scrubbed] . this finding appears consistent with other research and analyses . if the trend continues the immediate future is likely to bring "a larger number of smaller attacks , less meticulously planned , and local rather than transnational in scope. on the other hand , "an increasing number of such attacks could fail through lack of skill or equipment...." of growing concern is what many see as a trend by terrorists to launch near - simultaneous multiple attacks aimed at causing economic damage — such as attacks on transportation , tourism , and oil related targets and infrastructures . for example , in february 2006 , saudi security forces thwarted a suicide attack at an oil processing facility in the eastern part of that nation . an al qaeda affiliated website subsequently claimed responsibility . a wave of arrests in the saudi arabia in late march 2006 reportedly thwarted a second refinery attack . if terrorist acts are becoming more the product of localized micro - actors , it raises the question of whether united states anti - terror strategy and tactics should reflect a more international law - enforcement oriented approach . such an approach was envisioned in the february 2003 national strategy for combating terrorism . for example , the inclusion of the drug enforcement administration's office of national security intelligence as a member of the intelligence community will put in place new structures to share information on the ties between international terrorism and international drug trafficking . increased sharing and cooperation between the law enforcement and the intelligence communities could well lead to disrupting some of the ties between terrorist and criminal groups , potentially "defunding" some terrorist activities . overall , policymakers may consider expanding programs that support foreign law enforcement training and educational exchanges , joint / multilateral training exercises , the creation of bi - lateral or multilateral law enforcement task forces , staff exchanges of detailees among foreign and domestic law enforcement agencies , and expansion of so - called "rule of law" programs . some observers call for more vigorous , focused , and better funded public diplomacy initiatives to counter terrorist efforts to generate popular support and gain recruits . collection and analysis of data which may reveal trends over time might also be strengthened . some might argue that it could serve united states and allied interests to see more data analyzed and exchanged on terrorist motivations , tactics , and organizations by a wide range of institutions in the public and private sector . greater participation in this process by industry , governments , and academia might prove fruitful . however , compiling and sharing the data on a timely basis may present yet another daunting challenge .