these senate amendments were not adopted . initially , the house farm bill had included a provision on arbitration clauses in livestock and poultry contracts , which evolved from part of the house companion bill to s. 622 ( h.r . 2135 ) , introduced by representative boswell , chairman of the house agriculture subcommittee on dairy , livestock , and poultry . however , the arbitration provision was further altered during committee markup ; other elements of h.r . 2135 were not included in the draft bill forwarded to the full committee and passed off the house floor . another related proposal that was not adopted in the house farm bill was h.r . 2213 , introduced by representative herseth sandlin , which would have amended the p&s act with respect to livestock producer - packer forward contracts . some of these options had been considered previously . in legislative activity leading to enactment of the 2002 farm bill , the senate agriculture committee voted in november 2001 to delete a competition title from the omnibus farm bill ( s. 1628 ) , also proposed by chairman harkin . during subsequent floor action on the bill , the senate did approve a number of individual "competition" amendments . two such amendments were retained by house - senate conferees in early 2002 in the final version of the bill ( h.rept . one gives producers the right to discuss their contracts with family members and advisors . the other extends some new p&s act protections to swine producers with production contracts . conferees also included in the final farm bill a new program requiring many retailers to provide country - of - origin labeling ( cool ) for red meat and several other commodities . since then , congress twice postponed mandatory meat cool , but it is now being implemented by usda . in the house , representative boswell , chairman of the house agriculture subcommittee on dairy , livestock , and poultry , had introduced the house version of s. 622 as h.r . however , with the exception of a provision on arbitration clauses in livestock and poultry contracts , other elements of h.r . 2135 were not included in the draft bill forwarded to the full committee . the boswell arbitration provision was further altered during committee markup . the arbitration provision in the house - passed bill directed usda to establish regulatory standards for arbitration provisions in livestock and poultry contracts . among other things , such regulations are intended to permit a producer to seek relief in a small claims court , if within the court's jurisdiction , regardless of a contract's arbitration clause . the house - passed bill contained no other major "competition" language . the senate - passed version of the farm bill also contained a new title on livestock , marketing , regulatory , and related programs ( title x ) that was based in part on chairman harkin's wide - ranging bill ( s. 622 ) , among other senate provisions . in the house , although representative boswell had introduced the house version of s. 622 as h.r . 2135 , few elements of h.r .