the federal role in natural resource management continues to be controversial . some stakeholders seek to maintain or enhance the federal role in resource management . others support more local influence or international decision - making in some cases . often the resource issues debated in congress are focused on specific management tools and their effects ( eg , changing grazing fees , reforming mining laws , restructuring the endangered species act ) , rather than on broader goals and objectives of resource policies . however , debate on specific management issues may encompass discussions of broad principles , such as the principles of multiple use and sustainable yield that underpin the management philosophies of some federal resource agencies and whether they remain appropriate for the current demands , constraints , and values of resources . congress deals with natural resource issues on a number of fronts . key laws , programs , and issues are handled by several authorizing committees in the house and senate . many issues involve several committees , such as those involving wetlands protection and restoration . in addition , natural resource issues often are addressed during consideration of annual appropriations bills for natural resource agencies , programs , and activities . the 110 th congress is likely to weigh whether federal funds for natural resources issues are adequate and focused on the appropriate resource priorities . in many cases , natural resource issues do not divide along clear party lines . instead , they may be split along rural - urban , eastern - western , coastal - interior , or upstream - downstream interests . this section briefly discusses 31 selected natural resource issues that the 110 th congress may consider through oversight , authorizations , or appropriations . the 31 issues have been grouped into five categories , as follows: federal and indian lands and resources natural hazards , climate , and earth science ocean and coastal affairs species management and ecosystem protection water resource . crs report rl33523 , arctic national wildlife refuge ( anwr ) : controversies for the 109 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl33792 , federal lands managed by the bureau of land management ( blm ) and the forest service ( fs ) : issues for the 110 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] et al . crs report rl33053 , federal stafford act disaster assistance: presidential declarations , eligible activities , and funding , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) . crs report rl33264 , fema ' s flood hazard map modernization initiative , by [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl33602 , global climate change: major scientific and policy issues , by john r. justus and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl33459 , fishery , aquaculture , and marine mammal legislation in the 109 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] . natural resource availability represents both an opportunity and constraint for human activities . crs report rs21890 , the u.n. law of the sea convention and the united states: developments since october 2003 , by [author name scrubbed] .