art . i , ยง 8 , cl . the court of appeals also agreed , stating that [the language of ] article i , ยง 2 ... precludes the house from bestowing the characteristics of membership on someone other than those "chosen every second year by the people of the several states. based on these statements , it is unlikely that these courts would have seen merit in an argument that congress could grant the delegate a vote in the house . an argument might be made , however , that the decision in michel v. anderson can be distinguished from the instant proposal , because michel concerned a house rule , not a statute . under this argument , the house in michel was acting alone under its power to "determine the rules of its proceedings" pursuant to article i , section 5 . arguably , the court did not consider the issue of whether congress as a whole would have had the authority to provide for representation for the district of columbia under the district clause . under this line of reasoning , the power of congress over the district represents a broader power than the power of the house to set its own rules . at first examination , it is not clear on what basis such a distinction would be made . the power of the house to determine the rules of its proceedings is in and of itself a very broad power . while the house may not "ignore constitutional restraints or violate fundamental rights ... within these limitations all matters of method are open to the determination of the house... . the power to make rules , ... [w]ithin the limitations suggested , [is] absolute and beyond the challenge of any other body or tribunal. in fact , the supreme court has found that in some cases , the constitutionality of a house rule is not subject to review by courts because the question is a "political question," and not appropriate for judicial review . it is true that the power of congress over the district of columbia has been described as "plenary. to a large extent , this is because the power of congress over the district blends the limited powers of a national legislature with the broader powers associated with a local legislature . thus , some constitutional restrictions that might bind congress in the exercise of its national power would not apply to legislation which is limited to the district of columbia . for example , when congress created local courts for the district of columbia , it acted pursuant to its power under the district clause and thus was not bound by to comply with article iii requirements which generally apply to federal courts . or , while there are limits to congress's ability to delegate its legislative authorities , such limitations do not apply when congress delegates its local political authority over the district to district residents . it is not clear , however , that the power of congress at issue in h.r . 157 would be easily characterized as falling within congress's power to legislate under the district clause .