section 1279 of p.l . 114-92 , the fy2016 national defense authorization act , authorized the establishment of a u.s. - israeli anti - tunnel cooperation program . this authorization allowed funds from the research , development , test , and evaluation defense - wide account to be used ( in combination with israeli funds ) to establish anti - tunnel capabilities that detect , map , and neutralize underground tunnels that threaten the united states or israel . the authorization requires the secretary of defense to report to congress on , among other things , the sharing of research and development costs between the united states and israel . section 1278 of p.l.115-91 , the fy2018 national defense authorization act , extended the authority of the anti - tunnel cooperation program through december 31 , 2020 . it also required that not less than 50% of u.s. contributions to the program should be used for "research , development , test , and evaluation activities in the united states in connection with such support. u.s. aid and arms sales to israel , like those to other foreign recipients , are subject to u.s. law . some u.s. citizens and interest groups periodically call upon congress to ensure that u.s. military assistance to israel is conditioned on the israeli government's compliance with applicable u.s. laws and policies and with international humanitarian law . since 1973 , israel has received grants from the state department's migration and refugee assistance account ( mra ) to assist in the resettlement of migrants to israel . funds are paid to the united israel appeal , a private philanthropic organization in the united states , which in turn transfers the funds to the jewish agency for israel . between 1973 and 1991 , the united states gave about $460 million for resettling jewish refugees in israel . annual amounts have varied from a low of $12 million to a high of $80 million , based at least partly on the number of jews leaving the former soviet union and other areas for israel . congress has changed the earmark language since the first refugee resettlement funds were appropriated in 1973 . at first , the congressional language said the funds were for "resettlement in israel of refugees from the union of soviet socialist republics and from communist countries in eastern europe. but starting in 1985 , the language was simplified to "refugees resettling in israel" to ensure that ethiopian jews would be covered by the funding . technically , the legislative language designates funds for refugee resettlement , but in israel little differentiation is made between jewish "refugees" and other jewish immigrants , and the funds are used to support the absorption of all immigrants . since 1972 , the united states has extended loan guarantees to israel to assist with housing shortages , israel's absorption of new immigrants from the former soviet union and ethiopia , and its economic recovery following the 2000-2003 recession , which was probably caused in part by the israeli - palestinian conflict known as the second intifada . loan guarantees are a form of indirect u.s. assistance to israel , since they enable israel to borrow from commercial sources at lower rates .