how can this be reconciled ? how can measurements of progress be established which are not politicized or biased ? in this regard , one must be cautious that success is not defined retrospectively , with goals reformulated after the fact to correspond with the known outcomes . arguably , measurements of progress have greater validity if strategies are established before , and not after , taking action . in a search for meaningful measurement criteria , the academic , engineering , scientific and actuarial communities may have much to offer government policymakers . extensive mathematical tools exist to help define and validate proposed measurement systems , and indeed one might employ a variety of such systems used by different groups . as long as measurements are clearly defined and linked to goals and objectives , these differences need not be divisive . the conduct of a survey of data on terrorism is an option . that is , a survey of what data on terrorism — especially data bases — currently exist , what categories and details are found within that data , and what the data can reasonably inform policymakers about . existing methodologies for measuring progress in combating complex social phenomena such as drug trafficking and crime could contribute valuable insights . effective responses to terrorism may need to take into account , and to some degree be individually configured to respond to , the evolving goals , strategies , tactics , and operating environment of different terrorist groups . better understanding of the dynamics of terrorism allows for a more complete picture of the complexities involved in measuring success or failure and can assist the 110 th congress as it coordinates , funds , and oversees anti - terrorism policy and programs . although terrorism's complex webs of characteristics — along with the inherent secrecy and compartmentalization of both terrorist organizations and government responses — limit available data , the formulation of practical , useful measurement criteria appears both tractable and ready to be addressed . progress may be defined differently by the terrorists and those who oppose them . hence both can claim progress , and both can be correct in their assessments . these types of issues were often not addressed in the patterns of global terrorism reports of previous years . however , in contrast , the successor to patterns , titled country reports on terrorism , now emphasizes in - depth , comprehensive analysis . though some $200 million is said to have been have been confiscated , it is not clear how much damage has been done to the terrorist's ability to raise or transfer additional funds . moreover , if one terminates 2 / 3 of the senior leadership of a particular terrorist organization , the ranks of the organization may grow and decentralize , similar to the impact of attacks on drug cartels , evolving into a more resilient adversary . another key issue is how one measures the impact of unintended consequences — or side effects and by - products — and other results , such as diverting scarce resources from one policy area to another , increasing spending and possibly adding to the budget deficit , or eroding civil liberties .