figure 1 . andean counterdrug initiative countrie . the program in colombiaresumed in august 2003 . the program supports an aircraft fleet , pilot training , and logistical andintelligence support . the program tracks aircraft suspected of being involved in drug trafficking,and forces them to land for inspection . if the aircraft is repeatedly unresponsive , it may be shotdown , at the direction of the commander of the colombian air force . the resumption of a programin peru is still pending the development of safety enhancements . additional funding for the andean region is provided through the foreign military financing ( fmf ) program and the international military education and training ( imet ) program , bothmanaged by the state department . the defense department has a counternarcotics account forworldwide programs involving interdiction , training , equipment , and intelligence sharing . in thewestern hemisphere , these programs are managed by the u.s. army southern command . since first approving expanded assistance to colombia for counternarcotics programs in2000 , congress has included a number of conditions on u.s. assistance in both authorization andappropriations legislation . the fy2006 national defense authorization act ( h.r . 1815 , p.l.109-163 ) authorized funding for department of defense drug interdiction activities . funding for aci from fy2000 through fy2005 totaled nearly $4.3 billion . aci ismanaged by the state department's bureau of international narcotics control and law enforcementaffairs ( incle ) . some aci funds are transferred to the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) for alternative development programs . aci funds are divided between programs that support eradication and interdiction efforts,as well as those focused on alternative crop development and democratic institution building . onthe interdiction side , programs train and support national police and military forces , providecommunications and intelligence systems , support the maintenance and operations of host countryaerial eradication aircraft , and improve infrastructure related to counternarcotics activities . on thealternative development side , funds support development programs in coca growing areas , includinginfrastructure development , and marketing and technical support for alternative crops . it alsoincludes assisting internally displaced persons , promoting the rule of law , and expanding judicialcapabilities . aci also funds the air bridge denial program that is currently operational in colombia , andtemporarily suspended in peru , after an accidental shooting down of a civilian aircraft carrying u.s.missionaries in 2001 . after the incident , in which two americans died , the program in bothcountries was suspended until enhanced safeguards were developed . the most recently enacted funding legislation is the fy2006 foreignoperations appropriations act ( h.r . 109-102 ) , which included a numberof longstanding provisions relating to the andean counterdrug initiative . the fy2005 nationaldefense authorization act ( h.r . 4200 , p.l.108-375 ) also included provisions relatingto colombia . 106-246 ) for colombia and six regionalneighbors . u.s. support for plan colombia began in 2000 , when congress passed legislation providing$1.3 billion in interdiction and development assistance ( p.l . the region also includes two major oil producing countries ( venezuela and ecuador ) ,members of the organization of petroleum exporting countries ( opec ) , which supply significantquantities of oil to the united states .