that congested regions provide . environmental organizations generally argue that road traffic congestion results from an unbalanced transportation system , one that favors cars and trucks , and that urban sprawl , air pollution , and noise , not road traffic congestion per se , should be the focus of national policy . the alternative view is that transportation congestion is a major problem , national in scope , and , if unchecked , a problem that will intensify and spread over the next 25 years . many experts point out that although congestion may be highly localized , because transportation is a network that serves the u.s. population in a variety of ways , its economic effects are national . most obviously , freight movement is largely dependent on a national transportation network in which a bottleneck in one place , such as southern california , may affect businesses and consumers in largely congestion - free nebraska . moreover , these experts point out the national network effects are becoming increasingly important as supply chains lengthen and become more complex . similarly , although passenger transportation is mostly a local affair , congestion on roads that service airports and other passenger terminals may also result in inefficient intercity passenger travel , dragging down the productivity of businesses that rely on it for managing far - flung operations . local congestion may also be thought of as a national issue in that the places where it is found tend to be the hubs of the national economy and its costs , therefore , are not inconsequential in terms of the national economy . for instance , the 28 metropolitan areas that experienced 40 hours or more of annual delay per peak - period traveler ( as measured in 2005 by tti ) account for more than 45% of total personal income in the united states ( in 2005 ) . most businesses rely , to one degree or another , on the efficient transportation of people locally , whether it is the transportation of managers to business meetings , workers to work , or customers to places where products are consumed . research has shown that metropolitan areas with the largest labor markets tend to have the highest productivity . consequently , when added together , the local costs of congestion , some argue , are significant in national terms . another commonly expressed view is that given current trends in the supply and demand for transportation the problems of congestion will affect more people and more businesses in the future . road traffic congestion , for instance , is growing fastest in the smaller urban areas included in the tti study , though admittedly from a small base . however , research by the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) shows a wider problem when it projects future demand on the current highway system . underlying these trends are broader trends in population and the economy . for example , the population is expected to reach 364 million by 2030 , an increase of about 20% from 2007 . over the same period , the cbo projects gdp to increase by about 70% ( in real terms ) .