circuit . internal epa documents released by an environmental group have also indicated that the proposed rule was strongly opposed by the air enforcement division , whose director concluded that it would adversely affect the agency's nsr enforcement cases and is largely unenforceable as written . throughout the nsr debate , there appears to have been a conflict between the epa's regulatory actions and its enforcement stance . while the agency stated in promulgating the equipment replacement rule that "we do not intend our actions today to create retroactive applicability for today's rule," continued pursuit of the enforcement actions filed during the clinton administration created a double standard for utilities , with one set of rules applicable to those utilities unlucky enough to have been cited for violations prior to promulgation of the new rule , and a different standard applicable afterward . despite earlier agency denials that the rule would affect ongoing investigations , in early november 2003 , the epa's enforcement chief , j. p. suarez , and another epa official were reported to have indicated that the agency would drop enforcement actions against 47 facilities that had already received notices of violation , and would drop investigations of possible violations at an additional 70 power companies . agency staff who were involved in the enforcement actions note that the prospect of nsr rollbacks has caused utilities already charged with violations to withdraw from settlement negotiations over the pending lawsuits , delaying emission reductions that could have been achieved . ( for additional information , see crs report rs21608 , clean air and new source review: defining routine maintenance , by [author name scrubbed] , and crs report rl31757 , clean air: new source review policies and proposals , by [author name scrubbed]. ) at congress's direction , the national academy of sciences began a review of the nsr program in may 2004 . an interim report , released in january 2005 , said the committee had not reached final conclusions , but it also said , "in general , nsr provides more stringent emission limits for new and modified major sources than epa provides in other existing programs" and "it is ... unlikely that clear skies would result in emission limits at individual sources that are tighter than those achieved when nsr is triggered at the same sources. the final report , issued july 21 , 2006 , found that [m]ore than 60% of all coal - fired electricity - generation capacity in the united states currently lacks the kinds of controls for so 2 and no x emissions that have been required under nsr . also , the older facilities are more likely than newer facilities to undergo maintenance , repair , and replacement of key components , so a substantial portion of emissions from the electricity - generating sector is potentially affected by the nsr rule changes . nevertheless , the report reached ambivalent conclusions . on the one hand , the report stated , "it is reasonable to conclude that the implementation of the erp [the proposed equipment replacement provision] could lead to so 2 and no x emission increases in some locations and decreases in others.