most of these sites are campgrounds . taken together , a majority of these four agencies' sites are not charging a recreation fee . in determining entrance fees , the nps is using a standardized fee structure nationwide . this structure groups national park units into four categories based on type of designation ( eg , national park , national battlefield , national seashore ) and other factors . the same entrance fee is charged at each park unit in a category . for instance , for category 2 units , namely , national seashores , recreation areas , monuments , lakeshores , and historic parks , the entrance fee is $7 per person , $10 per motorcycle , $15 per vehicle , and $30 per annual pass . the fws typically charges daily entrance fees of $5 per vehicle and $15 for a refuge - specific annual pass . for particular activities , such as hunts , fees are based on a market analysis . fws seeks consistency of fees within regions , based on related state and private fees . blm sets fees based on the amenities available at recreation sites , using low , moderate , and high categories . the fs bases fees on local market rates and a variety of factors including amenities available , site condition , and operation and maintenance costs . the average fees at fs sites are approximately $6 for day use and $9 for overnight use . fs use of high - impact recreation area ( hira ) designations for charging fees has been controversial . while the flrea does not mention hiras , the agencies have agreed to define an hira as an area of concentrated recreational use that includes a variety of developed sites providing a similar recreation opportunity . further , it is a contiguous area composed of places , activities , or special , natural , or cultural features that is the focal point of recreation and that has clear access points and boundaries . the fs views it as more convenient for users to pay fees for use of these areas rather than to pay separate fees at each of their sites . the agency notes that collections are used for upkeep of facilities in the areas . some of the hiras have been criticized by recreationists as broad designations for large tracts of land lacking in the amenities required by the flrea . the fs examined the use of fees at its hiras in 2007-2008 , and expects to present its findings to the racs . the fs currently is considering fee changes in some hiras and is developing new directives on these areas , which will be made available for public comment . the agency anticipates that some fee changes could result . while the flrea also applies to reclamation , the agency is charging a fee under flrea at only one site . the majority of reclamation's 289 developed recreation sites are managed by partner organizations , and the agency concluded that these non - federally managed sites will not participate in the flrea program . other reclamation recreation areas are managed by other federal agencies , and these agencies determine whether the areas charge fees under the flrea .