the version of h.r . 2082 reported out of conference was passed by the house on december 13 , 2007 , and the senate on february 13 , 2008 , but was subsequently vetoed by president bush on march 8 , 2008 . the house voted to approve the bill on march 13 , 2008 , by a vote of 225-188 , but failed to muster the two - thirds majority necessary to override the president's veto . 4156 , the orderly and responsible iraq redeployment appropriations act , 2008 , which was passed by the house on november 14 , 2007 , would have generally barred all federal agencies , including the cia , from using any treatment or interrogation tactic that is not authorized or listed by the army field manual . agencies would still be permitted to use non - field manual standards with respect to any individual being held pursuant to u.s. criminal or immigration laws . on november 16 , 2007 , the senate failed to invoke cloture on a motion to proceed with consideration of h.r . similar proposals have also been introduced in the 111 th congress . it remains to be seen whether president obama's executive order on detainee treatment or the findings of the special interagency task force on interrogation and transfer policies will affect congressional interest in passing further legislation affecting u.s. interrogation policy . 374 , the lawful interrogation and detention act , and h.r . 2544 , the legal interrogation procedures act , would generally bar any individual in the custody or control either of an intelligence agency or a contractor or subcontractor of an intelligence agency , from being subjected to any treatment or interrogation technique not authorized by the united states army field manual . similarly , h.r . 893 , the american anti - torture act of 2009 , would generally prohibit all u.s. agencies from employing any interrogation technique or treatment not authorized by the army field manual , though this requirement would not apply with respect to any person detained under u.s. criminal or immigration laws . 374 would also bar the cia from permitting a contractor or subcontractor from carrying out an interrogation of an individual . 591 , the interrogation and detention reform act of 2008 ( sic ) , would require the president to establish uniform standards for the interrogation of persons in the custody or under the effective control of the united states , and that u.s. intelligence personnel receive training regarding the federal and international obligations and laws applicable to the humane treatment of detainees . the president would be required to submit a report to congress concerning implementation of this requirement . s. 1494 , the intelligence authorization act for fiscal year 2010 , would require the director of national intelligence to submit a report to the congressional intelligence committees concerning measures taken by the intelligence community to comply with applicable legal requirements concerning detention and interrogation activities , including those requirements contained in the dta . the following paragraphs discuss notable developments concerning standards for detainee treatment since the dta was enacted .