it will not be updated . the lead speaker was christopher j. hoh , the director for response strategy and resource management in the state department office of the coordinator for reconstruction and stabilization ( s / crs ) . the administration has tasked the s / crs to develop the concept of a civilian reserve force that could rapidly deploy to conflict - torn areas to carry out state - building efforts . this is often referred to as a "surge capability. personnel in such a force would include rule of law practitioners ( police , judges , lawyers , prison administrators ) , civil administrators and governance experts ( people with experience involving local and state government agencies ) and infrastructure experts ( eg , civil engineers and planners ) . mr. hoh explained current state department plans for a civilian reserve . these plans envision the civilian reserve as a group that would fill the gap between permanent u.s. government employees , who could be deployed immediately , and contractors , who take much longer to deploy . ( permanent government employees would be comprised of two groups , an active force of employees dedicated solely to such operations and a stand - by reserve of government employees who have volunteered to be detailed from their permanent jobs to such operations as needed. ) civilian reservists would be deployable within 30 to 60 days , mobilized as government employees , paid at a comparable level with government employees doing the same work and offered comparable incentives such as death and dismemberment insurance and diplomatic privileges , according to the administration plans outlined by mr. hoh . they would be chosen for their expertise in the areas needed for "transitional security," rule of law , essential public services , and civil administration . they would be screened and trained for the capacity to work effectively from the very beginning of their assignment and to function in teams . because they would be government employees , they would be accountable under u.s. government ethics laws and other regulations and could form part of the u.s. government management structure , eg , supervising and managing permanent u.s. government employees and contractors . ( mr. hoh did not provide an estimate of the number of reservists contemplated under current plans . the numbers contemplated by studies prepared for s / crs are discussed in the " related issues for congress " section , below. ) noting that the state department had just received a lengthy report ( of well over 600 pages ) from bearingpoint , inc. outlining detailed plans for a civilian reserve , mr. hoh stated that the administration would consult with congress on specific plans for the reserve once intra - executive branch consultations are completed . he said that the administration would consult with congress on issues regarding specific functional specialty areas ( i.e. , rule of law , civil administration , economic development ) , the types of situations in which the reserve should be deployed , and the period of time over which to build a comprehensive reserve force . subsequent discussion centered on examining the lessons that the united nations and others have learned in developing their own roster systems to deploy civilians to peace operations .