no regulatory or legislative definition of streamlining exists . it is defined differently by different stakeholders or agencies for different classes of projects . however , the term is often used to describe a process or procedures intended to accelerate decision making , especially when the input of multiple federal , state , tribal , or local agencies is required to comply with multiple environmental laws , regulations , or executive orders . for example , fhwa may propose a highway construction project that affects wetlands that are home to an endangered species . within the context of conducting a review of the environmental impacts of the project under nepa , fhwa may also be required to demonstrate compliance with elements of the clean water act and the endangered species act . as a result , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , the u.s. army corps of engineers , and the department of the interior's fish and wildlife service would have statutory obligations to participate in the proposed project . these agencies , with potentially conflicting missions ( eg , protecting endangered species or sensitive wetlands versus building a highway ) , are then required to work together to review various aspects of fhwa's proposed project . streamlining efforts may be implemented with the intent of expediting the requirement of having these agencies work together . many of the issues leading to a call for streamlining , as well as challenges to implementing such actions , are summed up in the following excerpt from a report issued by the national conference of state legislatures: regulators often lack guidance on how to successfully integrate the complicated requirements of state and federal environmental laws and regulations... . depending on the complexity of the issue and the priority given the issue by decision makers , decisions can be slow in coming , thus delaying progress . another barrier is the fact that individual regulators tend to be experts in only one set of laws and regulations . this tends to create some resistance to proposals that coordinate or integrate the provisions of different laws . regulators tend to be cautious about integrating the requirements of different laws unless they can define all possible regulatory and technical impacts . this statement recognizes that barriers to efficient decision making arise not from nepa alone , but from the challenges of integrating compliance with a multitude of laws and regulations that may apply to a given federal action . recently , there have been numerous legislative and administrative streamlining activities , including the following: the enactment of legislation that alters individual agency nepa procedures ; administrative changes in individual agency nepa procedures ; and the creation of nepa "task forces," established by ceq and congress , to study the nepa process or expedite implementation of certain types of projects . the process of complying with and documenting compliance with all environmental statutes , regulations , executive orders , and court decisions potentially applicable to a federal project is complicated . even those projects with no or minor environmental impacts must demonstrate that potential impacts to certain types of resources ( i.e.