territories . seven urban areas which are part of an ongoing urban area security initiative are specifically funded . the amounts are subsets of the amount designated for the state associated with the urban area . the new york city area , for example , is slotted to receive $34,812,602 , accounting for over half of the $60,734,783 designated for new york state . the other urban areas are centered on: san francisco , ca ; chicago , il ; houston , tx ; newark - jersey city , nj ; los angeles - long beach , ca ; and washington , dc . the announcement of the top - level , statewide allocations meets the september 30 deadline set by congress . the states , however , have additional time to submit their detailed requests , and will receive funds through fy2010 . the funding program has been modified slightly to conform to provisions established in p.l . in addition , states will have to reappraise their plans for grant requests to meet the new guidelines established by the law . one of the most significant changes has been to provide for grants for strategic technology reserves for communications in an emergency . the $75 million for strategic reserves required by the new law will be distributed among the recipients in proportion to the funds already set aside . the destruction caused by hurricanes katrina and rita in august - september 2005 reinforced the recognition of the need for providing interoperable , interchangeable communications systems for public safety and also revealed the potential weaknesses in existing systems to withstand or recover from catastrophic events . testimony at numerous hearings following the hurricanes suggested that dhs was responding minimally to congressional mandates for action , most notably as expressed in the language of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act . bills subsequently introduced in both the house and the senate proposed strengthening emergency communications leadership and expanding the scope of the efforts for improvement . some of these proposals were included in title vi of the homeland security appropriations act , 2007 ( p.l . title vi — the post - katrina emergency management reform act of 2006 — reorganized the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) , gave the agency new powers , and clarified its functions and authorities within dhs . subtitle d — the 21 st century emergency communications act of 2006 — created an office of emergency communications and the position of director , reporting to the assistant secretary for cybersecurity and communications . the director is required to take numerous steps to coordinate emergency communications planning , preparedness , and response , particularly at the state and regional level . these efforts are to include coordination with regional administrators appointed by the fema administrator to head ten regional offices . among the responsibilities of the regional administrators is "coordinating the establishment of effective regional operable and interoperable emergency communications capabilities. two major programs previously supported by other sections of the department of homeland security are included in the responsibilities of the director of emergency communications — safecom and participation in the integrated wireless network ( iwn ) .