reg . 23302 ) , published in 1986 by the white house office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) . a key principle has been that ge products should continue to be regulated according to their characteristics and unique features , not their methods of production , that is , whether or not they were created through biotechnology . the framework provides a regulatory approach intended to ensure the safety of biotechnology research and products , using existing statutory authority and previous policy experience . some newer applications of biotechnology did not exist when the current regulatory framework was enunciated . the nrc animal biotechnology report concluded that this regulatory regime "might not be adequate to address unique problems and characteristics associated with animal biotechnologies" and that federal agency responsibilities are not clear . in 1997 , scientists at the roslyn institute in scotland used nuclei from the mammary cells of an adult sheep to clone "dolly. such nuclear transfer ( nt ) techniques were first developed in amphibians in the 1950s . they were first used in sheep in 1986 , with the production of clones using nuclei taken from sheep embryos . the significance of dolly was that she was cloned from differentiated cell types obtained from an adult ( called "somatic cell nuclear transfer" or scnt ) , rather than undifferentiated cells from an embryo ( "embryonic nt" ) . cloning in animal agriculture is generally not applied in isolation from other biotechnologies such as genetic engineering . scientists note that cloning does not require fertilization and is not , by itself , a form of genetic engineering , that is , altering , removing , or inserting genes into an animal's existing dna . however , cloning can involve transgenic as well as non - transgenic cells . scnt is not yet a notably efficient technique ready for widespread commercial adoption . for example , only about 6% of the embryos transferred to recipient cows resulted in healthy , long - term surviving clones , according to a 2005 report . the european food safety authority ( efsa ) recently reported that overall success rates vary by species , ranging from 0.5% to 5% . success rates are said to be improving , however . as more efficient cloning technologies , which can overcome the range of cloning abnormalities that have resulted from scnt , are introduced , they could provide new opportunities in human medicine , agriculture , and animal welfare . this is the focus of much of the current international animal biotechnology research . the efsa draft scientific opinion estimated the number of live clones worldwide in 2007 to be less than 4,000 cattle and 1,500 pigs , of which about 750 cattle and 10 pig clones were in the united states . efsa reported that life span data were limited , with only a few reports on cattle of six to seven years of age and no data available in 2007 on the full natural life span of livestock clones generally . the following are among the policy concerns that have arisen along with the development of new biotechnologies in animal agriculture .