appendix a . concerning the safe and secure transportation , storage , and destruction of weapons and prevention of weapons proliferation , 1992: provides for u.s. assistance to russia for the safe and secure transportation , storage , and destruction of nuclear , chemical , and other weapons . agreement between the united states and republic of belarus concerning emergency response and the prevention of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , 1992: provides for u.s. assistance to belarus in eliminating nuclear weapons and responding to nuclear emergencies in belarus . treaty ... on the further reduction and limitation of strategic offensive arms ( start ii ) 1993: would have further reduced the number of u.s. and russian strategic offensive nuclear weapons . would have banned the deployment of all land - based multiple - warhead missiles ( mirved icbms ) , including the soviet ss - 18 "heavy" icbm . signed on january 3 , 1993 ; u.s. senate consented to ratification in january 1996 ; russian duma approved ratification in april 2000 . treaty never entered into force . convention on the prohibition of the development , production , stockpiling and use of chemical weapons and on their destruction: bans chemical weapons and requires elimination of their production facilities . opened for signature on january 13 , 1993 ; entered into force in april 1997 . agreement .. . concerning the disposition of highly enriched uranium resulting from the dismantlement of nuclear weapons in russia , 1993: provides for u.s. purchase of highly enriched uranium removed from russian nuclear weapons ; uranium to be blended into low enriched uranium for fuel in commercial nuclear reactors . the convention on prohibitions or restrictions on the use of certain conventional weapons which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects: this convention , also known as the convention on conventional weapons ( ccw ) , was concluded in geneva in 1980 and entered into force in 1993 . protocol ii ( protocol on prohibitions or restrictions on the use of mines , booby - traps and other devices ) contains rules for marking , registering , and removing minefields , in an effort to reduce indiscriminate casualties caused by antipersonnel landmines . protocol iv prohibits laser weapons designed to cause blindness . document of the stockholm conference on confidence - and security - building measures and disarmament in europe ( stockholm document ) , 1986: expands on the notifications and confidence - building measures in the helsinki final act . provides for ground and aerial inspection of military activities . treaty of rarotonga , 1986: establishes a nuclear weapons free zone in the south pacific . the united states signed the protocols in 1996 ; the senate has not yet provided its advice and consent to ratification . agreement ... on the establishment of nuclear risk reduction centers , 1987: establishes communications centers in washington and moscow and improves communications links between the two . treaty ... on the elimination of their intermediate - range and shorter - range missiles , 1987: bans all u.s. and soviet ground - launched ballistic and cruise missiles with ranges between 300 and 3,400 miles . u.s. announced withdrawal on february 1 , 2019 .