5386 in june . final action on h.r . 5386 and most other fy2007 appropriations bills for domestic agencies and departments did not occur before congress adjourned sine die in december , thus delaying this legislative activity to the beginning of the 110 th congress . in 2003 , epa promulgated revised rules that govern waste discharges from large animal feeding operations to the nation's waters . those revised rules were challenged by multiple parties , and in 2005 , a federal court issued a ruling that upheld major parts of the rules , vacated other parts , and remanded still other parts to epa for clarification . in june 2006 , epa proposed revisions to the rules in response to the court's decision and expects to promulgate revised regulations by june 2007 . in 2005 , congress enacted comprehensive energy policy legislation , h.r . 109-58 ) ; one provision ( section 323 ) provides a permanent exemption from stormwater runoff rules for the construction of exploration and production facilities by oil and gas companies or the roads that service those sites . epa promulgated a rule to implement this provision of p.l . 109-58 in june 2006 . the federal water pollution control act , or clean water act , is the principal law concerned with polluting activity in the nation's streams , lakes , and estuaries . originally enacted in 1948 , it was totally revised by amendments in 1972 ( p.l . 92-500 ) that gave the act its current form and spelled out ambitious programs for water quality improvements that are now being put in place by industries and cities . congress made certain fine - tuning amendments in 1977 ( p.l . 97-117 ) and enacted comprehensive amendments in 1987 ( p.l . the act consists of two major parts: regulatory provisions that impose progressively more stringent requirements on industries and cities in order to meet the statutory goal of zero discharge of pollutants , and provisions that authorize federal financial assistance for municipal wastewater treatment construction . industries were to meet pollution control limits first by use of best practicable technology and later by improved best available technology . cities were to achieve secondary treatment of municipal wastewater ( roughly 85% removal of conventional wastes ) , or better if needed to meet water quality standards . both major parts are supported by research activities authorized in the law , plus permit and penalty provisions for enforcement . programs are administered by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , while state and local governments have the principal day - to - day responsibility for implementing the law . the last major amendments to the law were contained in the water quality act of 1987 ( p.l . these amendments culminated six years of congressional efforts to extend and revise the act and were the most comprehensive amendments to it since 1972 . they recognized that , despite much progress , significant water quality problems persisted .