more than half of those were awaiting kidneys . the number who have died awaiting a kidney transplant rose each year from 2000 to 2009 . the overall effect that mechanisms for expanding the pool of potential living organ donors , such as paired and list donation , will or might have on the available supply of various organs is difficult to measure . this is due largely to the fact that paired and list donation systems have only been implemented and tested for kidney donation , which is discussed below . the central ethical question involved in organ transplantation is how to balance the needs of people seeking organs with one another , and with the needs of potential organ donors . this question has given rise to many issues , discussed below , including those related to evolving transplantation systems , the directive that physicians do no harm , risk - benefit ratios , informed consent , type o recipients , resource allocation , parity , and the possibility of paying for organs . in order to help address the ethical issues , two groups have made recommendations , and a third has held deliberations . first , the acot has made a series of recommendations to the secretary . second , the institute of medicine ( iom ) issued a report in 2006 , organ donation: opportunities for action . third , the president's council on bioethics ( pcbe ) , which was created in 2001 to advise the president on bioethical issues , took up the issue of organ transplantation in its june 2006 and february 2007 meetings . relevant recommendations and discussions from acot , iom , pcbe and a variety of articles are summarized in the following sections . as new transplantation systems test the boundaries of old regulations , the primary question arises — does congress want to maintain direct control over key components of the system to help ensure that ethical boundaries are not breached , or does congress want to delegate more of its authority in order to make the system more flexible ? current law permits and defines paired organ donation ( p.l . 110 - 144 ) and is , in various instances , both more and less broad than earlier proposals that were made . it is broader in that it allows paired donations for many types of organs , while many earlier proposals were restricted to kidneys ( h.r . 710 eh and s. 487 , 110 th ) . it is less broad in that it exempts paired but not list donation from the prohibition of exchange of valuable consideration ( s. 2306 , 109 th ) , it does not specifically enable the secretary to determine that other similar practices are also exempt ( h.r . 710 eas , 110 th ) , and it does not exempt the broader categories of familial , emotional , psychological , or physical benefits ( s. 573 is , 108 th ) , or tax credits ( h.r . acot proposed one possible alternative that would enable more flexibility for developing transplantation systems .