upheld the constitutionality of that act . as to the governmental interest involved in requiring the reports and disclosure from those who engage in "lobbying," as that term was defined by the court , the court stated: present - day legislative complexities are such that individual members of congress cannot be expected to explore the myriad pressures to which they are regularly subjected . yet full realization of the american ideal of government by elected representatives depends to no small extent on their ability to properly evaluate such pressures . otherwise the voice of the people may all too easily be drowned out by the voice of special interest groups seeking favored treatment while masquerading as proponents of the public weal . this is the evil which the lobbying act was designed to help prevent . toward that end , congress has not sought to prohibit these pressures . it has merely provided for a modicum of information from those who for hire attempt to influence legislation or who collect or spend funds for that purpose . it wants only to know who is being hired , who is putting up the money , and how much . it acted in the same spirit and for a similar purpose in passing the federal corrupt practices act — to maintain the integrity of a basic governmental process . §§261 et seq. , 1994 code ed. ) see burroughs and cannon v. united states , 290 u.s. 534 , 545 . under these circumstances , we believe that congress , at least within the bounds of the act as we have construed it , is not constitutionally forbidden to require the disclosure of lobbying activities . to do so would be to deny congress in large measure the power of self - protection . and here congress has used that power in a manner restricted to its appropriate end . we conclude that [the registration and reporting sections of the act] , as applied to persons defined in §307 [those covered by the act] , do not offend the first amendment . the supreme court in buckley and in mcconnell , looking at "campaign finance" regulations , recognized not only the significant governmental interest of assuring purity in elections , but also ultimately , the interest in mitigating the potential affect and undue influence of monied interests on the legislative process . the court in buckley , finding that disclosure requirements generally "appear to be the least restrictive means of curbing the evils" of unwarranted influence and corruption concerning basic governmental processes , noted that governmental interests such as these may "outweigh" the possible chilling effect of disclosure statutes on first amendment rights: the strict test established by alabama is necessary because compelled disclosure has the potential for substantially infringing the exercise of first amendment rights . but we have acknowledged that there are governmental interests sufficiently important to outweigh the possibility of infringement , particularly when the "free functioning of our national institutions" is involved .