that is sufficient. ( 18 ) lower courts also have considered challenges to a senate amendment on the ground thatit violated the origination clause . in 1982 congress enacted the tax equity and fiscalresponsibility act ( tefra ) , p.l . 97-248 , 96 stat . as introduced in the house , the billthat eventually was enacted as tefra would have reduced total tax revenues by $1 billionbetween 1982 and 1986 . ( 19 ) the senate replaced the entire text of the house bill exceptfor the enacting clause with a version that , as ultimately enacted , increased total revenue byabout $100 billion between 1983 and 1985 . ( 20 ) in over 50 cases , ( 21 ) none of which was reviewed by the united states supremecourt , plaintiffs challenged the constitutionality of tefra , contending that the senateexceeded its authority under the origination clause to amend a house bill for raising revenuewhen it struck the entire text of a house bill to reduce revenue and replaced it with a senateamendment that increased revenue . under their interpretation of the clause , the senate wasrestricted in its authority to amend house bills ; it could amend only house bills that increased revenue , not those that related to or collected revenue but did not increase it . the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit rejected this contention and elaboratedon the reasons . we cannot accept this restrictive andstrained reading of the origination clause . the term "bills for raising revenue" does not referonly to laws increasing taxes , but instead refers in general to all laws relating to taxes . wardell v. united states , 757 f.2d 203 , 205 ( 8th cir . 1985 ) ( per curiam ) : black's law dictionary ( rev.5th ed . 1979 ) ( defining "raise" in the revenue context to mean "to collect , to levy , as to raisemoney by levying taxes" ) , see also , 2 a. hinds , precedents of the house of representatives ofthe united states â§ 1489 at 949-53 ( 1907 ) ( recounting an 1872 debate between the house andsenate concerning the proper interpretation of the originationclause ) . under armstrong's interpretation , bills oramendments raising taxes would have to originate in the house , whereas bills or amendments lowering taxes could presumably be initiated in either the senate or house . this interpretationraises several problems . first , it runs sharply contrary to past practice , since the senate hasnever regarded itself as being empowered to initiate any sort of revenue bill , even one thatlowers taxes . see , e.g . , 2 a. hinds precedents of the house â§ 1489 at 949-53 . second , it maywell be impossible to implement , since members of congress may differ over whether aproposed revenue bill or amendment will "increase" or "decrease" taxes overall , and since thesame revenue bill may have varying effects upon the total taxes assessed in different years .