policy. u.s. regulations define cooperating with the boycott as ( 1 ) agreeing to refuse or actually refusing to do business in israel or with a blacklisted company ; ( 2 ) agreeing to discriminate or actually discriminating against other persons based on race , religion , sex , national origin , or nationality ; ( 3 ) agreeing to furnish or actually furnishing information about business relationships in israel or with blacklisted companies ; and ( 4 ) agreeing to furnish or actually furnishing information about the race , religion , sex , or national origin of another person . u.s. antiboycott laws are included in the export administration act of 1979 ( eaa ) and the ribicoff amendment to the tax reform act of 1976 ( tra ) . the export - related antiboycott provisions are administered by the department of commerce and prohibit u.s. persons from participating in the boycott . the internal revenue service ( irs ) administers tax - related antiboycott regulations that deny tax benefits to u.s. taxpayers that participate in the boycott . a "bds" ( boycott , divestment , and sanctions ) movement against israel — ostensibly linked to its treatment of palestinians — has gained support among civil society organizations in a range of countries . some divestment from and boycotts of israel or israeli goods have resulted . for example , the american studies association , a scholarly organization devoted to the interdisciplinary study of american culture and history , voted for an academic boycott of israeli institutions in december 2013 , amplifying the controversy surrounding the issue with lawmakers and with u.s. higher education institutions and student councils . some who oppose bds measures against companies in israel because of concerns that the movement's demands could endanger israel's identity as a jewish state nevertheless support efforts to divest from israeli companies doing business in west bank settlements . additionally , some european countries' pension funds and companies have withdrawn investments or canceled contracts owing to concerns regarding connections with settlement activity . however , some reports have questioned whether such developments are properly characterized as constituting a boycott or a significant threat to israel's economy . extending existing u.s. antiboycott measures to incorporate the bds movement raises several challenges . to the extent a u.s. organization may participate in the bds movement , it would not appear to violate existing federal antiboycott legislation , which targets organizations' participation in foreign boycotts . foreign states do not directly participate in the bds movement , and the movement does not have a secondary tier targeting companies that do business in or with israel . it appears , rather , to essentially be an informal grouping of civil society organizations — originating among palestinians but subsequently expanding into other countries — making common cause rather than exercising economic pressure on companies to participate . u.s. legislation similar to the 2011 israeli "anti - boycott law," which instituted civil penalties for israeli citizens who organize or publically endorse boycotts against israel , would probably be vulnerable to challenge on free speech ( first amendment ) grounds . they [the legislation] have the effect of preventing u.s. firms from being used to implement foreign policies of other nations which run counter to u.s .