ii . the president sends a final legal draft text of the trade agreement and a draft implementing bill ( with supporting materials ) to congress on a day that it is in session . the draft bill may , or may not , reflect some or all of amendments adopted by committees in the mock markup . iii . identical bills are subject to mandatory introduction in each house of congress on the day received . the bills are referred to the house ways and means and senate finance committees jointly , with others if jurisdiction warrants . iv . each committee has 45 in session days to report the bill or it is automatically discharged and the bill is placed on the appropriate calendar . an implementing bill subject to tpa procedures is likely to be a revenue bill , in which case the constitution requires that the senate ultimately act on the house bill . under these conditions , the senate finance committee has until the later of the 45 th day of session after the senate bill is introduced or the 15 th day of session after the senate receives the house bill . v. in each house , after the implementing bill is reported or discharged , any member may offer a non - debatable motion to consider it . debate is limited to 20 hours evenly divided between those for and against . the measure cannot be amended , and a motion or unanimous - consent request to suspend this restriction is not in order . if the chamber has not completed floor action by the 15 th day after the bill is reported or discharged , any member may bring it to a vote . vi . a bill passes by simple majority under the statute . whichever house acts second ( typically the senate assuming the bill is a revenue bill ) considers and debates its own bill , but takes its final vote on the bill received from the other house ( typically the house of representatives ) . this procedure ensures that both houses will ultimately act on the same measure , thereby clearing it to be presented to the president ( without the need for conference ) . after the implementing bill is signed , under its terms , the agreement enters into force for the united states when the president implements it by proclamation . this typically occurs after the ustr has assured the president that the partner country ( ies ) has made the legislative and regulatory changes necessary to meet all obligations under the trade agreement , and the president exchanges notes with the trading partner government providing for the agreement's entry into force on or after a specific date . no tpa renewal . the lack of tpa could delay action on future reciprocal trade agreements , but trade policy can move ahead in its absence , including consideration of trade and investment framework agreements ( tifas ) , unilateral preference arrangements ( eg , the african growth and opportunity act — agoa ) , and trade enforcement measures , among others . the united states has also conducted trade negotiations prior to having tpa authority in place .