the circumstances of their occurrence have varied , as well . five of the 12 were submitted quite late in a session , so that the senate may simply have lacked time to act . these included one of the late - session nominations and the one that became moot . six others were withdrawn before floor consideration could commence , including instances from paterson in 1793 ( first nomination ) to miers in 2005 . — in different ways at different times . a review of all supreme court nominations since 1789 yields two general conclusions about the procedures used . first , the senate has not felt bound to consider each nomination in exactly the same way that the others before it were considered . although some supreme court nominations , for example , never reached the senate floor ( and hence , did not receive a vote ) , the senate spent numerous days debating other nominations . within this broad outline , the senate has answered the basic question — what should the procedure be for consideration of nominations ? this stance becomes even more evident when the senate considers a well - known person for a supreme court seat . the senate received , debated and confirmed the nomination of former president william howard taft to be chief justice on the same day , for example . second , although the form of confirmation proceedings has varied , the senate's process has tended to become longer and more formal over time . although members of the first supreme court were confirmed just two days after their nominations were received , the norm in modern times has tended toward weeks , if not months , between the receipt of the nomination and disposition by the senate . early in the senate's history , it was not typical for supreme court nominations to be referred to committee at all ; by modern times , it was the norm for the senate committee on the judiciary to spend significant time reviewing nominees . a study of the 160 nominations sent to the senate finds that the senate's floor consideration of supreme court nominations breaks down relatively naturally into five patterns over time . senate floor proceedings on supreme court nominations might be distinguished in terms of a wide variety of different characteristics . the present study focuses chiefly on three that are readily identifiable and often referred to the kind of vote ( or other action ) by which the senate disposed of the nominations ; the amount of time the senate spent considering them on the floor ; and the forms of procedural action that occurred during their consideration . each of these represents a salient element of the procedural context in which a nomination is considered . together , they may afford an indication of the amount of controversy , contention , or opposition that surrounds a nomination . for example , if the senate approves a nomination by a voice vote after a single day of consideration , during which no procedural actions occur , one might reasonably conclude that it involved little opposition or controversy .