sec . 328 of the conference report ( h.rept . 2082 , the intelligence authorization act for fy2008 , agreed to in the house on december 13 , 2007 , would have limited spending of the intelligence budget to 30% until each member of the intelligence committees has been informed with respect to intelligence regarding the facility targeted on september 6 . the administration objected that this provision would circumvent the executive's authority to control access to extraordinarily sensitive information . the senate agreed to the conference report on february 13 , 2008 , by a vote of 51-45 and the bill was cleared for the white house , but it was not signed . on april 24 , national security advisor stephen hadley , cia director michael hayden , and director of national intelligence mike mcconnell presented evidence to congressional committees that the israeli target was a nuclear reactor , designed by and being built with the assistance of north korea . hayden said that the reactor was within weeks or months of completion and , within a year of entering operation , it could have produced enough material for at least one weapon . these officials reportedly acknowledged lack of evidence indicating that syria was working on nuclear weapons designs and that they had not identified a source of nuclear material for the facility . they expressed "low confidence" that the site was part of a nuclear weapons program . they also denied u.s. involvement in planning or executing the september 6 strike . experts suggested that the inability to identify a source of fuel raised questions about when the reactor would have been operational and agreed that the inability to identify facilities to separate plutonium from fuel raised further questions about whether the reactor was part of a weapons program . damascus has allowed the international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) only one visit to the site and has turned down requests for follow - up visits and for access to other sites . the iaea has said that the building had characteristics of a nuclear facility and that its inspectors had detected "significant" traces of man - made uranium at the site . on september 15 , 2009 , the u.n. human rights council's gaza fact - finding mission , headed by south african judge richard goldstone , presented its report on the december 2008-january 2009 conflict between israel and hamas , which israel refers to as operation cast lead . the report concluded that "there is evidence indicating serious violations of international human rights and humanitarian law were committed by israel ... and that israel committed actions amounting to war crimes , and possibly crimes against humanity . the report also found "evidence that palestinian armed groups committed war crimes , as well as possibly crimes against humanity in their repeated launching of rockets and mortars into southern israel. the mission asked the u.n. security council to order israel and hamas to conduct credible investigations into the alleged crimes . if either side fails to do so within six months , it said , then the evidence should be referred to the international criminal court prosecutor in the hague .