as a result , costs and utilization have begun rising again . since costs and utilization are rising , so is the cost of the program to congress . low utilization rates were a major concern of congress for several years . while phas are expected to have utilization rates of at least 95% , in fy2000 and fy2001 , national voucher utilization rates were just over 91% . since phas were not utilizing all of their vouchers , they typically had low budget utilization as well , meaning that they had more money in their budgets than they needed , and they rarely had to dip into their one - month program reserves , even if their costs rose significantly . at the end of the year , hud and each pha would reconcile their budgets , and hud was typically able to recapture excess funds from phas' reserves . hud generally used this same formula — last year's actual costs , plus an inflation , times the number of authorized vouchers — each year to determine how much funding to request from congress for the renewal of tenant - based section 8 vouchers . hud would also make available to congress for rescission those unused funds that the agency had recaptured from phas . in areas where they did have control , such as in setting payment standards , selecting families from the waiting list , and issuing vouchers , many phas made changes . some lowered their payment standards from 110% to 100% or less of local fair market rents . since changes in payment standards only affect future families in the program , some phas undertook rent reasonableness reviews and reduced rents paid to landlords , some of whom accepted the cut , others of whom chose to no longer participate in the program . under the budget - based funding formulas in place in fy2005 and fy2006 , phas' funding did not necessarily decrease if their costs decreased ( for example , due to changes in the types of families served or changes in the rental market ) . since maximized leasing was prohibited , some phas had funds that they were not permitted to spend , even if they had waiting lists for vouchers in their communities ( 7% of all phas had unusable funds , as of september 2006 , according to crs analysis ) . phas had the option of selecting higher - income families from their waiting lists ( for whom subsidy costs are lower ) , although phas were still constrained by a requirement that 75% of all vouchers be targeted to the lowest - income families . many phas intentionally reduced their utilization rates by not reissuing vouchers when families left the program . agencies that intentionally lowered their utilization rates in order to save money in fy2004 likely encountered problems in fy2005 , as their budgets were capped at their costs and utilization rates as of the third quarter of fy2004 . it is likely that , at least for some phas whose costs had risen faster than their funding under the new formula , these changes resulted in fewer households receiving vouchers .