appendix a . it will be updated periodically . the mercosur countries are experiencing an extended period of strong economic growth after a deep recession caused by financial crises in brazil ( 1999 ) and argentina ( 2001 ) . they currently have competitive exchange rates , stable macroeconomic conditions , and strong growth in exports and foreign direct investment largely because of the global commodity price boom . commodity prices , however , cut two ways . although strong agricultural prices have fueled export growth , the rising price of oil has offset some of these gains for the net oil importers ( venezuela being the exception ) , contributing to deteriorating current account balances over the past year . within mercosur , brazil dominates the trade relationship , running a sizable and growing trade surplus with the rest of the pact . mercosur has a well - diversified trade relationship with the world . in 2006 , the european union ( eu ) was mercosur's largest trade partner , capturing 25% of total trade , followed by asia with 22% , and the united states with 19% . by contrast , the four mercosur countries together accounted for only 3.0% of total u.s. trade . with the recent addition of venezuela , the "mercosur 5" make up 3.6% of total u.s. trade , the increase accounted for almost entirely by u.s. imports of venezuelan oil . collectively , the "mercosur 4" would rank 9 th for u.s. exports and 14 th for u.s. imports , slightly ahead of brazil by itself , the largest economy in south america , responsible for 80% of total mercosur trade with the united states . patterns in u.s. merchandise trade with the "mercosur - 4" appear in figure 1 ( country data for all five appear in table a - 1 ) . note that trends are heavily skewed by brazil's large economy . u.s. imports of mercosur goods rose steadily from 1996 to 2006 , paralleling growth in the u.s. economy . expansion of u.s. exports , by contrast , was flat from 1996 to 2001 and then fell as import demand collapsed around deep recessions in brazil and argentina . u.s. exports rebounded in 2004 as the mercosur economies recovered , and by 2007 , the u.s. trade balance turned from deficit to surplus for the first time since 2001 . the u.s. trade surplus reflects growth in demand in all four mercosur countries . for brazil , u.s. imports actually declined slightly in 2007 , as u.s. exports rose by 28% . u.s. exports have been helped by brazil's strong economic growth resulting in increased demand for u.s. inputs such as aircraft engines and parts , as well as the strong appreciation of brazil's currency relative to the u.s. dollar . major u.s. exports to mercosur include mostly capital and high technology goods such as mechanical and electrical machinery ( computers , vehicles , aircraft , medical equipment , and pharmaceuticals ) . the primary u.s. imports are components for machinery and vehicles , agricultural products , and oil if venezuela is included .