for how long ? how are developments in syria affecting other countries in the region , including u.s. partners ? what potential consequences of u.s. action or inaction should be considered ? how might other outside actors respond to u.s. choices ? amid significant territorial losses by the islamic state and syrian opposition groups since 2015 and parallel military gains by the syrian government and coalition partner forces , u.s. policymakers face a number of questions and potential decision points related to the following factors . since 2011 , u.s. policy toward the unrest and conflict in syria has attempted to pursue parallel interests and manage interconnected challenges , with varying degrees of success . among the objectives identified by successive administrations and by many members in successive sessions of congress have been supporting syrian - led efforts to demand more representative , accountable , and effective governance ; seeking a negotiated settlement that includes a transition in syria away from the leadership of bashar al asad and his supporters ; limiting or preventing the use of military force by state and nonstate actors against civilian populations ; mitigating transnational threats posed by syria - based islamist extremist groups ; meeting the humanitarian needs of internally and externally displaced syrians ; preventing the presence and needs of syrian refugees from destabilizing neighboring countries ; limiting the negative effects of other third party interventions on regional and international balances of power ; and responding to and preventing the use of chemical weapons . as syria's conflict has changed over time from civil unrest to nationwide military conflict involving multiple internal and external actors to the apparent resurgence of the asad government , the policies , approaches , and priorities of the united states and others also have changed . as of late 2018 , the united states and its syrian and regional partners have not succeeded in inducing or compelling syrian president bashar al asad to leave office or secured a fundamental reorientation of syria's political system as part of a negotiated settlement process . the united states continues to advocate for an inclusive negotiated solution , but has largely acquiesced to asad's resumption of political and security control . forceful interventions in syria by russia , iran , turkey , the united states , and israel have created a fundamentally different set of calculations for policymakers to consider relative to those that prevailed prior to the conflict . the united states , the united nations , and others have assessed that the syrian government has used chemical weapons repeatedly against opposition forces and civilians in the country . expert teams affiliated with the u.n. - opcw joint mission to investigate allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the syrian arab republic ( jim ) and the opcw fact - finding mission ( ffm ) in syria have investigated some of these allegations and have found evidence that in some cases confirms and in others suggests that chemical weapons and / or toxic chemicals have been used in attacks by the syrian regime and by the islamic state . any use of chemical weapons is prohibited by the chemical weapons convention , which syria joined in september 2013 .