no further action on h.r . 2829 was taken by the senate . the agencies included in the fsgg appropriations bill were funded from the start of fy2007 until december 31 , 2007 , by a series of continuing resolutions . under the continuing resolutions , fsgg agencies were generally funded at fy2007 rates , although the district of columbia had special funding provisions . the fsgg agencies were ultimately funded through h.r . 2764 , a consolidated appropriations bill which passed the senate on december 18 , and passed the house , as amended , on december 19 . the bill was signed by president bush on december 26 , 2007 , becoming p.l . 110-161 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 . included as section 722 of the bill as passed by the house and reported in the senate , and of p.l . section 834 , which states that congress recognizes the united states anti - doping agency as the official anti - doping agency for olympic , pan american , and paralympic sports in the united states . included as section 733 of the bill as passed by the house and reported in the senate , and of p.l . section 836 , which prohibits the use of appropriated funds to implement or enforce restrictions or limitations on the coast guard congressional fellowship program or to implement opm's proposed regulations limiting the detail of executive branch employees to the legislative branch . included as section 735 of the bill as passed by the house and reported in the senate , and of p.l . section 837 , which would have required agencies to report to congress on the amount of the acquisitions made from entities that manufacture the articles , materials , or supplies outside the united states . this provision is not included in the bill as passed by the house or reported in the senate , or as enacted in p.l . section 839 , which requires appropriate executive department and agency heads either to transfer funds to , or reimburse , the federal aviation administration to ensure the uninterrupted , continuous operation of the midway atoll airfield . this provision is not included in the bill as passed by the house , but is included as section 737 of the bill as reported in the senate , and is included as section 738 of p.l . section 840 , which would have provided certain requirements for conducting a public - private competition for the performance of an activity that is not inherently governmental for executive agencies with less than 100 full - time employees . this provision is not included in the bill as passed by the house or reported in the senate , or as enacted in p.l . section 842 , which prohibits the use of funds to convert an activity or function of an executive agency to contractor performance if more than 10 federal employees perform the activity , unless the analysis reveals that savings would exceed 10 percent of the most efficient organization's personnel - related costs for performance of the activity or function by federal employees , or $10 million , whichever is lesser .