that legislation was not enacted . the settlement of pharmaceutical patent litigation forms an important issue because such litigation is itself important to our public health system . our patient population relies upon brand - name drug companies to develop new medicines , but it also relies upon generic firms to increase access to such medications once they have been developed . the hatch - waxman act provides for patent litigation between these two traditional rivals as a primary vehicle through which these competing demands are mediated . when concluded in a manner that comports with antitrust principles , such settlements may further the public policy goals of encouraging the labors that lead to medical innovation , but also distributing the fruits of those labors to consumers . several options are available for congress . one possibility is to await further judicial developments . while the united states supreme court has not yet addressed pharmaceutical litigation patent settlements , it is possible that the highest court may do so in the future . continuing case law developments in the lower courts could also lead to an informed consensus on the antitrust consequences of reverse payment settlements . another option is to regulate the settlement of pharmaceutical patent litigation in some manner . in the 112 th congress , s. 27 , titled the preserve access to affordable generics act , would have amended the federal trade commission ( ftc ) act to allow the ftc to initiate a proceeding against the parties to any agreement resolving or settling a patent infringement claim in connection with a drug product . the legislation would have created a presumption that such an agreement has anticompetitive effects and be unlawful if the anda filer receives anything of value and the anda filer agrees not to research , develop , manufacture , market , or sell the anda product for any period of time . this presumption of unlawfulness would not have applied if the parties to the agreement demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence that the precompetitive benefits of the agreement outweigh the anticompetitive effects of the agreement . in considering whether the settling parties have met that burden , the legislation would have required consideration of ( 1 ) the remaining term of the relevant patent , compared with the agreed upon entry date of the anda product ; ( 2 ) the value to consumers of the competition from the anda product ; ( 3 ) the form and amount of consideration provided to the anda filer ; ( 4 ) the revenue the anda filer would have received by winning the patent litigation ; ( 5 ) the reduction in the nda holder's revenues if it had lost the patent litigation ; ( 6 ) the time period between the date of the agreement conveying value to the anda filer and date of the settlement of the patent case ; and ( 7 ) any other relevant factor . under s. 369 , in determining whether the settling parties have met their burden of overcoming the presumption of unlawfulness , it would not have been presumed that entry of the anda product would not have occurred until the expiration of the relevant patent or statutory exclusivity .