the mtb consideration process proposed by h.r . this report will be updated as events warrant . congress may presently consider a bill to legislatively establish a process to facilitate consideration of mtbs . on april 13 , house ways and means chairman kevin brady introduced h.r . 4923 , the american manufacturing competitiveness act of 2016 . the ways and means trade subcommittee held hearings on h.r . 4923 on april 14 , and a full committee markup of the bill was held on april 20 . the committee passed the bill , as amended , on the same date . during the markup , chairman brady asserted that "our bipartisan bill creates an open and transparent process that allows the american people to see every part of this process . our bill upholds our earmark rules because members of congress will no longer introduce bills to begin the mtb process. the legislation could reportedly come to the house floor as early as the last week in april . the trade facilitation and enforcement act of 2015 , p.l . 114-125 , enacted on february 24 , 2016 , included a sense of congress that urged the house ways and means and senate finance committees to "advance , as soon as possible , after consultation with the public and members of the senate and house of representatives , a regular and predictable legislative process for the temporary suspension and reduction of duties that is consistent with the rules of the senate and of the house. 4923 and s. 2794 is different than the previous process for vetting mtbs primarily because ( 1 ) an independent agency , the u.s. international trade commission ( itc ) , will directly receive duty suspension petitions from the public ; and ( 2 ) the process would be subject to certain time and reporting requirements . as in the previous mtb process ( 1 ) the itc — in consultation with the department of commerce , u.s. customs and border protection , the u.s. trade representative , and other relevant agencies — would consider the duty suspension requests ; ( 2 ) the conditions that applied to prior duty suspensions ( i.e. , they must be noncontroversial , revenue - neutral , administrable ) would apply ; and ( 3 ) the final mtb would be drafted through the committee , which would retain authority to exclude duty suspensions to which a member objected or if there were domestic production . when considering previous mtb legislation , the process was begun by the house ways and means and senate finance committee chairs ( the committees of jurisdiction ) sending out dear colleague letters inviting members to introduce stand - alone legislation on proposed duty suspensions . members were required to file disclosure forms affirming that neither the member nor spouse had any financial interest in the entity supporting the duty suspension . the deadline for introduction was usually several months before an mtb was expected to be reported out of committee . the mtb , when introduced , included all committee - approved measures , including duty suspensions .