these are discussed below . the federal laboratories have received a mandate to transfer technology . this , however , is not the same as a mandate to help the private sector in the development and commercialization of technology for the marketplace . while the missions of the government laboratories are often broad , direct assistance to industry is not included , with the exception of the national institute of standards and technology . the laboratories were created to perform the r&d necessary to meet government needs , which typically are not consistent with the demands of the marketplace . the missions of the federal laboratories are under review , due , in part , to budget constraints and the changing world situation . national security is now being redefined to include economic well - being in addition to weapons superiority . the laboratories which have contributed so much to the defense enterprise are being re - evaluated . these discussions provide an opportunity to debate whether the mandate of the federal r&d establishment should include expanded responsibilities for assistance to the private sector . whether or not the missions of the u.s. government laboratories are changed to include expanded assistance to industry , there are various initiatives which may facilitate the technology transfer process under the laboratories' current responsibilities . these include making the work performed in government institutions more relevant to industry through augmented cooperative r&d , increased private sector involvement early in the r&d efforts of the laboratories , and expanded commercialization activities . because a significant portion of the laboratories are involved in defense research , questions arise as to whether or not the technologies in these institutions can be transferred in such a way as to be useful to commercial companies . in addition , the selection of one company over another to be involved in a transfer or in a cooperative r&d agreement raises issues of fairness and equity of access , as well as conflict of interest . and , while it is virtually impossible to prevent the flow of scientific and technical information abroad , there is ongoing interest in the extent of foreign access to the federal laboratory establishment . how these concerns are addressed may be fundamental to the success of u.s. technology transfer . over the past 30 or more years , the congress has enacted various laws designed to facilitate cooperative r&d between and among government , industry , and academia . these laws include ( but are not limited to ) tax credits for industrial payments to universities for the performance of r&d , amendments to the antitrust laws as they pertain to cooperative research and joint manufacturing , changes to government patent policies , and improved technology transfer from federal laboratories to the private sector . the intent behind these legislative initiatives is to encourage collaborative ventures and thereby reduce the risks and costs associated with r&d as well as permit work to be undertaken that crosses traditional boundaries of expertise and experience leading to the development of new technologies and manufacturing processes for the marketplace . today , the perspectives on joint r&d , technology transfer , and cooperative research and development agreements appear mixed . the results of legislative activity are open to discussion .