what alternatives can be pursued ? what are the relative federal and private roles in selecting and financing r&d of specific technologies ? perhaps most important for the longer run , what breakthrough research should be pursued ? over the past 100 years , a number of technological changes have occurred ( eg , in nuclear power , computing , and communications ) that demonstrate the low success rate of predicting technological and societal changes far into the future . at present , at least two technological breakthrough possibilities can be discerned: fusion power , which conceivably could wean economies from fossil fuels , and sequestration , which could capture and store carbon dioxide — and perhaps even remove excess from the atmosphere . other breakthroughs are surely possible — including serendipitous discoveries that cannot be conceived of now . if the ultimate , 2050 target for reducing greenhouse gas emissions is as aggressive as 83% below 2005 levels , as in some proposals , then fundamentally at issue is whether the risks of climate change can be addressed only by incremental "muddling through" or whether some extraordinary , aggressive effort is needed . certainly , there are many opportunities for incremental and iterative policies to reduce greenhouse gases , to conserve energy , to find alternative energy sources , to make vehicles more energy efficient , to enhance carbon sequestration through afforestation and refined cropping practices , to deter deforestation and land use changes that increase co 2 emissions , and so on . in addition , the potential for a substantial supply of natural gas offers the united states the possibility of buying time ( similar to what the u.k. did in the 1990s ) to allow a combination of research and development and market forces responding to a government - imposed carbon price to providing longer term opportunities . the incremental nature of such a response provides flexibility , while a time frame of decades offers hope of unpredictable breakthroughs or the discovery that climate change is not so threatening as some fear . conversely , given the drivers increasing emissions , such as population growth and economic development and growth , it is hard to see how incremental changes affecting intensity will achieve the rate of intensity decline sufficient to reduce emissions to the proposed levels , even over decades . from this perspective , an intense , aggressive pursuit of breakthroughs — even with high costs and high risks of failure — has to be weighed against the costs and risks of failing to prevent potentially dangerous interference with the climate system . how fast and how far might intensity be driven down ? there are two ways to approach this question: one is to examine the sources of emissions and consider how much and how fast they could be curtailed ; a second is to assess what level of greenhouse gases can be emitted to the atmosphere without causing "dangerous interference with the climate system" ( in the words of the unfccc ) and to calculate from those emissions what the intensity would have to be over time , taking into account population and income growth .