the george h.w . bush administration also granted ded to what was then anestimated 190,000 salvadorans through december 1994 . on december 23 , 1997 , president williamclinton instructed the attorney general to grant ded to the haitians for one year . ( 40 ) following the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , ins issued a press release announcingthat family members of victims of the terrorist attacks whose own immigration status was dependenton the victim's immigration status should not be concerned about facing immediate removal fromthe united states . the then - commissioner james ziglar stated: "the ins will exercise its discretionin a compassionate way toward families of victims during this time of mourning and readjustment . on september 19 , we began to advise our offices to exercise compassionate discretion in thesecircumstances. ( 41 ) some , including a group of democratic senators , have requested that dhs secretary michaelchertoff issue a formal statement reassuring immigrant victims of hurricanes rita and katrina thatthey can seek help from relief agencies without fear of deportation or being turned over toimmigration authorities . ( 42 ) meanwhile , it appears that some foreign nationals who were adversely affected by hurricanekatrina are beginning to depart the united states voluntarily . mexican consular officials in theunited states , for example , are reportedly helping to repatriate mexicans when the person who hasbeen displaced by the hurricane requests it . ( 43 ) initially it was unclear whether ice would initiate forciblerepatriations targeting unauthorized aliens who were victims of hurricane katrina . ( 44 ) more recently there havebeen reports , however , of unauthorized aliens who were victims of hurricane katrina being arrested,detained , and ordered deported . legislation addressing thesepolicy areas is discussed in the relevant sections . many of the victims of hurricane katrina lack personal identification documents as a resultof being evacuated from their homes , loss or damage to personal items and records , and ongoingdisplacement in shelters and temporary housing . as a result of the widespread damage anddestruction to government facilities in the area affected by the hurricane , moreover , many victimswill be unable to have personal documents re - issued in the near future . lack of adequate personalidentification documentation , a problem for all victims , has specific consequences under immigrationlaw , especially when it comes to employment . the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) requires employers to verify employmenteligibility and establish identity through specified documents presented by the employee - - citizensand foreign nationals alike . specifically , â§274 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) of the ina makes it illegal for an employerto hire any person - - citizen or alien - - without first verifying the person's authorization to work inthe united states . employers ( and recruiters and referrers for a fee ) must examine documents andattest that they appear to be genuine and relate to the individual . if a document does not reasonablyappear on its face to be genuine and relate to the person presenting it , the employer may not acceptit . under ina â§274 ( b ) , employers may not specify which document ( s ) the person must present .