security . in the tf plan , cnpc would be theonly site in the complex for category i and ii snm . ( 14 , 15 ) this material would be moved frompantex and y - 12 ( assuming cnpc is not located at either site ) , and from lanl and llnl . partof the rationale is to reduce security costs . cnpc would probably achieve that objective . whetherit would "reduce the overall threat to the complex" ( vii ) is less clear . it would reduce the numberof sites and communities "that could be targets of terrorist attacks," ( 24 ) but reducing the numberof potential terrorist targets would seem to increase security only if there is concern about thepossibility of an attack on multiple complex sites at the same time . if terrorists could attack onlyone site , having more sites with fewer assets at each would make each site a lower - value target,which could reduce the risk of attack on any one site . conversely , locating many facilities at a singlesite would seem to make that site a more attractive terrorist target . it is far from certain that anycomplex site would rise to the top of a terrorist target list given that these sites are well defendedand large in area . a related tf goal is that "consolidation would result in reduction of risk to adjacent civilianpopulations . currently , the llnl , lanl , y - 12 , and pantex sites are sufficiently close to residentialand commercial structures such that any partially successful terrorist attack on these sites may causecollateral damage to the surrounding civilian population and associated public and private assets .

" ( 19 ) of these four sites , only llnl is located in a densely - populated area , yet the tf's considerationof relocating plutonium r&d to llnl ( 35 ) would require increasing the inventory of plutonium atthat laboratory . for the threat of snm release to occur as a result of terrorist attack on a complexsite , several steps would be required . terrorists would have to attack the site , which would bedifficult given site security . they would have to gain access to snm , which additional securityfeatures would render very difficult . they would then have to seize and detonate a bomb , althoughthere are few complete weapons in the complex other than at pantex and complete weapons are wellprotected . alternatively , they might try to seize and disperse snm as a dirty bomb , but snm is apoor choice for a dirty bomb because it is very much less radioactive or accessible than suchradioactive materials as cobalt - 60 or cesium - 137 . reducing risk to adjacent population thus seemsa questionable rationale for cnpc . nonproliferation . critics hold that the tf reportmight adversely affect u.s. nuclear nonproliferation efforts . the lead sentence of the report statesthat the goal of the nuclear weapons program has "shifted to sustaining existing warheads for theindefinite future," ( v ) even though states party to the nuclear nonproliferation treaty , including theunited states , agreed in article vi to "pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measuresrelating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament.