transitional benefits . ( discussed in table 1 — item a16 . ) disregarded assets . ( discussed in table 1 — item a7 ( b ) . ) title iv allowed states , when determining food stamp eligibility , to disregard ( exclude ) liquid assets that they do not consider under their tanf or medicaid programs . reporting changed household circumstances . ( discussed in table 1 — item a9 . ) with some exceptions , title iv gave states the option to require households to report changes in their circumstances as infrequently as every 6 months . title iv allowed states to give up to 5 months' "transitional" food stamp benefits to those leaving the tanf program . the transitional amount would effectively be the food stamp benefit received prior to leaving the tanf program . ( discussed in table 1 — item a18 . ) the food stamp program's quality control ( qc ) system measures the degree to which states erroneously determine eligibility and benefits . disregarded income . ( discussed in table 1 — item a2 . ) title iv allowed states , when determining food stamp eligibility and benefits , to disregard ( exclude ) any type of income the state does not consider under its temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) cash assistance program or its medicaid program . tracking household expenses . ( discussed in table 1 — item a6 . ) title iv permitted states to disregard changes in household expenses ( such as shelter costs ) until the household's next eligibility redetermination . household expenses affect benefits by lowering ( or raising ) the amount of income counted in calculating benefits . based on the extent to which they exceed certain thresholds , they may be assessed financial penalties . on the other hand , if they fall below certain thresholds , they may receive "bonus" payments . title iv substantially changed the food stamp qc system of penalties and bonus payments . it raised the threshold above which states are assessed penalties and effectively penalized only those states with persistently ( over 3 years ) high rates of erroneous determinations . it also changed the system of bonus payments to a requirement for performance bonuses totaling $48 million a year to states meeting federal standards for high / most - improved performance . ( discussed in table 1 — item a20 . ) in addition to continuing the requirements for unmatched federal funding for employment and training programs for food stamp recipients ( at $90 million a year ) and unlimited state - match ( 50% ) funding , title iv provided up to $20 million a year in unmatched federal funding for employment / training services to able - bodied adults without dependents ( abawds ) , eliminated a state "maintenance of effort" requirement , and eliminated limits on funding for participant support costs ( eg , child care ) . ( discussed in table 1 — item a24 . ) title iv consolidated the nutrition assistance block grants for puerto rico and american samoa and increased the new consolidated grant to an amount slightly above what it would have been under regular inflation indexing .