of these , only the latter type is considered tip . based on the tvpa , as amended , sex trafficking is not considered a "severe form of tip" unless it is associated with commercial sex acts induced by force , fraud , or coercion or in which the person induced to perform such acts is a minor . some have questioned the adequacy of the state department's indicators . they maintain that more credit should be given to countries that are seeking to address the underlying factors that put people at risk for trafficking , such as gender and racial discrimination , violence against women and children , and economic inequality . in 2015 , there were 1,744 prosecutions of suspected traffickers , up from 944 prosecutions last year . convictions also increased , from 470 in 2014 to 663 in 2015 . although prosecutions and convictions are higher than five years ago , they still pale in comparison to europe , which recorded 4,990 prosecutions and 1,692 convictions in 2015 , and to south and central asia , which secured 6,915 prosecutions and 1,462 convictions . it is often difficult to measure success in the fight against human trafficking . many countries in latin america have reported increases in the number of training courses provided , conferences held , and workshops convened as evidence of their commitment to combat human trafficking . however , as stated in the 2009 tip report , the state department prefers countries to focus on "concrete actions" when determining the adequacy of a particular country's anti - tip efforts . ecuador appeared on the tier 3 list in both 2004 and 2005 but did not lose assistance . some argue that restrictions will probably only be applied to countries already subject to sanctions — such as north korea — and that threatening other countries aid cuts may actually encourage them to become less open to working with the united states . others argue that this may be the case with china or saudi arabia , but most latin american countries depend on good political and economic relations with the united states , as well as u.s. tourism , and fear the negative press that comes with a tier 3 designation nearly as much as reduced u.s. assistance . concrete actions include enacting new or amended tip legislation ; expanding victim assistance and prevention programs ; and , perhaps most importantly , securing prosecutions , convictions , and prison sentences for tip offenders . although many countries in latin america have passed or amended their existing tip laws , until very recently , the number of tip - related arrests , prosecutions , and convictions remained low in comparison to other regions . they also pale in comparison to the number of victims that have been identified in latin america ( 9,661 in 2015 alone ) . to continue improving enforcement of tip legislation in latin america , some observers have urged u.s. officials and other donors not to encourage countries to pass laws modeled entirely after those from other countries ( such as the tvpa ) . instead , countries should develop trafficking laws that respond to their particular tip problems and law enforcement capacities .