appendix a . selected reform legislation when considering u.n. reform issues , congress may wish to explore the nature and effectiveness of past legislative approaches and the extent to which they may have influenced the adoption of reform measures at the united nations . there is some evidence that legislation such as the kassebaum - solomon amendment and the helms - biden agreement may have led , either directly or indirectly , to substantive changes in u.n. policies . the following sections highlight selected reform legislation from 1986 to the present and note any subsequent changes to internal u.n. policy . kassebaum - solomon amendment ( 1986-1987 ) in the mid - 1980s , some members of congress expressed concern that u.s. influence over the u.n. budget was not proportionate to its rate of assessment . in 1986 congress passed legislation , popularly known as the "kassebaum - solomon amendment," which required that the u.s. assessed contribution to the u.n. regular budget be reduced to 20% unless the united nations gave major u.n. financial contributors a greater say in the budget process . subsequently , in 1986 the general assembly adopted a new budget and planning process that incorporated consensus - based budgeting as a decision - making mechanism , thus giving member states with higher assessment levels a potentially greater voice in the budget process . u.n. office of internal oversight services ( 1993 ) in the early 1990s , some members of congress and the administration were concerned with the apparent lack of oversight and accountability within the u.n. system . in 1993 , as part of the fy1994 state department appropriations act , congress directed that 10% of u.s. assessed contributions to the u.n. regular budget be withheld until the secretary of state certified to congress that "the united nations has established an independent office with responsibilities and powers substantially similar to offices of inspectors general act of 1978. . on july 29 , 1994 , the u.n. general assembly established the office of internal oversight services ( oios ) which reports directly to the secretary - general and provides "internal auditing , investigation , inspection , programme monitoring , evaluation and consulting services to all u.n. activities under the secretary - general's authority. helms - biden agreement ( 1999 ) in the late 1990s , congress and the administration negotiated and agreed to legislation that would further u.s. reform policy at the united nations . the helms - biden bill authorized payment of some u.s. arrears if specific reform benchmarks were met and certified to congress by the secretary of state . under the terms of helms - biden , the united states agreed to ( 1 ) pay $819 million in arrearages over fiscal years 1998 , 1999 , and 2000 ; and ( 2 ) forgive $107 million owed to the united states by the united nations in peacekeeping costs if the united nations applied the $107 million to u.s. peacekeeping arrears . for arrearage payments to occur , congress required that the u.s. assessment for contributions to the u.n. regular budget be reduced from 25% to 22% and that the peacekeeping contribution be reduced from 30% to 25% .