any resources owned by the ineligible spouse are deemed to the beneficiary . their combined countable income is used to reduce their monthly benefit . this amount is supplemented by 44 states and the district of columbia . arkansas , kansas , mississippi , north dakota , tennessee , west virginia , and the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands do not offer a state supplement . a participant in the ssi program receives the federal benefit amount , plus any state supplement , minus any countable income . at the end of december 2008 , over 7.5 million people received ssi benefits . in that month , these ssi beneficiaries each received an average cash benefit of $477.80 and the program paid out a total of just under $3.9 billion in ssi benefits . the average monthly benefit is lower than the federal benefit amount because a person's total monthly benefit may be lowered based on earnings and other income . federal regulations establish the definition of marriage for the purposes of determining ssi eligibility and calculating ssi benefits . two people are considered married for the purposes of the ssi program if one of the following conditions is present: the couple is legally married under the laws of the state in which they make their permanent home ; the ssa has determined that either person is entitled to social security benefits as the spouse of the other person ; or the couple is living together in the same household and is leading people to believe that they are married . this situation has been called a "marriage penalty" by the national council on disability . under the provisions of title xvi of the social security act , disabled individuals and persons who are 65 or older are entitled to benefits from the ssi program if they have income and assets that fall below program guidelines . ssi benefits are paid out of the general revenue of the united states and all participants receive the same basic monthly federal benefit . in most states , adults who collect ssi are automatically entitled to coverage under the medicaid health insurance program . the basic monthly federal benefit amount for 2009 is $674 for a single person and $1,011 for a couple . under the terms of the defense of marriage act , p.l . 104-199 , a married couple must consist of one man and one woman for the purposes of the ssi program . when two ssi beneficiaries marry , they are considered a beneficiary couple . as a result , they are entitled to a federal benefit of up to $1,011 per month and may have countable resources valued at up to $3,000 . the marriage of two ssi beneficiaries can have a negative effect on their eligibility for benefits and their total amount of benefits . as a married couple , both beneficiaries are presumed to have access to the couple's shared income and resources . compared with two single beneficiaries as single persons , a married couple has a lower resource limit , a lower maximum federal benefit , and a lower amount of excluded income as shown in table 1 . single ssi beneficiaries can have countable resources valued at up to $2,000 .