this report may be classified . the secretary was also required to report annually on the actions taken by the federal government to ensure the preparedness of the private sector to reduce interruptions in the operations of critical infrastructures associated with acts of terrorism or natural catastrophe , or other national emergency , in accordance with the defense production act of 1950 . this report is to go to the house financial services committee and the senate banking , housing , and urban affairs committee , in addition to the respective homeland security committees . the section did a number of things . it amended the homeland security act to include the requirement that the secretary of homeland security establish a national asset database . it also required the secretary to establish within this database a subset of assets that the secretary determines are most at risk . this subset of assets shall be called the national at - risk database . this requirement indicated that the house disagrees with the undersecretary that the national asset database should not include a prioritization of assets . section 902 also established a national asset database consortium , made up of representatives from at least two , but no more than four , national laboratories along with officials from other federal agencies with appropriate experience in working with and identifying critical infrastructure . is it a list of assets that are critical , or is it a list of assets that make up each of the critical sectors , with criticality to be determined later ? there appear to be two primary uses for the database: as a first step in a prioritization process that eventually will help focus risk reduction activities ; and , to provide a degree of situational awareness . the secretary is to secure recommendations from the consortium 60 days after this act is enacted . the section also required the secretary to annually review the database to examine assets in the database to determine if the information on these assets is incorrect or if they do not meet national asset guidelines used by the secretary to determine which assets should remain in the database . it required the secretary to remove from the database any asset whose information is not verifiable or which does not meet the nation asset guidelines . the requirement disagrees with the undersecretary's position that less - than - nationally - critical assets should remain in the database . also , the secretary is to provide the database to states for review and to meet annually with the states to discuss guidelines their submissions of information for the database . this requirement is in agreement with recommendations made by the inspector general . section 902 also required the secretary to ensure that the information contained in the database can be organized by sector , state , locality , and region . section 902 required the secretary to report to congress annually on those assets in the database considered to be most at risk . the report is to include name , location , and sector of each asset . it is also to include any changes in the criteria used to define or identify critical infrastructure and any changes in the compiling of the database .