, the "intent" requirement ) of these provisions . most of these provisions state that a violation occurs when a defendant commits an offense "knowing or in reckless disregard of the fact" that an alien's presence in the united states is in violation of the law . it is possible that similar legislation will be considered in the 111 th congress . this report describes the law that currently governs alien smuggling and then addresses how the recent legislative proposals would have changed the current law structurally and substantively . ina ยง 274 proscribes several types of activities that can be characterized as alien smuggling . these activities are characterized broadly , potentially criminalizing a wide range of activities . this is particularly apparent when analyzing the scienter element ( i.e. "reckless disregard" requires more than mere negligence , but it does not require that a defendant have actual knowledge that the alien he is assisting is in the country illegally . rather , "reckless disregard" requires a person to consciously disregard a substantial and unjustifiable risk , and such disregard must constitute a gross deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable person would exercise in the situation . thus , a violation would occur if a defendant chose to assist an alien in some manner when he "should have known" that the alien was in the united states illegally . the proposed legislation would have altered the current sentencing schema in several ways: unless stated otherwise , a violation of any act in ina ยง 274 would merit a fine , imprisonment for not more than five years , or both . if the offense involved the transit of the defendant's spouse , child , sibling , parent , grandparent , or niece or nephew , and the offense was not affected by the sentencing enhancements listed below , the defendant could be fined , imprisoned for not more than one year , or both . if the offense was for recruiting , encouraging , or inducing an alien to come to , enter , or reside in the united states , transporting or moving an alien in the united states , or harboring , concealing , or shielding from detection the alien in any place in the united states , for purposes of profit , commercial advantage , or private financial gain , the defendant could be fined , imprisoned for not more than 10 years , or both . if the offense was for bringing an alien into the united states in any manner whatsoever regardless of any future official action that may be taken with respect to the alien , for the purpose of profit , commercial advantage , or private financial gain , or if the offense was committed with the intent or reason to believe the alien would commit an offense against the united states or any state punishable by imprisonment for more than one year , the defendant could be fined for each violation , and / or imprisoned for not less than 3 and not more than 10 years for the first two offenses , and not less than 5 and not more than 15 years for each subsequent offense .