a subsequent decision by the d.c . circuit in horne brothers , inc. v. laird held that contractors are also entitled to due process in suspension determinations , although the court distinguished between suspensions of shorter and longer duration in finding that a contractor is entitled to pre - exclusion notice and an opportunity to be heard in suspensions of five months but not of three weeks . because of these and subsequent decisions , the far currently provides that contractors must generally receive notice and an opportunity for a hearing before being debarred , but can be suspended without prior notice or an opportunity to be heard so long as they are "immediately advised" of the suspension and allowed to offer information in opposition to the suspension within 30 days . circuit in gonzalez v. freeman . written by future chief justice warren burger , who was then a judge for the d.c . circuit , gonzalez held that while contractors may not have a right to government contracts , "that cannot mean that the government can act arbitrarily , either substantively or procedurally , against a person or that such a person is not entitled to challenge the processes and the evidence before he is officially declared ineligible for government contracts . for this reason , the court found that the commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) had improperly debarred the thos . p. gonzalez corporation , in part , because the ccc failed to provide written notice of the charges against the contractor and did not give the contractor "the opportunity to present evidence and to cross - examine adverse witnesses , all culminating in administrative findings and conclusions based upon the record. the judicially developed doctrine of de facto debarment can also serve to protect contractors from improper exclusion in certain circumstances . while the possibility of de facto debarment often arises in connection with agency conduct that also deprives the contractor of a protected liberty interest without due process , the de facto debarment analysis focuses primarily upon conduct outside the debarment and suspension process that effectively excludes contractors . for example , in its 1980 decision in old dominion dairy products , inc. v. secretary of defense , the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c . circuit found that the air force had improperly de facto debarred a contractor through repeated nonresponsibility determinations based on the same information . the air force had determined the contractor to be nonresponsible for the award of one contract because of an audit report showing three irregularities in billing statements . the air force never informed the contractor of these allegations , in part , because contractors do not routinely receive notice of nonresponsibility determinations concerning them . however , the contractor was later determined to be nonresponsible for the award of a second contract by another contracting officer , who had received news of the earlier determination and relied upon it to conclude that the contractor lacked integrity . the court found that the second nonresponsibility determination constituted an improper de facto debarment because the contractor was excluded from government contracts without any notice of or opportunity to challenge the allegations against it .