some studies have been optimistic about pipeline requirements for co 2 sequestration . 110-140 ) , signed by president bush , as amended , on december 19 , 2007 , requires the secretary of the interior to recommend legislation to clarify the appropriate framework for issuing co 2 pipeline rights - of - way on public land ( sec . this report examines key uncertainties in co 2 pipeline requirements for ccs by contrasting hypothetical pipeline scenarios in one region of the united states . the report summarizes the key factors influencing co 2 pipeline configuration for major power plants in the region , and illustrates how the viability of different sequestration sites may lead to enormous differences in pipeline costs . power plants , particularly coal - fired plants , are the most likely initial candidates for ccs because they are predominantly large , single - point sources , and they contribute approximately one - third of u.s. co 2 emissions from fossil fuels . the report discusses the implications of uncertain co 2 pipeline requirements for ccs as they relate to evolving federal policies for carbon control . infrastructure requirements and policy implications related to co 2 pipelines become clearer when considering what actual pipeline projects might look like . this section outlines contrasting scenarios for hypothetical co 2 pipeline development in the region covered by the midwest regional carbon sequestration partnership ( mrcsp ) . the mrcsp is one of seven regional partnerships of state agencies , universities , private companies , and non - governmental organizations established by the department of energy to assess ccs approaches . the mrcsp serves as a good illustration of co 2 pipeline issues because it has a varied mix of co 2 sources and potential geologic sequestration sites , and because geologists have completed a number of focused studies relevant to ccs in this region . the mrcsp pipeline scenarios , while only illustrative , nonetheless highlight several important policy considerations which may warrant congressional attention . these include concerns about co 2 pipeline costs , siting challenges , pipeline and sequestration site relationships , and differences in sequestration potential among regions . the socially and economically efficient development of the nation's public infrastructure is an important consideration for policymakers . the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l . yet there are many uncertainties about the cost and configuration of co 2 pipelines that would be needed to meet environmental goals within an emerging regulatory framework . exactly who will pay for co 2 pipelines , and how , is beyond the scope of this report , but understanding ways to minimize the cost and environmental impact of this infrastructure may be of benefit to all . in addition to specific questions about co 2 pipeline requirements , the scenarios in this report raise larger questions about the ultimate development and allocation of sequestration capacity under a national ccs policy . how much individual companies may have to spend to transport their co 2 depends upon where it has to go . however , even as viable sequestration reservoirs are being identified , it is unclear which co 2 source facilities will have access to them , under what time frame , and under what conditions .