if not , what could be done ? 109-282 ; 120 stat . 1186 ) — be viewed as an illustration of what could be done with evm information ? what would be the advantages and disadvantages ? the usefulness of evm metrics depends upon the quality and reliability of the cost , schedule , and functionality data that underlie both a project's baseline plan and its reports on work performed . given concerns that have been raised about the quality of agency capital investment business cases that are used to justify budget requests , as well as concerns that have been raised about the quality of agency project management , what might be options for congress to cause omb and agencies to improve any deficiencies in the underlying analyses and data that support capital investment decision making and reporting ? what might be the advantages and disadvantages of requiring independent , publicly accessible assessments — including verification and validation , as appropriate — of the underlying quality of evm data , including cost estimates and assessments of the functionality that is delivered in comparison with what was planned ? what might be the advantages and disadvantages of requiring independent , publicly accessible assessments of the capacity of agencies to manage the capital planning and investment control ( cpic ) process ( eg , agency capacity to research , formulate , plan , propose , develop , report on , operate , and evaluate major capital investments ) , which is arguably more fundamental as a driver of evm data quality ? would assessments of key capabilities be amenable to systematic oversight through the use of "scorecards," similar to those used under the bush administration's president's management agenda , albeit with transparency outside the executive branch and independent validation ? to the extent that omb currently identifies gaps in agency capabilities , to what extent do annual budget requests ( submitted to congress by the president ) and performance plans ( produced by agencies under the government performance and results act of 1993 , or gpra ; p.l . 103-62 ) address the gaps ? processes that support the capital investment process — including development of capital investment business cases , project management , evm , contract oversight , management auditing , and evaluation — depend for success , in large part , upon adequate staff and skill resources in agencies . have agencies allocated sufficient staff and financial resources to successfully undertake major capital investments ? how might such judgments be made ? also , do agencies have sufficient ability to recruit , retain , and train personnel in disciplines including project management , risk management , contract management and oversight , information technology , and program evaluation ? if so , what are their track records in recruiting , retaining , training , and allocating staff in sufficient number and competency in the management and oversight of major capital investments ? what might be the advantages , disadvantages , costs , and benefits of applying evm - related requirements to major capital investments , as appropriate , pursued by agencies in the legislative and judicial branches ? issues that are potentially related to evm are a significant subset of this larger picture .