this was changed with the enactment of ieepa . ieepa was enacted primarily , according to the senate report accompanying the legislation , as a direct response to expanding use of emergency power by presidents: the purpose of the bill is to revise and delimit the president's authority to regulate international economic transactions during wars or national emergencies . the bill is a response to two developments: first: extensive use by presidents of emergency authority under section 5 ( b ) of the trading with the enemy act of 1917 to regulate both domestic and international economic transactions unrelated to a declared state of emergency and , second , passage of nea , which provides safeguards for the role of congress in declaring and terminating national emergencies , but exempts section 5 ( b ) of the trading with the enemy act from its coverage . by restricting the use of twea section 5 ( b ) to wartime , ieepa draws a distinction between the power provided presidents in declaring peacetime national emergencies having their origin abroad and that available when war has been declared . nonetheless , because of the need to provide presidents with sufficient flexibility to respond to emergencies , the breadth of authority provided in ieepa is considerable with respect to affording powers to the president to impose economic sanctions in peacetime emergencies originating abroad . to use these powers , the president must declare a national emergency with respect to "any unusual and extraordinary threat , which has its source in whole or substantial part outside the united states , to the national security , foreign policy or economy of the united states. once such a national emergency has been declared , ieepa provides the president with broad power to impose controls over economic transactions involving transfers abroad and foreign property controls . ( 1 ) under ieepa , the president may "under such regulations as he may prescribe , by means of instructions , licenses , or otherwise ... investigate , regulate , or prohibit" any foreign exchange transaction , any transfers of credit or payments involving any foreign interest , and the import or export of currency or securities "by any person , or with respect to any property , subject to the jurisdiction of the united states. ( 2 ) ieepa also empowers the president to "investigate , block during pendency of an investigation , regulate , direct and compel , nullify , void , prevent or prohibit , any acquisition , holding , withholding , use , transfer , withdrawal , transportation , importation or exportation of , or dealing in , or exercising any right , power , or privilege with respect to , or transactions involving , any property in which any foreign country or national thereof has any interest by any person , or with respect to any property , subject to the jurisdiction of the united states. ( 3 ) ieepa does not provide authority to block international communications , information or informational materials .