crp payments are received under a "claim of right. no more than 45 million acres could be enrolled in the program . in the first year — crop year 1986 — the act required enrollment of at least 5 million acres . each year , through 1989 , the minimum was increased by 10 million acres . for the final year , the minimum was increased to 40 million acres . one - eighth of the land under contract was to be devoted to trees . under the program , owner / operators were required to follow a plan , approved by their local conservation district , to convert the enrolled land to a less intensive use according to a planned schedule and to establish an approved vegetative cover on the land . they were generally prohibited from using the land for agricultural purposes , and could not use the forage from the land commercially , whether for harvesting , grazing , or any other commercial purpose . in return , the owner / operators were to be reimbursed for half of the cost of the conservation measures when such cost - sharing was "appropriate and in the public interest. additionally , they were to be paid an "annual rental payment" in cash or commodities . however , full refunds of both the rental payments and the cost - share payments could be required in two situations: ( 1 ) violation of the contract sufficient to warrant termination of the contract , or ( 2 ) transfer of the owner / operator's rights and interests in the land to another who chose not to assume all the obligations of the contract . in case of termination , the act specified that the repayment was to be with interest . partial repayment might be required if the contract had been violated but the secretary of agriculture did not find termination appropriate . this is similar to the bright - line rule that treats income from hotels and motels as self - employment income , but treats longer - term real estate rentals as rental income . a bright - line rule for crp payments might be based on a determination by congress that the services required under the crp contracts are significant and payment for them is included in the crp "rent. this would eliminate the need to examine the services provided on a case - by - case basis . further , it would eliminate any arguable need to examine whether the participant was engaged in the trade or business of farming . the crp payments would be considered income from self - employment because they included compensation for significant services . with this bright - line rule , there would be no need to consider the extent of the services provided by the recipient on a case - by - case basis . a different bright - line rule could be established if congress were to choose to do so: a bright - line rule that crp payments are to be treated as rent that is not subject to self - employment tax .