formula factors . allocation formulas have one or more factors that target funds to seas , leas , or other entities to accomplish or facilitate some policy outcome . these are based on state or ( less frequently ) lea average per pupil expenditure for public k - 12 education . expenditure factors are intended to adjust for state or local differences in the costs of providing public k - 12 education , although they are often criticized as reflecting differences in ability to pay for educational services as well . , 100% ) or , more often , some lesser percentage ( eg , 85% ) . raising a state or lea to its hold harmless level almost always reduces grants to other states or leas that do not benefit from the hold harmless . hold harmless amounts are only guaranteed if funds are sufficient to pay for them . if not , hold harmless amounts are ratably reduced ( see below ) to meet the level of the appropriation . further , in almost all cases , hold harmless provisions only apply to grantees meeting program eligibility criteria for the current year , not necessarily every grantee that received a grant in the preceding year . foundation grant . under some esea programs , each state or lea first receives a "foundation grant" amount , then additional appropriations , if any , are allocated on the basis of a population and possibly other formula factors . if funds are insufficient to pay the full foundation grant amount , then each grantee receives an equal proportion of its foundation grant . the foundation grant may be an equal amount per grantee ( eg , $3 million per state ) or , more often , it is the amount received in a base year under one or more antecedent programs . the latter usually occurs when two or more programs are consolidated into one new program in a reauthorization of the esea . minimum state grant . in addition to hold harmless amounts ( see above ) , which are always expressed in terms of a percentage of a previous year grant , several programs have a state minimum grant expressed primarily in terms of a percentage of all allocations to states or as a fixed dollar amount per state . such minimum grant provisions are aimed at providing what advocates argue is a minimum 'viable' grant to all states . state minimums are set at a percentage of total state grants ( typically 0.25% , 0.35% , or 0.5% ) . occasionally , they are fixed dollar amounts ( eg , $500,000 ) or the greater ( or lesser ) of a fixed amount or a percentage of the total . in some cases , one or more "caps" may be placed on these minimums ( eg , a state minimum might be 0.25% of total state grants , subject to a cap of 150% of the national average grant per population factor child multiplied by the state total number of such children ) .