each candidate was considered separately . some allies have criticized the map process . they contend that it is primarily a creation of the united states , and that the ultimate decision on whether map requirements are met is made principally in washington . they say , for example , that the full range of qualifications outlined in the map in the 2003 round of enlargement was not adequately assessed for several states that became members of the alliance . they contend , therefore , that designation of candidate states as prospective members is above all a political process , and that actual accomplishment of requirements is secondary to the will of the alliance's leader . u.s. officials dispute this characterization . at the same time , the two governments have evidently made considerable progress in military reform , and their populations overwhelmingly support nato membership . croatia has a settled political environment . a somewhat narrow majority of its population supports nato membership , a figure that has been rising in recent months . these issues will be more fully discussed below . the member states had hoped to make a preliminary determination about invitations at a nato foreign ministers' meeting on march 6 , 2008 , but resolution of the issue surrounding macedonia's name , and other issues , prevented a collective decision . at least two governments , france and germany , expressed reservations about offering the map to georgia and ukraine . at bucharest , other governments such as spain and italy shared the french and german view . the allies will draw up and sign a protocol for albania and croatia , probably by the end of july 2008 . the protocol will outline nato's expectations of the two prospective members . the protocol will then be deposited with each allied government . from that point , member governments will go through their constitutional processes to amend the washington treaty and admit a new state or states . in some member states , such as the united kingdom , the government has the authority to determine whether the executive alone may decide to admit a state nominated for entry , or instead , if issues of broad significance are involved , may send the protocol to parliament for approval . at the other end of the spectrum , the netherlands has a meticulous , time - consuming process involving a parliamentary study and debate before a final vote is taken . nato hopes to admit prospective candidate states at its next summit , to be held on the french - german border , scheduled for late 2009 . the united states senate has the constitutional authority to give its advice and consent by a two - thirds majority to the amendment of any treaty . in the case of nato enlargement , it must decide whether to amend the washington treaty to commit the united states to defend additional geographic territory . the senate foreign relations committee is the committee holding the initial authority to consider the issue . both the senate foreign relations committee and the full senate may decide whether to vote on each candidate state separately , or all together .