at least for the muslim republics… . [in fact,] the north caucasus is not under russia's control … in terms of either mentality , or law , or security… . the sooner that russia amputates this diseased organ , the fewer negative consequences [growing foreign islamic influence] will have on the main part of russia. he also warned that much of russia's re - development budget allotted to the north caucasus is being used by local "business interests" to deepen their influence throughout russia by buying up domestic firms . the united states and several other countries and international organizations have maintained that while russia has the right to protect its citizenry from terrorist attacks , it should not use "disproportionate" methods that violate the human rights of innocent bystanders . they have objected to russia's 2006 counter - terrorism law , which permits police and other security forces to declare a "counter - terrorism operations regime" in a locality and to detain suspects for up to 30 days , search homes , ban public assemblies , and restrict media activities without any pre - approval by the courts or legislative oversight . as a result of this and other permissive laws and government actions , human rights watch , a nongovernmental organization , has argued that russia's security forces "believe they may act with impunity when carrying out any operation related to counter - terrorism. the u.n. human rights committee in october 2009 reflected these concerns when it urged russia to "take stringent measures to put an end to enforced disappearances , extrajudicial killings , torture , and other forms of ill - treatment and abuse committed or instigated by law enforcement officials in chechnya and other parts of the north caucasus ; ensure the prompt and impartial investigations by an independent body of all human rights violations allegedly committed or instigated by state agents , [and] prosecute perpetrators," among other measures . instead , the evidence has pointed to the lack of professionalism and discipline among law enforcement agencies and to a cowed judiciary . mr. marty indicated his deep dismay that the coe's committee of ministers has failed to take russia's human rights record into full account in assessing russia's compliance with the commitments of membership in the coe . mr. marty's report was considered by the coe's parliamentary assembly in june 2010 . for the first time , the russian delegation voted in favor of a coe report on the north caucasus . members of the russian delegation , including yunus - bek yevkurov , the president of ingushetia , and leonid slutskiy , a duma deputy , expressed agreement with much of mr. marty's "balanced and accurate" report , but they argued that the human rights situation in the region was much improved compared to the past and that russia needed the support of the coe to carry out further reforms . they also alleged that foreigners had fostered much of the terrorism in the region , but mr. marty replied that "infiltration had taken place because injustice in the region had created fertile ground for radicalization," and called for yevkurov to denounce human rights abuses by his security services .