the 2008 farm bill ( sec . 15101 ) of the 2008 farm bill authorizes a series of new disaster programs through september 30 , 2011 , the largest of which is a supplemental revenue assistance payment program for crop producers . the sure program is designed to compensate eligible producers for a portion of crop losses that are not eligible for an indemnity payment under the crop insurance program ( i.e. , the portion of losses that is part of the deductible on the policy. ) an eligible producer can receive a payment equal to 60% of the difference between a target level of revenue and the actual total farm revenue for the entire farm . the target level of revenue would be based on the level of crop insurance coverage selected by the farmer , thus increasing if a farmer opts for higher levels of coverage . ( see the box in this report for a description of how the guarantee level and total farm revenue are defined by the statute. ) to be eligible for a payment , a producer must be either in or contiguous to a county that has been declared a disaster area by either the president or the secretary of agriculture . agriculture is generally viewed as an inherently risky enterprise . farm production levels can vary significantly from year to year and by location , primarily because farmers operate at the mercy of nature , and frequently are subjected to weather - related and other natural disasters . since the great depression , policymakers have decided that the federal government should absorb some portion of the weather - related production losses that otherwise would depress farm income and could alter farmers' decisions about what to produce in some high - risk locations . federal crop insurance is the primary ongoing crop loss assistance program . it is permanently authorized by the federal crop insurance act , as amended ( 7 u.s.c . 1501 et seq .

 ) , and is administered by the u.s. department of agriculture's risk management agency ( rma ) . this is complemented with the non - insured assistance program , administered by the farm service agency ( fsa ) , which is available to producers not offered insurance coverage . lack of insurance availability occurs in locations where there is insufficient production history to determine actuarial risks of a crop or in regions where production of a specific commodity is relatively small . following a widespread and severe drought in 1988 , congress approved a large ad hoc disaster assistance program to supplement the ongoing disaster programs . such ad hoc assistance subsequently has became routine . for more information on currently available agricultural disaster assistance , see crs report rs21212 , agricultural disaster assistance . since the federal crop insurance program is permanently authorized , it does not require periodic reauthorization in an omnibus farm bill . however , during the 2007-2008 farm bill debate , some policymakers expressed interest in revising the crop insurance program in the context of the farm bill with two goals: to score cost savings and / or to supplement it with a permanent disaster payment program . ultimately , the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .