government. the enacted law ( p.l . 110-161 ) did not include the shift in funds . the future of the reconstruction and stabilization initiative — congress may consider whether to codify the existence s / crs by adding its authorization to the state department basic authorities act of 1956 , and to increase s / crs authority to lead and coordinate a government - wide response to international reconstruction and stabilization . and how receptive will people in other countries be to the new u.s. initiatives ? the following are examples of international reactions to the administration's transformational diplomacy plan . the state department intends to increase u.s. representation through the global repositioning initiative in three of these countries , china , indonesia , and malaysia . except for needed appropriations , congressional involvement in the implementation of the transformational diplomacy proposal appears to some observers to have been minimal . changes were made under existing authorities , and no legislation or new authority was requested from congress . in 2007 , at the state department's request , congress considered but did not move forward , bills to authorize the full implementation of the civilian response corps in the "reconstruction and stabilization civilian management act of 2007 ( s. 613 / h.r . as the proposal continues to be implemented , increased transformational diplomacy - related appropriations may be requested . congress may also exercise its oversight responsibilities to monitor the effect that transformational diplomacy has on achieving foreign policy goals , maintaining a top quality foreign service , and providing the best possible representation around the world . some areas of consideration may include the following: foreign service personnel and security issues — reports of personnel shortfalls at the department of state , because of the staffing effects of iraq , afghanistan , and the new transformational diplomacy proposal , and the lack of authority to expand the number of positions may need to be addressed in future appropriations and authorizations . concern about adequate security may also need to be monitored as foreign service personnel are regularly posted to more difficult and dangerous assignments . monitoring the impact of transformational diplomacy on foreign service morale , recruitment , and attrition may be required to maintain a strong and effective diplomatic representation of america overseas in the future . funding — while the 110 th congress passed the fy2007 continuing appropriations ( p.l . 110-5 ) , which included funding for the department of state , no fy2007 money was provided specifically to implement transformational diplomacy as requested by the administration . instead , funds were reprogrammed from other accounts within state to handle early implementation . in order to implement transformational diplomacy changes in fy2008 , the department of state is requesting a total of $124.8 million: $20.8 million for training , $14.6 million for reconstruction and stabilization , $39.9 million for global repositioning , $34.5 million for foreign service modernization , and $15 million for public diplomacy . through the appropriation and authorization process , congress will likely provide oversight and funding for the plan . foreign assistance in the future — the administration's foreign assistance reform proposals appear to some as already being amended by congress .