appendix a . how the endangered species act works: consultation under the esa ( 16 u.s.c . century ? millennium ? if the flow is lowered still further , how much greater does the risk to the species become , and is that level of risk acceptable ? if a higher risk is tolerated , a lower flow could be acceptable ; if only a low risk of extinction is acceptable , then higher flows would be desirable . in the acf context , instead of setting itself the difficult or impossible task of determining the minimum flow necessary for the various species , fws instead accepted the far more specific task of determining whether any one plan offers sufficient flows to avoid jeopardy to the species . it is noteworthy that in the acf case , fws limited its opinion to a specific period of months , not years , and further requested additional studies and data from the corps . only then does fws , presumably with more data in hand , plan to address the risks from any further cutbacks in flows . ยง 1531 ) , the taking of species listed as endangered or threatened is prohibited . taking is broadly defined and includes not only obvious actions such as killing or trapping , but also harming . ( see 50 c.f.r ยง 17.3 for a definition of harm . ) in addition , under ยง 7 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( 16 u.s.c . ยง 1536 ( a ) ( 2 ) ) , federal agencies must insure that their actions are not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any listed species or result in the destruction or adverse modification of designated critical habitat . to that end , they must consult with fws . the consultation process is described below , in simplified form . federal agencies must consult with fws on "any action authorized , funded , or carried out by such agency" if that action may harm a listed species or its critical habitat ( 16 u.s.c . if fws advises the action agency that a listed species , or one proposed for listing , may be present in the affected area , then the action agency must conduct a biological assessment ( ba ) describing its proposed action . according to fws regulations , the purpose of the ba is to "evaluate the potential effects of the action on listed and proposed species and designated and proposed critical habitat and determine whether any such species or habitat are likely to be adversely affected by the action ..." ( 50 c.f.r . if , with the help of information in the ba , formal consultation between the agency and fws is determined to be necessary , either because of potential taking of the species or effects on critical habitat , the action agency submits a formal request for consultation . the action agency must provide the best scientific data available regarding its action and potential effects of the action on the species or its critical habitat . once a request for formal consultation is submitted , certain deadlines apply , but these may be extended when additional information is needed ( 50 c.f.r .