these three steps are organized as follows: 1 . the joint capabilities integration and development system — for identifying requirements . the planning , programming , budgeting , and execution system — for allocating resources and budgeting . the defense acquisition system — for developing and / or buying the item . these three steps ( each of which is a system onto itself ) , taken together , are often referred to as "big 'a'" acquisition , in contrast to the defense acquisition system , which is referred to as "little 'a'" acquisition ( see figure 1 ) . programs are divided into acquisition categories ( acats ) based primarily on program cost . the level of management oversight of an acquisition program increases as the cost of the program increases . the most significant dod and congressional oversight activities apply to mdaps , which are categorized as acat i programs . table 1 illustrates the thresholds and decision authorities for all acats . concerns over defense acquisitions generally center around significant cost overruns , schedule delays , and an inability to provide troops in the field with the equipment they need when they need it . many analysts believe that cost overruns and schedule delays have a debilitating effect on the nation's military and threaten america's technological advantage and military capabilities . for more than 50 years , both congress and dod have initiated numerous attempts to improve defense acquisitions . despite the numerous initiatives , studies and reports ( many of which echo the same themes and highlight the same weaknesses in the acquisition process ) , congressional hearings , and legislative fixes , dod acquisition reform efforts have failed to rein in cost and schedule growth . in recent years , dod and congress have taken another look at defense acquisitions and embarked on an effort to improve the process . some analysts believe that the efforts currently underway are the most comprehensive in more than 20 years . in recent years , dod has embarked on a number of initiatives aimed at improving the process for buying weapon systems . for example: on january 10 , 2012 , dod issued updated versions of the instructions charter of the joint requirements oversight council and joint capabilities integration and development system . these and other related dod initiatives generally focus on rewriting the rules and regulations to create a more efficient and effective acquisition process , improving the culture and professionalism of the acquisition workforce , and improving the overall performance of the acquisition system . although these efforts are not aimed solely at weapon system acquisition , if such efforts succeed in improving acquisitions writ large , weapon system acquisitions should similarly improve . in recent years , the primary mechanism through which congress has exercised its legislative powers to reform the defense acquisition structure has been the annual national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) . sections of the acts have prescribed requirements applicable to both specific acquisition programs and acquisition structure overall , the latter of which has typically been addressed in section viii , usually titled "acquisition policy , acquisition management , and related matters.