according to u.s . ambassador to vietnam david shear , "agent orange remains among the most sensitive issues in u.s. - vietnam relations. over the last decade , there has been a groundswell of concern among the vietnamese people about the continuing problems of environmental damage and illnesses associated with agent orange . some non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) in vietnam are seeking compensation or assistance from the u.s. government and the manufacturers of agent orange . partially in response to this rising tide of popular concern , the vietnamese government has raised the profile of this issue in various bilateral fora with u.s. officials , including the june 2008 summit between president bush and prime minister nguyen tan dung . vietnam's government is divided on the issue of whether to seek greater u.s. assistance with the agent orange / dioxin issue . vietnam's ministry of defense ( mod ) and various veterans groups are among the more vocal advocates of seeking more u.s. assistance . similarly , the ministry of health ( moh ) ; the ministry of labour , war invalids , and social affairs ( molisa ) ; and the ministry of natural resources and the environment ( monre ) would like to see the united states increase its assistance . however , the ministry of agriculture and rural development ( mard ) is concerned that by drawing attention to the continued pervasive presence of dioxin in the vietnam's environment , other nations may restrict or prohibit the import of vietnamese crops , aquatic products , meats and poultry , and processed foods supposedly for health reasons . some officials in vietnam's ministry of foreign affairs ( mofa ) are also apprehensive that greater pressure on the united states on the agent orange / dioxin issue may have an adverse impact on other important bilateral issues , such as vietnam's application to the u.s. generalized system of preference program or the ongoing trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) negotiations . according to one vietnamese estimate , there are up to 5 million vietnamese spanning three generations who have medical conditions that are purported to be related to exposure to agent orange and similar herbicides — and more importantly , their accompanying dioxin — that the u.s. military sprayed across much of south vietnam as part of operation ranch hand . the vietnamese government and various vietnamese interest groups have long sought u.s. assistance with the cleanup of the residual dioxin in vietnam , as well as financial support to provide medical treatment to people exposed to agent orange . the official u.s. response to date has been to deny any legal liability and to contest that the medical conditions are related to exposure to agent orange and dioxin . the vietnamese government and people have objected to these denials given the level of support provided to u.s. veterans who were presumably exposed to agent orange and the extensive cleanup efforts made at love canal , times beach , and other u.s. locations found to have elevated levels of dioxin in the soil .