appendix a . historical context the complexities of technical assistance emerged through incremental policy changes over time . should this authority be extended ? will the limitations of the cap continue to affect other agencies funded through the ccc ? if additional legislative changes are made to the section 11 cap , what effect would this have on conservation technical assistance ? when the federal agriculture conservation effort was limited primarily to soil erosion control and water supply , technical assistance was limited in the number of resource concerns addressed as well as funding . technical assistance has expanded in both scope and funding recently , and has been brought to the forefront of the debate for both implementation and funding levels . how this process evolved is discussed below . federal conservation assistance not until the 1930s and the occurrence of the dust bowl did soil conservation become a national priority . on august 25 , 1933 , through the use of public works program funding , the department of the interior ( doi ) created the soil erosion service . in march 1935 , the president ordered soil erosion service moved to the usda . the severity of soil erosion at the time helped gain congressional support for the passage of the soil conservation and domestic allotment act ( p.l . 74-46 , 49 stat . 163 ) in april 1935 , establishing the soil conservation service ( scs ) within the usda . the scs was established for the purpose of providing "permanently for the control and prevention of soil erosion and thereby to preserve natural resources , control floods , prevent impairment of reservoirs , and maintain the navigability of rivers and harbors , protect public health , public lands and relieve unemployment. following the enactment of the 1935 legislation creating the scs , most of the services provided to landowners were through demonstration projects . agreements ( usually five years in length ) were entered into with landowners who agreed to contribute access to their land , labor , and some resources in exchange for following a conservation plan . the scs provided technical assistance , materials , labor ( using the civilian conservation corps and emergency conservation work camps ) . the overlapping mission with other federal and state agencies ( the extension service and land grant universities in particular ) and limited landowner buy - in forced the usda to look toward more localized entities to carry out these demonstrations . this brought about the establishment of the soil conservation districts . model state legislation to create and operate districts was presented to state governors in february 1937 by president franklin d. roosevelt , who encouraged adoption . this level of interest directly from the president highlights the significant level of political support for soil conservation during this time . in 1937 , twenty - two states passed legislation creating districts . following the creation of these districts , scs increasingly concentrated on providing technical assistance to farmers through these new local entities . the current role of conservation districts is discussed in the " outlook for technical assistance " section , above . expansion of technical assistance the scs mission has expanded beyond soil erosion and conservation assistance through multiple legislative and administrative mandates .