in contrast , h.r . 3590 , the senate - passed bill , would prohibit exchange plans from discriminating against any individual health care provider or health care facility because of its unwillingness to provide , pay for , provide coverage of , or refer for abortions . this legislation is discussed in the next section . the abortion non - discrimination act ( anda ) has been introduced in every congress since the 107 th congress . in general , anda would amend the nondiscrimination provision in the phsa to expand the definition of the term "health care entity" to include hospitals , provider - sponsored organizations , health maintenance organizations ( hmos ) , health insurance plans , or any other kind of health care facility , organization , or plan . supporters of anda maintain that expanding the definition of "health care entity" is necessary because some state legislatures and courts have weakened existing conscience clause protections , which proponents view as critical to shielding religious hospitals and other medical providers that oppose abortion . opponents contend , however , that anda would impose serious restrictions on a woman's access to abortion . critics also argue that anda would allow providers to drop abortion coverage not only for moral or religious reasons , but also for financial reasons , such as the desire to save money by reducing coverage . although anda has not been considered by recent congresses , conscience clause provisions with similar language were inserted in the fy2005 , fy2006 , and fy2008 appropriations measures for the departments of labor , hhs , and education . these provisions are commonly referred to as the weldon amendment because they were added to the fy2005 appropriations measure following the adoption of an amendment offered by representative dave weldon . the language used in the appropriations measures has remained the same since 2004 . the provisions state: none of the funds made available in this act may be made available to a federal agency or program , or to a state or local government , if such agency , program , or government subjects any institutional or individual health care entity to discrimination on the basis that the health care entity does not provide , pay for , provide coverage of , or refer for abortions . the weldon amendment defines the term "health care entity" to include "an individual physician or other health care professional , a hospital , a provider - sponsored organization , a health maintenance organization , a health insurance plan , or any other kind of health care facility , organization , or plan. the weldon amendment prevents the federal government and state and local governments from enacting policies that require health care entities to provide or pay for certain abortion - related services . in addition , the weldon amendment increases both the number and type of health care providers and professionals who could refuse to provide abortion training or services without reprisals . for example , prior law protected only individual doctors or medical training programs that did not provide abortions or abortion training , and appeared to apply primarily in the medical education setting or to doctors in their individual practices .