the wia programs are briefly described below . the three formula grant programs for youth , adult , and dislocated workers provide funding for employment and training activities provided by the national system of one - stop career centers . statutory formulas distribute funds to states on the basis of measures of unemployment and poverty status for youth and adult allocations and unemployment measures only for dislocated worker allocations . states in turn distribute funds , again by formula , to local workforce investment boards . rtaa participants that work more than 20 hours per week but less than full - time are required to be enrolled in a training program to receive the rtaa wage supplements . title v of the older americans act of 1965 ( oaa ; p.l . 89-73 , as amended ) authorizes the community service employment for older americans ( cseoa ) program , also known as the senior community service employment program ( scsep ) . administered by dol , its purpose is to promote part - time employment opportunities in community service for unemployed low - income persons aged 55 or older and who have poor employment prospects . the program is the primary job creation program for adults since the elimination of public service employment previously authorized under wia's predecessor legislation . a variety of benefits may be available for unemployed workers . when eligible workers lose their jobs , the unemployment compensation ( uc ) program may provide income support through the payment of uc benefits . as discussed above , the wia statute mandates connections between the nation's one - stop system and a number of other employment , education , and social service programs . two of these one - stop partners also specifically fund employment and training activities for their particular populations: workers affected by trade - related layoffs and low - income older americans . approved training programs include a number of governmental and private programs and may last up to 104 weeks . in fy2011 , more than 86,000 workers participated in taa - funded training . training for taa - certified workers is funded out of the taa reemployment services funding annually allocated to each state . under the 2011 reauthorization ( p.l . 112-40 ) , $575 million is distributed each year using a formula that considers the number of recent taa - certified individuals in a state and the local cost of providing training . in addition to training activities , states must fund administrative activities and case management out of their reemployment services allocation . older workers who opt for the rtaa program ( described previously in this report ) and work full - time may not receive training assistance . while cseoa aims to move participants into subsidized employment , it also recognizes that older people who have special needs may need to remain in subsidized employment . however , program participation is limited to 48 months . in addition to the benefits described previously , taa - certified workers are eligible for training assistance . the program also supplements the income for some workers who cannot find jobs in the private economy . for fy2012 , cseoa funding of $448.3 million represented 23% of oaa funds .