for this purpose , a measure having the text of s.j.res . 42 , stating only that congress "does favor" the proposed agreement , would not suffice , because no statutory provision authorizes an agreement subject to congressional disapproval either to take effect , or to take effect before the conclusion of the period defined by the aea , simply because congress states its approval . section ( a ) ( 2 ) of p.l . 99-183 , granting conditional approval to the agreement with china , contained a provision of this kind . in the absence of such a provision , the provision of section 123. for automatic unconditional approval at the end of the 90 days would presumably continue to apply , so that in spite of the conditional approval , and unless the joint resolution of disapproval specified by section 130.i . were enacted into law , the agreement might take effect without conditions at the end of the period . the president might also be able to vitiate an attempt by congress to place conditions on its approval of the agreement with russia by vetoing the measure . unless congress could override the veto ( or secure enactment into law of a joint resolution of disapproval ) , the agreement would then instead go into effect without conditions at the end of the period prescribed in accordance with section 123 . finally , congress might act on a measure enabling the proposed agreement with russia to take effect immediately , without conditions . rather , any such measure would presumably have to state explicitly that the agreement could take effect upon enactment notwithstanding the provisions of section 123. of the aea . disapproval might also be accomplished by legislative "riders" on an omnibus appropriations bill or in any other measure . under its general legislative power , congress could also determine the status of the agreement by acting on a measure other than the one prescribed by the statute . such action occurred in the 99 th congress ( 1985-1986 ) , when congress enacted a measure ( p.l . 99-183 ) providing that a nuclear cooperation agreement with china would become effective only when certain further conditions were met . just as with the disapproval resolution specified by the statute , however , any such measure would have to be enacted before the end of period required by the aea , because otherwise the agreement as submitted would automatically go into effect . on the other hand , inasmuch as any such alternative measure would not meet the requirements of section 130.i . for a joint resolution of disapproval , the measure would not be eligible for consideration under the expedited procedures of section 130.i . instead , each house would have to consider it under its regular legislative procedures ( unless it chose , in accordance with its own general procedures , to apply the expedited procedure to the alternative measure ) . any measure granting approval with conditions to the proposed agreement with russia would presumably have to contain language specifying that its provisions apply "notwithstanding section 123. of the atomic energy act of 1954 , as amended. in light of these developments , this report is being archived and will not be updated .