id . , at 25 ; see id . this followed from the court's concern that large contributions could be given "to secure a political quid pro quo . ibid . the buckley court explained that the potential for quid pro quo corruption distinguished direct contributions to candidates from independent expenditures . the court emphasized that "the independent expenditure ceiling ... fails to serve any substantial governmental interest in stemming the reality or appearance of corruption in the electoral process," id . , at 47-48 , because "[t]he absence of prearrangement and coordination ... alleviates the danger that expenditures will be given as a quid pro quo for improper commitments from the candidate," id . the supreme court then concluded in citizens united : limits on independent expenditures ... have a chilling effect extending well beyond the government's interest in preventing quid pro quo corruption . the anticorruption interest is not sufficient to displace the speech here in question . *** for the reasons explained above , we now conclude that independent expenditures , including those made by corporations , do not give rise to corruption or the appearance of corruption . the same considerations in allowing an exception to first amendment principles in prohibiting contractor "contributions" to candidates , therefore , may not necessarily be present to justify a similar government restriction on contractor "expenditures" for independent political speech . furthermore , it should be noted that subsequent to citizens united , courts have been willing to more critically examine limitations on "contributions" than in the past . one state supreme court , for example , has invalidated that state's law against campaign contributions to state candidates by "sole source" government contractors as an unconstitutionally overbroad intrusion into the first amendment rights of state contractors . additionally , campaign "contribution" limitations under federal law which the federal election commission sought to apply to contributions to groups making only independent expenditures was , subsequent to citizens united , found unconstitutional by the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia . it is obvious that congress may and does institute various conditions and requirements on the receipt of federal funds . although the cases discussed in the preceding section found , to one degree or another , an "unconstitutional condition" on the receipt of federal funds by private parties ( by restricting the use of the recipient's own resources for protected first amendment advocacy as a condition to receive funds ) , the supreme court has permitted the government to require a restriction on the use of a recipient's own funds for certain speech within a particular program when that program is even partially funded with federal funds . in rust v. sullivan , a provision restricting participants in certain programs funded by the government from providing abortion counseling was upheld by the supreme court . the court did note that the restriction examined there was , however , a restriction going only to the program which was partially federally funded , and not a restriction on the recipient of the funds , who could continue separately and independently to counsel on abortion or even to perform abortions apart from the federally funded program .