appendix a . existing bomber fleet this appendix presents additional information on the air force's existing fleet of b - 2 , b - 1b , and b - 52h bombers . b - 2 bomber may 2009 air force testimony the air force testified in may 2009 that: the b - 2 spirit advanced technology bomber provides a lethal combination of stealth , range , payload , and precision engagement . the b - 2 remains the world's sole long - range , low observable bomber , and the only platform capable of delivering 80 independently targeted gbu - 38s . b - 2 availability has steadily increased over the past five years , due in large part to focused efforts to enhance low observable maintenance such as the highly successful alternate high frequency material program . however , it still faces increasing pressures to upgrade avionics originally designed over twenty years ago . the three - increment extremely high frequency satellite communications and computer upgrade program ( ehf satcom and computer upgrade ) seeks first , in increment 1 , to upgrade the spirit's flight management computers as an enabler for future avionics efforts . increment 2 integrates the family of beyond - line - of - sight terminals ( fab - t ) along with a low observable antenna to provide secure , survivable strategic two - way communications , while increment 3 will connect the b - 2 into the global information grid . increment 1 of ehf satcom and computer upgrade is currently in engineering and manufacturing development ( emd ) and on track to begin procurement in fy11 for fleet installation beginning at the end of fy13 . the b - 2 is also replacing the original radar antenna and upgrading selected radar avionics as part of the radar modernization program ( rmp ) to change the radar operating frequency . rmp recently recovered from development challenges and has been approved to enter production . the lrip contract for the first six production radar kits was signed on 29 december 2008 , with the second and final buy for the remaining seven shipsets slated for later this year . seven radar shipsets were also bought during development and are currently being installed in fleet aircraft to round out the 20 aircraft b - 2 fleet ; the developmental units will be retrofitted to the final production configuration . thanks in large part to congressional support , the rmp acquisition strategy was modified to include both life - of - type component buys to avoid diminishing manufacturing issues during the production run , and advance procurement to recover five months of the schedule lost while resolving the rmp integration issues during development . march 2009 gao report a march 2009 gao report provides summary assessments of the b - 2 radar modernization program ( rmp ) and the b - 2 advanced extremely high frequency ( ehf ) satcom modernization program . air force fact sheet an online air force fact sheet on the b - 2 bomber dated april 2008 stated the following: mission the b - 2 spirit is a multi - role bomber capable of delivering both conventional and nuclear munitions .