quantities of this stored water are periodically released into the delta . pumps situated at the southern edge of the delta eventually lift the water into canals for transport south.... " both projects acquired appropriative rights , receiving several permits at various points between 1927 and 1967 . the delta and its ecosystem are also affected by contaminants from urban and agricultural runoff . two major water projects transfer water throughout the state . the central valley project ( cvp ) is a federal project run by the u.s. bureau of reclamation ( reclamation ) . the state water project ( swp ) is run by the california department of water resources ( dwr ) . the projects "divert water from the rivers that flow into the delta and store the water in reservoirs . section 8 of the reclamation act of 1902 requires reclamation to comply with state law , including requiring reclamation to acquire water rights for the cvp . if reclamation found it necessary to take the water rights of other users , those users would be entitled to just compensation . in some cases , reclamation found it necessary to enter into "settlement" or "exchange" contracts with water users who had rights pre - dating the cvp . the state water resources control board ( the board ) is the state agency charged with water supply and water quality issues . it is authorized to regulate water rights permits and to regulate water pollution and quality control . fish and wildlife service completed consultations and issued a new biological opinion in late 2008 . this decision required federal and state entities to reduce pumping water in two large water projects and therefore has had significant effects on the water supply of california . in a july 2008 decision , the same judge indicated that restrictive measures may also be necessary for another species . in 1959 , the state enacted the delta protection act , which provided a specific law to govern delta waters based on the unique problems posed by the delta . the delta protection act provides for protections against the two major problems — salinity control and adequate supply . these problems stem from an "uneven distribution of water resources. quantitatively , the areas in california in which demand for water is highest are also the areas in which the supply is lowest , causing shortages for users — largely south of the delta . qualitatively , the delta is affected by saltwater intrusion , caused by the inflow of saline tidal waters and the diversion of fresh water that would normally counterbalance the inflow . over the decades since the construction of the water projects , there has been extensive litigation regarding water rights , delta water management , and the regulation of permits and standards for water in the delta . some of the ensuing court decisions have affected the overall management of the delta and are summarized in the following paragraphs . although water law is traditionally a matter left to the states , congress has taken a role in the regulation of waters under its constitutional authority to regulate channels of interstate commerce . for instance , reclamation law typically regulates water supplied via federal reclamation projects .