the act imposes four new requirements . first , starting with taxable years beginning after march 23 , 2012 , hospitals will be required to conduct a "community health needs assessment" in the current or past two taxable years and adopt an implementation strategy to meet those needs . the assessment must be made publicly available and take into account input from persons representing the broad interests of the community , including those with public health knowledge or expertise . an organization that fails to meet the assessment requirement for the taxable year will be subject to a new excise tax equal to $50,000 . additionally , hospitals will be required to describe on the form 990 how the needs identified in the assessment are being met and explain why any identified needs are not being addressed . second , starting with taxable years beginning after march 23 , 2010 , hospitals are required to have written financial assistance and emergency medical care policies . the financial assistance policy must address eligibility criteria for financial assistance , the application process , and whether the assistance includes free or discounted care . there is no definition in the tax code for the term "charitable. the emergency medical care policy must require the hospital to provide , "without discrimination," care for emergency medical conditions to individuals regardless of their eligibility for financial assistance . third , with respect to emergency and other medically necessary care , hospitals may not charge individuals eligible under the financial assistance policy more than the lowest amounts charged to those with insurance coverage . hospitals are also prohibited from using gross charges . these rules apply to taxable years beginning after march 23 , 2010 . fourth , hospitals are required to make reasonable efforts to determine whether an individual is eligible for financial assistance before beginning extraordinary collection actions . this provision applies to taxable years beginning after march 23 , 2010 . the treasury department is directed to issue necessary regulations and guidance , including guidance on whether a hospital has made reasonable efforts to determine a patient's eligibility under its financial assistance policy . an official at the treasury department has been quoted as saying that guidance on the act's provisions is needed "sooner rather than later," although she did not offer specifics . under the act , the treasury secretary will also be required to review , at least once every three years , the community benefit activities of any hospital subject to the new requirements . additionally , he or she , in consultation with the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) , will be required to annually provide congress with information on the charity care , bad debt expenses , and unreimbursed costs for services provided under means and non - means tested government programs of private tax - exempt , taxable , and government - owned hospitals , in addition to the costs of community benefit activities by private tax - exempt hospitals . a report on trends in this information is due within five years of the act's enactment .