the forest service is funded through the interior appropriations bill . 2829 , the financial services and general government appropriations act , 2008 . the enacted amount is between the amounts for cftc in the house and senate bills . the house bill provided $102.6 million for the cftc as an appropriation from the general fund . the senate amount was $116 million and was in h.r . mandatory spending decreased about $7 billion overall from fy2007 . mandatory transfers for the farm commodity programs decreased $10 billion because of less need for price - triggered income support , while food stamp benefits rose about $2.2 billion ( +4.2% ) . the appropriations bill for agriculture and related agencies covers all of usda except for the forest service . this amounts to about 94% of usda's total appropriation . the food and drug administration ( fda ) regulates the safety of foods and the safety and effectiveness of drugs , biologics ( eg , vaccines ) , and medical devices . now part of the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , fda was originally housed in the department of agriculture . the agriculture appropriation subcommittees still keep jurisdiction over the fda budget . fda's budget has two components: direct appropriations and user fees . for fy2008 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l . 110-161 ) provides a direct appropriation of $1.72 billion to fda , $142.5 million ( 9.1% ) more than the fy2007 enacted appropriation and $76 million ( 4.6% ) more than the president's request . for the entire fda budget ( direct appropriations and user fees ) , consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l . 110-161 ) provides fda $2.27 billion , compared with $2.07 billion in the president's request and $2.01 billion in the fy2007 appropriation . table 7 displays , by program area , the budget authority ( direct appropriations ) , user fees , and total program levels enacted for fy2007 , requested in the president's fy2008 budget , and enacted for fy2008 . the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) is the independent regulatory agency charged with oversight of derivatives markets . the cftc's functions include oversight of trading on the futures exchanges , registration and supervision of futures industry personnel , prevention of fraud and price manipulation , and investor protection . among the relatively short list of programs that are not extended are the farm commodity programs for the 2008 crop year . the agriculture appropriations bill includes all of usda ( except the forest service ) , plus the food and drug administration ( fda ) in the department of health and human services , and the commodity futures trading commission ( cftc ) . although most futures trading is now related to financial variables ( interest rates , currency prices , and stock indexes ) , congressional oversight remains vested in the agricultural committees because of the market's historical origins as an adjunct to agricultural trade . to fund the cftc at the $116 million level , a fee of about 5¢ per transaction on the futures exchanges would be required . every administration since ronald reagan's has proposed a similar fee , but congress has never enacted one .