but by definition , such factors are ephemeral . when putin took the reins of authority in 1999-2000 , first as acting president , then in march 2000 as president , his task was to avoid the economic chaos that had plagued russia earlier and to put russia on track toward long - term economic growth . to do so required the putin leadership to take advantage of the window of opportunity of the post - 1998 crisis economic surge and undertake some major economic reforms , which it did at least during putin's first presidential term ( 2000-2004 ) . the quality of life of the average russian deteriorated in other terms . in 1991 , the life expectancy of the average russian male was 64 years and for the average russian woman it was 74 years . by 1999 , the life expectancy had declined to 59 years for males and 72 for females . russia did not perform much better in the foreign sector . is an economically strong russia a threat or benefit to the united states ? is russia following economic strategies that promote a market economy that underlies the international trade system manifested in the wto ? these links have drawn the attention of some members of congress . congress may consider whether to pass legislation to extend permanent normal trade relations ( pntr ) status to russia . during the period , russia lost close to 30% of its real gross domestic product ( gdp ) , a decline reminiscent of the great depression of the 1930s in the united states . russia also suffered very high rates of inflation – over 2,000% in 1992 and over 800% in 1993 – before it declined to more tolerable , but still high , levels of around 20% by the end of the 1990s . russian economic policies and performance raise important policy questions for the united states and the u.s. - russian relationship which this report addresses . might russia's robust economic growth return ? the first seven years of russia's transition from the soviet central planned economy ( 1991-1998 ) were not easy . the disposable income ( income available after taxes ) of the average russian declined 25% in real terms between 1993 and 1999 . foreign direct investments ( fdi ) flows were meager given the size and needs of the russian economy . furthermore , russia was incurring serious capital flight – some $150 billion worth between 1992 and 1999 by one estimate . russian foreign debt soared in part because russia had taken on the foreign debts of the entire former soviet union in an arrangement made with the other former soviet states . however , russia had also incurred its own foreign obligations since the collapse of the soviet union . the economic problems were in part a continuation of economic collapse that was a factor in the demise of the soviet government . the problems were also in part the result of the rapid disintegration of an economic system in which the state , guided by the communist party , maintained complete control and market forces were an anathema .