restitution is available when the defendant is convicted of a criminal property offense . until 1996 , trade secret protection was primarily governed by state law . congress enacted the federal economic espionage act of 1996 to provide criminal penalties ( and authorize the attorney general to seek injunctive relief ) for the theft of trade secrets by domestic and foreign entities , in certain circumstances . the defend trade secrets act of 2016 amended the economic espionage act to provide private parties with a federal civil remedy for trade secret misappropriation . enforcement of ip rights may be accomplished by the ip owner bringing a lawsuit against an alleged infringer . ( certain injunctive relief may be available prior to final judgment , such as temporary injunctions or impounding of infringing articles. ) although there is no express federal statute of limitations for civil trademark infringement claims , federal courts generally follow the limitations period for the most analogous state - law cause of action from the state in which the claim is heard ; courts have also applied the equitable doctrine of laches ( unreasonable , prejudicial delay in commencing a lawsuit ) to determine whether a trademark infringement claim is untimely . one federal appellate court has determined that criminal trademark infringement prosecutions are governed by the general five - year statute of limitations for non - capital offenses under title 18 of the u.s. code . although there is no statute of limitations in patent infringement actions , the patent act specifies a time limit on monetary relief for patent infringement claims: damages are available only for infringement that occurs within the six years prior to the filing of the complaint or counterclaim for patent infringement . finally , federal law provides a three - year statute of limitations period for a civil action involving the misappropriation of a trade secret . the lanham act , copyright act , and economic espionage act have criminal and civil provisions for violations of their respective provisions , while the patent act only provides civil remedies in the event of patent infringement . federal courts determine the civil remedies in an action for infringement brought by the ip owner . if the federal government chooses to prosecute individuals or organizations for ip violations , the imprisonment terms are set forth in the substantive statutes describing the particular ip crime , while the criminal fine amount for violations of the trademark and copyright laws is determined in conjunction with 18 u.s.c . section 3571 ( which specifies the amount of the fine under title 18 of the u.s. code ) . in comparison , the criminal fine amount for economic espionage or trade secret theft is specified in the economic espionage act itself . information regarding the civil remedies and criminal penalties for violations of the copyright , trademark , patent , and trade secret laws is presented on the following pages in table - format . these penalties may be imposed upon conviction of the defendant in the case of a criminal prosecution , and the civil remedies follow a judgment of infringement reached by a federal judge or jury in a civil action .