newly enacted p.l . 110 - 314 , the consumer product safety improvement act of 2008 ( cpsia ) , prohibits the sale of children's toys and child care articles that contain more than 0.1% of dehp , dbp , or bbp . a similar ban applies for dinp , didp , and dnop , until the consumer product safety commission issues a rule either establishing or eliminating the ban on a permanent basis . there were two issues of particular concern during development of the final phthalate provisions of the cspia . first , what is the scientific basis for health concerns about exposure to these chemicals ? second , would the provision reduce the risks without generating greater risks ? these issues are discussed briefly here , based on the scientific and legal information presented above . the scientific basis for concerns about risks to human health appears to be strong in the case of some phthalates , adequate with respect to others , and weak for the remaining chemicals . the strongest evidence with respect to developmental effects has been produced since about the year 2000 . many of these studies were not available to the ntp or to cpsc when they reviewed the phthalate literature in 2000 or 2001 . at that time , regulators focused on carcinogenic effects , rather than effects on fetal development . this more recent animal evidence strongly supports a claim that dehp , dbp , and dbb can harm reproduction and damage fetal and juvenile development in rats . the structure - activity relationship ( between the molecular structure of the phthalates and developmental damage ) is well understood , such that scientific concern focuses now on dehp , dbp , and dbb . dinp also is a developmental toxicant , but is only about 15% as potent as the most potent phthalates . to the extent that it is still studied , it is generally studied together with other more potent toxic phthalates to evaluate additivity of effects . scientific evidence regarding the other phthalates mentioned in the new law is lacking . limited evidence indicates that didp , dinp , and dnop might have effects on the immune system , but these phthalates appear to be much less toxic to developing rodents . data indicate that people are exposed to many phthalates , especially dehp , dbp ( di - n - butyl ) , and dbb . children appear to be most heavily exposed . data are insufficient to judge exposure for dinp , didp , and dnop . individuals such as newborn babies in the intensive care units of hospitals face multiple and continuous phthalate exposures . scientists are just beginning to explore the additive effects of exposure to multiple phthalates , as well as to phthalates in combination with certain pesticides . to date , studies suggest there may be additive effects of multiple phthalate exposures . the national academy of sciences is evaluating the risk of aggregate human exposure to multiple phthalates , and is expected to report before the end of 2008 .