the uspto has appealed this judgment . at the time of the publication of this report , this outcome of this appeal is not yet available . congressional response to the claims and continuing application rules has thus far been limited . in the 110 th congress , h.r . 1908 would have expressly provided the uspto with regulatory authority to specify the circumstances under which a patent applicant may file a continuing application . the tafas v. dudas  ruling arose from lawsuits filed by two separate plaintiffs: ( 1 ) individual inventor triantafyllos tafas , and ( 2 ) the multinational pharmaceutical enterprise organized as smithkline beecham corp. and glaxo group limited . the plaintiffs requested a permanent injunction that would prevent the uspto from implementing the claims and continued application rules . although a number of arguments were before the district court , judge cacheris confined his ruling to the issue of whether the uspto claims and continued application rules were substantive or not . he concluded that the rules were indeed substantive because they would "affect[] individual rights and obligations. in particular , judge cacheris observed that the patent act placed no strict limitations upon the number of claims or continuing applications that an inventor could pursue . because the rules would deprive inventors of these rights , they were substantive in nature and thus beyond the ability of the uspto to enact . in keeping with its opinion , the district court issued an order permanently enjoining the uspto from implementing its claims and continued application rules . the uspto has appealed this judgment to the federal circuit , where the appeal remains pending at the time of the publication of this report . although patent professionals have focused attention upon the claims and continued application rules , the uspto has proposed additional reforms as well . one of these reforms relates to the so - called information disclosure statement , or ids . an ids is a document submitted to the uspto that discloses all journal articles , patents , and other "prior art" of which a patent applicant is aware . the uspto has expressed concerns that applicants too frequently include numerous "irrelevant or marginally relevant" prior art reference that not only fail to bring the most relevant material to the attention of examiners , but also require them to sort through dozens or hundreds of documents that are not pertinent to the question of patentability . as a result , the uspto has proposed rules that would impose additional applicant responsibilities with respect to ids filings . in particular , the uspto proposes that if more than 20 documents are disclosed in an ids , the applicant must provide an explanation of each cited document . that explanation consists of "an identification of a portion of a document that caused it to be cited , and an explanation of how the specific feature , showing , or teaching of the document correlates with language in one or more claims. if an ids contains fewer than 20 documents , the applicant would be required to provide an explanation only for documents not published in english , or for english - language documents over 25 pages in length .