the case was remanded for consideration on the merits . incidents involving persons with serious communicable diseases who disregard medical advice and either board commercial aircraft or express the intention to fly , cross borders , or take other forms of public transportation , have prompted the expansion of public health measures which may be used in emergency situations involving a public health threat . some available measures , such as quarantine and isolation authorities , date back many hundreds of years , while others , such as the public health "do not board" list , are recent measures , largely implemented in response to the andrew speaker incident in 2007 . the situation presented by andrew speaker raises a classic civil rights issue: to what extent can an individual's liberty be curtailed to advance the common good ? the u.s. constitution and federal civil rights laws provide for individual due process and equal protection rights as well as a right to privacy , but these rights are balanced against the needs of the community . with the advance of medical treatments in recent years , especially the use of antibiotics , the civil rights of the individual with a contagious disease have been emphasized . the fifth and fourteenth amendments prohibit governments at all levels from depriving individuals of any constitutionally protected liberty interest without due process of law . what process may be due under certain circumstances is generally determined by balancing the individual's interest at stake against the governmental interest served by the restraints , determining whether the measures are reasonably calculated to achieve the government's aims , and deciding whether the least restrictive means have been employed to further that interest . in o ' connor v. donaldson the supreme court examined the civil commitment of an individual to a mental hospital and held that "a state cannot constitutionally confine without more a nondangerous individual who is capable of surviving safely in freedom by himself or with the help of willing and responsible family members or friends. clearly , an individual who is highly contagious with a serious illness may be considered dangerous , and thus subject to involuntary confinement if there is no less restrictive alternative . the lesson of donaldson is that such confinements must be carefully examined in order to comport with the constitutional right to due process . donaldson also raises the issue of whether less restrictive programs are required prior to the imposition of the more restrictive application of isolation or quarantine . it could be argued that the least restrictive alternative must first be applied or more restrictive alternatives will run afoul of constitutional requirements . the unequal treatment of certain socially disfavored groups with regard to quarantine also raises equal protection issues . for example , in wong wai v. williamson a board of health resolution mandated chinese residents to be quarantined for bubonic plague unless they submitted to inoculation with a serum with "the only justification offered for this discrimination ... a suggestion ... that this particular race is more liable to the plague than any other. the court struck the resolution as a violation of the equal protection clause .