appendix a . president carter pursued a ctbt rather than seeking senate advice and consent to ratification of the ttbt and pnet . according to a senate report , "in mid - 1978 , the administration concluded that a push to gain senate consent to ratification of the ttbt and pnet could stir up a fight which would jeopardize the prospects for a complete ban. what is the current balance between monitoring and evasion ? given that monitoring technology will continue to improve , and that evasion capability may improve , but in ways that are generally classified and may well be unknown , how is the monitoring - evasion balance likely to shift over time ? how confident can an evader be in its ability to succeed , given the many and improving monitoring techniques and the difficulties that could cause an evasion attempt to fail ? how confident can monitors be in their ability to detect and identify a clandestine or an unattributable test in light of the many scenarios that have been set forth and the vast information on monitoring capabilities available in the open literature and available through the ims to states parties to the treaty ? how likely are russia and china to cheat , and to gain a strategic advantage thereby ? how likely are other nations to cheat , and how would that affect deterrence , regional stability , and nuclear proliferation ? would the international community impose severe consequences on a ctbt member that conducted clandestine tests ? would it impose such consequences on a state not party to the ctbt that conducted tests , whether clandestine or not ? would u.s. ratification of the treaty make nuclear proliferation more or less likely ? what specific steps would entry into force of the ctbt lead nonnuclear weapon states to take in order to rein in nuclear proliferation ? would these states take these steps only if the treaty enters into force ? is u.s. movement toward nuclear disarmament , as exemplified by the ctbt , essential for nuclear nonproliferation , as some suggest , or do the many u.s. steps toward disarmament and nonproliferation taken to date provide a firm basis for further nonproliferation efforts ? is a satisfactory outcome possible through diplomacy ? what capabilities are needed to deter iran or to roll back its nuclear program ? do nuclear forces have any relevance to deterring terrorists or their state sponsors ? this report now considers ctbt and nuclear testing issues that link to these broader issues of deterrence . without testing , can the united states maintain the facilities and skilled personnel supporting u.s. nuclear weapons ? this question is considered first because these capabilities are the bedrock on which nuclear weapons rest . can existing weapons be maintained without testing ? this is a necessary criterion for deterrence under the ctbt , as it would take many years to develop and deploy new weapons . does deterrence require new weapons that incorporate new military capabilities , and is testing required to develop them ? do u.s. weapons need more features for safety and security , and is testing required to add them ? such features might deter terrorist attempts to seize and detonate these weapons .