so would have h.r . again in the case of the controlled substance act , it may not seem like a great step to say the court can freeze property which it could order confiscated using the same or a less demanding standard of proof ; but restitution has no civil forfeiture equivalent . like h.r . 4110 's amendments were crafted to provide alternatives to direct involvement of the court in restitution enforcement . some addressed the courts' exclusive control of the scheduling of installment payments ; others the availability of the bureau of prisons inmate financial responsibility programs ; still others the collection authority of the government during the pendency of appeals . the sentencing guidelines state that the court need not impose a fine "where the defendant establishes that he is unable to pay and is not likely to become able to pay any fine" or "imposition of a fine would unduly burden the defendant's dependents. there are no such ameliorating provisions in the law of mandatory restitution . therefore , the denial of stay pending appeal or an asset freeze pending appeal may impose greater hardships in the restitution cases than in fine cases . the silence of the justice department materials may seem unfortunate in another respect . the materials do not further identify the type of "order described in subparagraph ( b ) " ( "an order limiting the enforcement of restitution obligations" ) that may not intrude upon a prosecutor's authority to conduct investigations of the defendant's finances , conduct discovery , record a lien , or seek any injunction . it obviously includes a stay pending appeal , but the wording is sufficiently vague to be construed as a limitation on the sentencing court's authority to curtail enforcement of its restitution order . the clause has no statutory counterpart in present law whether of restitution or fines . under the federal rules of criminal procedure , the probation officer's sentencing report may not include certain medical , confidential or informant - related material . the rules also forbid disclosing matters occurring before a federal grand jury , subject to certain exceptions , some which require court approval and some of which do not . various other statutes prohibit the disclosure of financial information but recognize an exception for information provided under grand jury subpoena . those statutes may be thought to proscribe disclosure beyond the grand jury absent some additional grant of authority . there are no statutory provisions which specifically proscribe bureau of prisons officials from disclosing to prosecutors information relating to an inmate's ability to pay restitution . 4110 would have granted the united states attorneys access without court approval to financial information on the defendant held by a grand jury , the probation office , or the bureau of prisons in order to enforce restitution orders . the justice department has explained that the change is necessary because some district courts insist upon court approval before allowing prosecutors to examine probation officer reports on a defendant's financial condition . they do not explain why explicit authority for access to grand jury material and bureau of prisons records is necessary or why court approval constitutes such a substantial obstacle . 4110 would have amended section 3664 in other ways .