some experts have linked vaw to discrimination . many in the international community view violence as a form of discrimination against women and maintain that discrimination also causes violence . to successfully combat vaw , they contend , equal attention should be paid to the causes and impacts of female discrimination . women who are discriminated against because of their sex may not receive a formal education or have access to healthcare . in many societies , women may not own property or have inheritance rights . some analysts argue that these factors may contribute to an unequal power relationship between men and women — which in turn may lead to a cycle of violence . some developed countries have undertaken studies to determine the economic costs of violence against women . though the results vary because of differing methodologies , the studies generally found that the cost to society may be significant . canadian researchers , for example , estimated that the cost of damage incurred by vaw in canada is over $4 billion canadian dollars . most studies analyze both long - term and short - term cost variables such as treatment and services for women victims of violence ( including healthcare and legal costs ) , and reduced employment and productivity levels because of violence against female employees . some studies also address the economic impact of pain and suffering inflicted on women by violence , though estimating the costs of such intangibles can present a challenge to researchers . it does not assess the scope of individual programs or a program's success in achieving its goal . the report also outlines possible policy considerations for the 112 th congress , including the scope and effectiveness of current u.s. programs , further integrating vaw prevention and treatment into u.s. foreign assistance programs , coordinating among u.s. executive branch agencies and departments , and u.s. funding of international anti - vaw programs . in 1993 , the u.n. general assembly adopted the non - binding declaration on the elimination of violence against women ( devaw ) . the declaration , which was supported by the u.s. government , describes vaw as "any act of gender - based violence that results in , or is likely to result in , physical , sexual , or psychological harm or suffering to women , including threats of such acts , coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty , whether occurring in public or private life. the devaw definition of vaw is broad , encompassing both physical and psychological harm . it is used in this report because it is one of the most inclusive and widely agreed to international definitions . in some contexts , vaw may be used synonymously with "gender - based violence" ( gbv ) , which describes violence perpetrated against an individual , regardless of sex , because of his or her gender . despite the international adoption of devaw , governments , organizations , and cultures continue to define vaw in number of ways , taking into account unique factors and circumstances . how vaw is defined has implications for policymakers because the definition affects the types of violence that are measured and addressed .