appendix b . current projects of national significance ( pns ) appendix c. acronym glossar . among other provisions , h.r . 911 would direct the assistant secretary of children and families in hhs to ( 1 ) implement an ongoing review process for investigating and evaluating reports of child abuse and neglect at covered programs ; ( 2 ) establish public websites with information about each covered program , as well as a national toll - free telephone hotline to receive complaints ; ( 3 ) establish civil penalties for violations of standards ; and ( 4 ) establish a process to ensure that complaints received by the hotline are promptly reviewed by persons with appropriate expertise . therefore , clinicians , families , and people with disabilities are increasingly recognizing the importance of long term planning for individuals with developmental disabilities who are living beyond childhood . similar legislation ( h.r . 6358 ) also passed the house during the 110 th congress . 911 requires standards and enforcement provisions to prevent child abuse and neglect in public and private residential programs that serve children with emotional , behavioral , or mental health problems or disorders ; or problems with alcohol or substance abuse . 911 would require the assistant secretary to develop a process to immediately notify the state , appropriate law enforcement , and appropriate p&a system of any credible complaint of child abuse and neglect at a covered residential program . should reauthorization of the dd act be considered in the 111 th congress , advocates have identified a need to address expanded funding for the ucedds to meet the needs of individuals with dd and their families across the lifespan . there are indications that individuals with dd are now living longer . also , there is increased recognition and appreciation of the impact of early life experiences on later life . the ddpie project was divided into two phases . phase one of the ddpie involved ( 1 ) the development of evaluation tools , and ( 2 ) the implementation of a pilot study to test the accuracy , feasibility , and utility of the evaluation tools . phase one included an advisory panel of relevant stakeholders , such as individuals with dd ; families of individuals with dd ; other consumers ; advocates ; researchers ; and representatives from various dd networks to provide input and review draft materials . a working group of dd program representatives from scdds , p&a programs , and ucedds was established to incorporate dd program input ; address concerns , such as potential duplication of data collection ; and facilitate collaboration between dd program components in the development and piloting of evaluation tools . in the 111 th congress , the house has passed h.r . 911 , the stop child abuse in residential programs for teens act of 2009 . the need to address the transition from pediatric health care services to adult care services for youth with chronic health conditions or disabilities was also identified in the 2007 institute of medicine report on the future of disability in america .