to charge different prices to different individuals . one such example relates to nasdaq . low fat products advertised fat content on a voluntary basis , but high fat products ( which varied in fat content ) did not . in addition , many of the studies analyzed goods that lack the special characteristics of health care . these shortcomings do not , however , necessarily mean that price transparency in the health sector would not be beneficial . first , the ready - mix concrete example , in which price information resulted in higher prices also involved for - profit businesses , which presumably were attempting to maximize profits . this example may not apply to many hospitals that are non - profit and may have different behavioral responses . second , the evidence from the advertising studies includes not only simple uniform goods such as alcoholic beverages and gasoline , but complex differentiated products such as vision exams , where quality matters . and while insurance pays much of the cost of medical care , the studies summarized above also included examples of price reductions for prescription drugs after direct advertising to consumers , whose prices are also subject to third party payment . in these cases as well , the evidence suggests that prices fell after advertising was permitted , without deterioration in quality . third , evidence from the internet suggested that price comparison sites may help reduce commodity prices , including differentiated commodities that are subject to bargaining ( automobiles ) . over time , price comparison websites have become more sophisticated and are playing an increasingly important role in consumer behavior in many markets . the internet has begun to affect the availability of price information in the health care sector , although this does not appear to have influenced a large proportion of consumers . according to the new york times , 32 states require hospitals to publish price information . some new websites provide consumers with data on health care costs . for example , vimo http: / / www.vimo.com provides information on average list prices and average negotiated prices charged by hospitals for specific procedures . one company , my medical control , provides a negotiation service for consumers through its website http: / / www.mymedicalcontrol.com . a consumer forwards a bill , via the website , to a claims adjuster who negotiates a reduced rate with the provider . this company then deducts a 35% fee and returns the remainder to the consumer . at present , such websites have little observable effect on health care markets . in the future , however , such sites could have large effects . the carol.com website allows consumers to compare prices and offerings of health providers in the twin cities region of minnesota , and in addition it allows them to book services . the intention of the website's creators is to follow the example of web - based booking services such as expedia.com , which have transformed the travel industry in the past decade . many state governments have opened their own sites that allow consumers to compare prices or provider characteristics .