the average was 7.4% . under ppaca , tax - exempt hospitals are subject to four new requirements . first , hospitals will be required to conduct a "community health needs assessment" and adopt an implementation strategy to meet those needs . second , hospitals are required to written financial assistance and emergency care policies . third , hospitals may not charge individuals eligible under the financial assistance policy more than the lowest amount charged to those with insurance coverage . finally , hospitals are required to make reasonable efforts to determine if an individual is eligible for financial assistance before beginning extraordinary collections actions . ppaca also requires the treasury secretary to review the community benefit activities of tax - exempt hospitals . additionally , the treasury secretary , in consultation with the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) will be required to report annually to congress information on charity care , bad debt expenses , unreimbursed costs for services , and community benefit activities . universities and colleges are classified as charitable organizations eligible to receive deductible contributions , and , also , as tax - exempt entities , do not pay tax on their investments . as indicated above , prior to the financial crises and subsequent recession , the benefit of exempting endowment income of colleges and universities from taxes was estimated at around $25 billion . at $25 billion , this exemption was worth more than three times the benefit of charitable deductions to all educational institutions . historically , these high yields were coupled with relatively low payout rates . for the fiscal year that ended june 2007 , endowments were $411 billion and the average rate of return was 21.5% . the payout rate was 4.6% . as a result of those relationships along with contributions , endowments grew 18.4% between fy2006 and fy2007 ( about thee and a half times the growth rate of the economy ) , continuing an ongoing trend from recent years . the losses in college and university endowment funds experienced during the recession have raised new issues of concern . in fy2009 , losses were 18.7% on average . prior to the onset of the recession , senator grassley , ranking member of the finance committee , discussed concern that colleges were not using enough of their endowments funds to provide an affordable education . tuition rates remain an issue of interest . in 2010 , following the release of data on college and university endowment losses , senator grassley noted: i hope colleges won't rely on double - digit losses as a reason to raise tuition or freeze student aid . many of them relied on some risky investments , like hedge funds , to get big gains in recent years , and now those strategies are causing losses . … pay - out rates over the last decade rarely topped 5 percent , even when investment returns were in double digits . the two basic issues associated with donor - advised funds and supporting organizations were possibilities of receiving private benefit by donors and payout rates . as noted above , while some changes were enacted , others remain possible .