it is expected to be completed in 2011 . turkey appears to be using its prime geographic location as bargaining leverage with both russia and the eu , in hopes of making turkey a regional energy hub . after signing the intergovernmental agreement on nabucco in july 2009 , turkey agreed in august to allow russia to use turkey's territorial waters for south stream . in exchange , russia will provide support for a trans - anatolian oil pipeline crossing turkey from the black sea to the mediterranean . russia and turkey will also discuss expanding the blue stream natural gas pipeline between russia and turkey . in addition , russia also agreed to build a nuclear power plant in turkey . another proposed gas pipeline is white stream . it would provide gas from the caspian through a pipeline under the black sea from georgia to crimea , in ukraine . the pipeline would have to pass over russia's blue stream pipeline to turkey on the seabed . in april 2009 , georgia and the white stream pipeline company signed a memorandum of understanding on the project . however , it is unclear whether the pipeline can find financing in the current economic climate , or a source of supply . bush administration officials criticized nord stream , which would traverse the baltic sea floor , supplying germany and other western european countries with natural gas , and bypassing the central and eastern european countries through which the main current pipelines run . the u.s. supported discussions by poland , the nordic countries , and the baltic states on alternatives , including delivering norway's expanding gas production to northern europe via danish pipelines and by developing liquefied natural gas terminals in poland and the baltic states . bush administration officials also criticized south stream , saying that it will not reduce dependence on russian supplies . however , germany strongly supports nord stream , as it is looking for a dependable source of natural gas , particularly after the natural gas crises between russia and ukraine , which briefly interrupted supplies to central and western europe in 2006 and 2009 . gazprom owns 51% of nord stream , while two german firms and a dutch firm , own the rest . a french company has also agreed to join the consortium . former german chancellor gerhard schroeder is chairman of the nord stream consortium . on the other hand , the baltic countries , poland and ukraine have expressed concerns about nord stream , fearing that it will give moscow more leverage on energy issues with them . after delays due to environmental concerns by sweden , finland , and denmark , through whose waters the pipeline would pass , nord stream is expected to begin laying the underwater segments of the pipeline later this year , with hopes that the pipeline will begin operation in late 2011 . the obama administration has been less critical of nord stream and south stream than the bush administration . part of the change in tone may be due to an effort to "reset" ties with russia that were frayed during the bush years .