as a result , the d.c . circuit court of appeals . on october 5 , 2012 , the u.s. department of justice filed a petition seeking en banc rehearing of the d.c . circuit's august 21 , 2012 , decision regarding the csapr . building on emission reductions attributed to cair phase i , the csapr was expected to result in relatively comparable benefits to those associated with cair in epa's october 2006 ria . circuit denied requests for both a panel and the en banc rehearing on january 24 , 2013 . to date , epa has not made a decision regarding its response to the court's denial for a rehearing . congress and a wide variety of stakeholders closely followed the development of the 2006 particulates naaqs since epa's review began nearly 10 years ago . congressional hearings were held regarding implementation and review of the particulates naaqs . well before epa formally proposed revising the particulates naaqs , stakeholders were providing evidence and arguments at public hearings and other forums for their preferred recommendations . in general , business and industry opposed more stringent standards , and public health and environmental interest groups advocated tighter standards . epa received thousands of comments during various stages of development of the particulates criteria document and in response to drafts of the epa particulates staff paper . the agency reported receiving more than 120,000 comments in response to the january 2006 particulates naaqs proposal . the administrator's proposed and final decisions represented the first time in the nearly 30-year history of the clean air scientific advisory committee ( casac ) that the promulgated standards fell outside of the range of the scientific panel's recommendations . in letters dated march 21 , 2006 , and september 29 , 2006 , the casac raised its concerns and objections regarding both pm 10 and pm 2.5 proposed standards . the administrator is not required by statute to follow casac's recommendations ; the caa ( in section 307 ( d ) ( 3 ) ) requires only that the administrator set forth any pertinent findings , recommendations , and comments by casac and the national academy of sciences , and , if the administrator's proposal differs in an important respect from any of their recommendations , provide an explanation of the reasons for such differences . courts , in reviewing epa regulations , also generally defer to the administrator's judgment on scientific matters , focusing more on issues of procedure , jurisdiction , and standing . nevertheless , casac's detailed objections to the administrator's decisions and its description of the process as having failed to meet statutory and procedural requirements could play a role in the debate regarding epa's reviews of naaqs . epa's october 17 , 2006 , promulgation of the final modifications to the existing particulates naaqs following completion of its statutorily required review sparked interest and conflicting concerns among a diverse array of stakeholders , and in congress . as a result of epa's 2006 tightening of the fine particulates ( pm 2.5 ) naaqs , additional areas were classified as nonattainment and needed to implement new controls on particulate matter in order to comply .