among them are the following . food and drug administration ombudsman when food and drug administration ( fda ) employees were found to be inadequately performing their duties in reviewing pre - market generic drug applications , the commissioner issued a "managerial fiat" creating the fda office of the ombudsman . the ombudsman provides several services , including the following: reviews marketing or investigational applications ; provides information on import or export issues ; offers explanations in response to citizen petitions or general inquiries ; and ensures a fair hearing of claims of unfair or unequal treatment . the office also serves as the fda's product jurisdiction officer , who determines the jurisdiction of a product headed for review if the jurisdiction is questionable . resources: what is the level of funding and resources that the entity receives ? controls: who appoints and removes the officer , and who determines the office's budget and spending priorities ? these criteria are not discrete . the characteristics overlap and are utilized in a variety of combinations in federal agencies and organizations , offering a gamut of ways and means for the public to petition the government . the variations among the attributes also suggest important differences in the capacity and capability of each office . interest in institutionalizing a centralized or standardized complaint - handling role in the federal government began in the mid - 1960s . although no proposals along these lines have been adopted , a number of studies and recommendations have emerged over the years . these have come from members of congress , executive and administrative officers , and nongovernmental organizations . although most earlier studies are dated or limited to certain entities , these efforts reveal a wide variety of complaint - handling mechanisms at the federal level . differences in the current collection of offices and positions that respond to complaints , grievances , concerns , and questions from the public arise along a number of distinct dimensions: their powers and duties , jurisdictions , locations , controls , neutrality , resources , and use of electronic and traditional communications . variations among the offices are reflected in their titles: federal student aid ombudsman ; medicare beneficiary ombudsman ; taxpayer advocate ; ombudsman at the federal deposit insurance corporation ; federal recovery coordinators and transition patient advocates for wounded military personnel ; aviation noise ombudsman ; environmental protection agency public liaison ; superfund ombudsman ; freedom of information act office of government information services and public liaisons ; construction metrication ombudsman ; and privacy and civil liberties officer or , alternatively , civil liberties and civil rights officer . although there is no authoritative , comprehensive , detailed survey of current federal complaint - handling offices , earlier studies ( even if dated and limited ) , along with the coverage here , provide useful information with which to describe , examine , and compare them . one observation , for instance , is that such offices appear to be growing in number and prominence as well as range of activities , duties , and services . as noted throughout this report , federal complaint - handling offices exhibit different forms , capacities , and designations .