, it does not include televisions ) . the law requires manufacturers to implement a recovery plan that provides consumers with a free and convenient program to recycle the manufacturer's computer equipment . standards for recyclers are not specified in the law . however , manufacturer recycling plans are required to "provide for environmentally sound management practices to transport and recycle discarded computer equipment. manufacturers have the option of developing their own program . by january 1 , 2009 , manufacturers that sell more than 1,000 items of computer equipment per year must register with the state and pay a $10,000 registration fee and an annual renewal fee of $1,000 . manufacturers are prohibited from selling computer equipment in the state unless an item has a visible , permanent label identifying the manufacturer affixed to the equipment . within 120 days of registration , manufacturers will be required to submit to the state a plan for the reuse or recycling of equipment . among other provisions , recycling plans must describe any take - back programs that will be implemented ; how the manufacturer will implement and finance the plan ; and how it will transport discarded equipment from collectors . manufacturers may implement recycling plans jointly with other manufacturers . manufacturers must also submit an annual report to the state that includes an evaluation of the recycling rate for equipment . however , the law does not specify recycling goals that manufacturers must meet . also by january 1 , 2009 , the state department of environment and natural resources will be required to maintain a list of registered manufacturers ; implement a public education program regarding computer equipment reuse and recycling ; and provide technical assistance to local governments on the establishment and operation of equipment collection centers . on june 7 , 2007 , oregon passed its e - waste recycling law , which applies to televisions and computer monitors of any type with screens larger than four inches , and to desktop or portable computers . by january 1 , 2009 , manufacturers that sell these products in the state will be required to finance "free , convenient , and environmentally sound" recycling services . manufacturers can create their own take - back program or participate in a common program , but they must pay for collection , transportation , and recycling costs . manufacturers must also register with the state and pay an annual registration fee of $20 , $200 , $5,000 , or $15,000 , depending upon their market share in the state . the registration must include a list of products sold in the state and a statement regarding whether the manufacturer will implement its own recycling program in accordance with criteria established by the law , or use the state contractor program . among other requirements , the state department of environmental quality will be responsible for maintaining a list of registered manufacturers and orphan brands ; determining each manufacturer's return share of ceds ; establishing a state contractor program to collect , transport , and recycle ceds ; and determining the recycling fee to be paid by each registered manufacturer . state and local governments will fund consumer education and promotion of the law .