under the exemption provided in p.l . 109-112 , nasa has also contracted with russian space entities to continue astronaut flights to and from the iss . however , the exemption runs out in 2012 . on april 11 , 2008 , nasa administrator michael griffin submitted a proposed amendment to inksna that would extend the exemption for soyuz flights for the life of the iss , or until the moon flight vehicle , or a commercial crew transport vehicle , is fully operational . the exemption would not be extended for the russian progress cargo vehicle . in a letter to chairman udall of the subcommittee on space and aeronautics , committee on science and technology , and to senator biden , chairman of the senate committee on foreign relations , griffin said that fabrication of soyuz vehicles requires 36 months , so that nasa must contract with russian entities in 2008 for vehicles to be available in 2012 . extension of the inksna exemptions would have to be enacted before such contracting could take place . on june 9 , senator biden introduced by request s. 3103 , the international space station payments act of 2008 , incorporating the measures requested by nasa . on september 23 , the bill was reported out of the senate foreign relations committee . on july 24 the house foreign affairs and science and technology committees reported by voice vote h.r . 6574 , the united states - russian federation nuclear cooperation agreement act of 2008 . title iii of h.r . this is widely believed to be because the president would be unable to certify an absence of proliferation activities by russian entities to these countries . the 2006 director of national intelligence report to congress on wmd acquisition says that "russian entities have supplied a variety of ballistic missile - related goods and technical know - how to china , iran , india , and north korea . transport to and from the iss will again have to rely on soyuz in the interim . in the past five years , after details about iran's clandestine nuclear activities came to light , russia has stepped up cooperation with the united states and other countries negotiating over iran's nuclear program . russia has insisted on iaea safeguards on any transfers to iran's civilian nuclear reactor at bushehr and has delivered fuel to bushehr beginning in december 2007 , on condition that the resulting spent fuel will be returned to russia . because of these developments , nasa applied to the congress for an exemption from the ina that would allow it to contract with russian space entities for use of the soyuz for iss missions . the response was the iran nonproliferation amendments act of 2005 ( p.l . following president bush's "vision" plan , nasa has begun designing spacecraft for resuming flights to the moon , and has indicated that such vehicles would also be available for missions to the iss . it has also continued flights of the space shuttle to the iss , and plans enough flights to finish the iss before the shuttle is retired in 2010 .