the introduction of h.r . 5629 ( eshoo ) in march 2008 provided yet another approach . 5629 was similar in some respects to s. 1695 with a few important differences that were favored by the brand - name industry . s. 1695 was reported on november 19 , 2008 . no further action was taken on this or the other follow - on biologics bills in the 110 th congress . in the 111 th congress , h.r . 1427 ( waxman ) contained a number of changes when compared with h.r . 1038 ( waxman ) from the 110 th congress . 1548 ( eshoo ) was essentially the same as h.r . 5629 ( eshoo ) as introduced in the 110 th congress with a few minor changes . health care reform legislation also provided a pathway for the approval of follow - on biologics . the biologics provisions were added to ppaca in "title vii — improving access to innovative medical therapies" as "subtitle a — biologics price competition and innovation," sections 7001 through 7003 . the following paragraphs briefly describe the biologics provisions in the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca ; p.l . a determination on interchangeability is required if the application shows that the biological product ( 1 ) is biosimilar to the reference product , ( 2 ) can be expected to produce the same clinical result in any given patient , and ( 3 ) can be alternated or switched with use of the reference product without risk to the patient in terms of safety or diminished efficacy compared with use of the reference product alone . there is no requirement on the publication of guidance . ppaca requires information in the fda application demonstrating that the follow - on biologic is similar to the reference product based on data from a clinical study or studies to demonstrate safety , purity , and potency for one or more appropriate conditions of use for which the reference product is licensed . however , the secretary may determine that elements in the application , such as clinical studies , may be unnecessary . fda may publish proposed guidance for public comment prior to publication of final guidance , and if so , fda must establish a process to allow public input regarding priorities for issuing guidance . the issuance or non - issuance of guidance would not preclude the review of , or action on , an application . data exclusivity is separate from the protection provided by a patent . data exclusivity is the period of time during which the manufacturer of a follow - on product , in the preparation of its application for fda approval , is blocked from referring to the data submitted in the original application to fda for the approval of the brand - name product ; this results in a period of exclusive marketing for the brand - name product . ppaca provides a 12-year exclusivity period from the date on which the reference product was first approved .