all include banking . all include use of offsets , although some would place substantial restrictions on their use . one proposal incorporates a "safety valve" that would effectively place a ceiling on allowance prices . other proposals would create a carbon market efficiency board to observe the allowance market and implement cost - relief measures if necessary . some see this as a more flexible response with the potential for avoiding or mitigating the environmental impacts of a safety valve ( i.e. , increased emissions ) . additionally , concern has been expressed in the united states about the regulation of allowance markets and instruments . based on experience with the ets , the potential for speculation and manipulation could extend beyond the emission markets . analysis of ets allowance prices during phase 1 suggests the most important variables in determining allowance price changes were oil and natural gas price changes . this apparent linkage between allowance price changes and price changes in two commodities markets raises the possibility of market manipulation , particularly with the inclusion of financial instruments such as options and futures contracts . congress may ultimately be asked to consider whether the securities and exchange commission , federal energy regulatory commission , the commodities futures trading commission , or other body should have enhanced regulatory and oversight authority over such instruments . other sources could be added as circumstances dictate . as noted , the eu's experience with the ets suggests that adding sectors to an emission trading scheme can be a slow and contentious process . if one believes that the electric utility sector is a cost - effective place to start addressing greenhouse gas emissions and that there is sufficient time to do the necessary groundwork to eventually add other sectors , then a phased - in approach may be reasonable . if one believes that the economy as a whole needs to begin adjusting to a carbon - constrained environment to meet long term goals , then a more comprehensive approach may be justified . the ets experience suggests the process doesn't necessarily get any easier if you wait . setting up a tradeable allowance system is a lot like setting up a new currency . allocating allowances is essentially allocating money with the marketplace determining the exchange rate . as noted above , the free allocation scheme used in the ets has resulted in "windfall profits" being received by allowance recipients . as stated quite forcefully by deutsche bank research: the most striking market outcome of emissions trading to date has been the power industry's windfall profits , which have sparked controversy . we are all familiar with the background: emissions allowances were handed out free of charge to those plant operators participating in the emissions trading scheme . nevertheless , in particular the producers of electricity succeeded in marking up the market price of electricity to include the opportunity - cost value of the allowances . this is correct from an accounting point of view , since the allowances do have a value and could otherwise be sold . moreover , emissions trading cannot work without price signals .