it was withdrawn . corporate average fuel economy ( cafe ) standards . proposed amendments 62 and 95 offered different policies for increasing cafe standards . proposed amendment 95 was withdrawn , and proposed amendment 62 was not included in the rule that prescribed floor action . oil savings provisions . proposed amendment 36 would have set a goal to reduce imported oil to less than 25% of vehicle petroleum use by 2015 . proposed amendment 72 would have called for development of a plan to cut u.s. oil use by 2.5 million barrels per day ( mbd ) by 2016 , rising significantly by 2025 . neither amendment 36 nor amendment 72 was included in the rule that prescribed floor action . title i — green jobs this title assumes the provisions of h.r . it would authorize up to $125 million in funding to establish national and state job training programs , administered by the u.s. department of labor , to help address job shortages that are impairing growth in green industries , such as energy efficient buildings and construction , renewable electric power , energy efficient vehicles , and biofuels development . title ii — the international climate cooperation re - engagement act of 2007 this title assumes the provisions of h.r . it would declare u.s. policy on international climate cooperation , authorize assistance to promote clean and efficient energy technologies in foreign countries , and establish the international clean energy foundation . subtitle a — u.s . policy on global climate change this subtitle would state that it is the policy of the united states to take a more active role in international climate change negotiations including future fifteenth meeting of the conference of parties ( cop - 15 ) to the united nations framework convention on climate change . also , the united states would declare its intent to seek mitigation commitments from all major greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emitting nations , including china , india , brazil , and other major developing nations . an office on global climate change would be established at the department of state . the secretary of state would be required to report to congress on progress made in promoting transparency in extractive industries resource payments . subtitle b — assistance for clean and efficient energy technologies the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) would be directed to report to congress on efforts to support policies for clean and efficient energy technologies . the department of commerce would be directed to increase efforts to export such technologies and report to congress on the results . other u.s. agencies with export promotion responsibilities would be required to increase efforts to support these technologies . also , increased efforts are requested from the interagency working group on the clean energy technology exports initiative , particularly to implement its 2002 strategic plan . the secretary of state would be required to report to congress on the impact of global climate change on developing countries . subtitle c — international clean energy foundation the foundation would be established with the long - term goal of reducing ghg emissions .