, of the cpsc . the cpsc may not construe the statutory preemption provisions as preempting any cause of action under state or local common law or state statutes regarding damage claims . section 3003 of p.l . 104-66 ( the federal reports elimination and sunset act of 1995 , codified as amended at 31 u.s.c . §1113 note ) provided that , with certain exceptions , reports required to be submitted to congress , as listed in h. doc . 103-7 , were terminated . section 203 of the cpsia ( 15 u.s.c . §2076 note ) requires that after the date of enactment of the cpsia , notwithstanding any rule , regulation or order to the contrary , the cpsc must comply with the requirement of cpsa §27 ( k ) ( codified at 15 u.s.c . §2076 ( k ) ) that it submit copies to congress of budget recommendations , legislative recommendations and comments , and testimony that it submits to the president or the office of management and budget . these copies are expressly exempted from the reporting limitations of p.l . critics alleged that the prior rulemaking procedures under cpsa §9 and other acts under the cpsc's jurisdiction , the fhsa and the ffa , were unnecessarily onerous , requiring procedural steps beyond those required by the administrative procedures act . section 204 of the cpsia streamlines the rulemaking procedures under cpsa §9 and similar provisions under the fhsa and ffa by eliminating the requirement for an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking ( anpr ) , a step not required by the administrative procedure act ( apa ) . this anpr was required to include an invitation for persons to submit existing standards as proposed consumer product safety standards or statements of intention to develop or modify a voluntary standard , as well as commentary . amendments conforming to the elimination of this requirement are also made . cpsia §204 clarifies that the elimination of the anpr requirement does not preclude a person from submitting all or part of an existing standard as a proposed consumer product safety standard . the fhsa is also amended to eliminate the required use of additional rulemaking procedures under the food , drug , and cosmetic act . technical amendments to the fhsa replace references to the secretary of health , education and welfare ( hew ) [now health and human services ( hhs ) ] , which remained from the original authority of the secretary of hew and the food and drug administration over the fhsa , with references to the cpsc . technical amendments to the ffa replace references to the secretary of commerce and the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , which remained from their original authority over the ffa , with references to the cpsc . references to specific congressional committees in the rulemaking provisions of the fhsa and the ffa are changed to references to the "appropriate congressional committees. section 205 of the cpsia ( 15 u.s.c .