pending legislation would provide for further conditionality . president musharraf himself reached out to u.s. congressional leaders in november , telephoning the chairs of the senate and house foreign relations committees in an apparent effort to discourage any new restrictions being placed on u.s. aid . many analysts , including those making policy for the bush administration , assert that conditioning u.s. aid to pakistan has a past record of failure and likely would be counterproductive by reinforcing pakistani perceptions of the united states as a fickle and unreliable partner . through a spokesman , mehsud has denied any involvement in the killing . censorship of the media makes the mosque more potent as a means of communication . the destruction of the institutions of the rule of law opens the door wider to extremism . indeed , musharraf's imposition of emergency did not lead to any immediately noticeable improvement in his government's battle with the militants as pakistan troops continued to appear on the defensive in provincial conflict regions . by one account , islamist militants in the swat valley more than doubled the territory under their control in the weeks after november 3 . by early december , however , following the apparent launch of major pakistan army offensives in the region , most militant elements in the swat were reported to be in retreat . on december 15 , the pakistani government claimed victory there , saying fighters loyal to the radical islamist mullah fazlullah had been routed and driven into the hills . many western diplomats , including those from the united states , have expressed dismay with president musharraf's november fixation on the pakistani judiciary and on his arrest of civil society elements considered unthreatening to state security . musharraf has to many observers appeared more interested in battling his domestic political adversaries than in taking on the country's religious militants . when asked about this apparent contradiction , a white house spokeswoman said , "we do not believe that any extra - constitutional means were necessary in order to help prevent terrorism in the region. bhutto's killing at year's end led to country - wide rioting . some 60 people were killed and the caretaker government called the damage from ensuing violence "colossal," saying "manufacturing , revenue , exports have all suffered badly. whether deserving or not , musharraf himself took the brunt of the blame for ensuing instability . the developments fueled already considerable concerns that , in focusing on civil strife in the cities , pakistan's security apparatus would be distracted from what the united states considers to be crucial counterterrorism operations in pakistan's western regions near afghanistan . pakistan's neighbor and long - time rival india has watched pakistan's turmoil with great interest , but little public comment . the killing elicited widespread condemnation from around the world . the next day , bhutto's body was interred in her ancestral village in sindh as the pakistani government ordered a nearly total shutdown of services in anticipation of spreading violence . serious rioting occurred in the sindhi capital of karachi , as well as at numerous other sites . the circumstances of bhutto's death remain controversial .