the language of s.amdt . 1014 was similar to that of h.r . the most significant difference between the two is that s.amdt . 1014 would allow for the modification of a smaller set of mortgages . these fees can be significant . thus , servicers often receive more in compensation through a foreclosure than they do through loss mitigation or loan modification . this is especially true where a servicer goes through the time and effort of offering a borrower a modification only to have the borrower redefault in the near future . some argue that voluntary modification programs have not been effective enough . in a letter sent to speaker of the house nancy pelosi and house minority leader john boehner , the attorneys general of 22 states and the district of columbia stated: in recent months , state attorneys general have especially focused on urging mortgage servicers to avoid unnecessary foreclosures by modifying unaffordable loans in a manner that serves holders , servicers , homeowners , and the public . through the multi - state foreclosure prevention working group , we collected data which demonstrates that voluntary loan modification measures have failed.... because most troubled mortgages are securitized , multiple stakeholders may be involved in the decision to modify mortgage loans , causing a continued paralysis . although some major lenders have recently embarked on loan modifications on a wide scale , many servicers and secondary market investors remain unwilling or unable to act , even when their own economic interests dictate otherwise . proponents of amending the bankruptcy code believe allowing strip down of primary residences would have two important results . first , it would encourage the voluntary modification of mortgages before default or delinquency that may drive borrowers into bankruptcy . second , they believe that where voluntary workouts prior to bankruptcy could not be achieved , strip down would adjust the mortgage terms such that the costs and benefits are efficiently spread among debtors and creditors , while allowing debtors to remain in the home after bankruptcy . senator durbin , before the senate committee on the judiciary , stated: as we heard at last year's hearing , the benefits of this proposal [to allow the modification of certain mortgage debts in bankruptcy] are clear . we heard testimony that: •my legislation would significantly reduce the number of foreclosures and help hundreds of thousands of families stay in their homes . •mortgage modification in bankruptcy benefits everyone - the homeowner , the lender , the neighboring homeowners and the economy - far more than foreclosure . •my proposal would give lenders , servicers and investors a real incentive to voluntarily rework mortgages... . professor adam levitin , at the same senate judiciary committee hearing , explained: in a perfectly functioning market without agency and transaction costs , lenders would be engaged in large - scale modification of defaulted or distressed mortgage loans , as the lenders would prefer a smaller loss from modification than a larger loss from foreclosure . voluntary modification , however , has not been happening on a large - scale , for a variety of reasons , most notably contractual impediments , agency costs , practical impediments , and other transaction costs .