this section focuses on sticker price . data on net price are discussed in a subsequent section . after considering the cost of a college and the price students are initially asked to pay , a third measure of college expenses is net price . net price is a measure of price that takes into account financial aid provided to students . it is the actual price students and their families need to pay out of their own pockets to attend college . student aid for postsecondary education may be need - based aid or merit - based aid . need - based aid addresses concerns of access and affordability through grants and loans , while merit - based aid programs are designed to recognize student achievement through tuition waivers and scholarships . numerous entities provide student aid , including states , local governments , institutions , foundations , and the federal government . in 2006-2007 , over $149.0 billion was awarded in student aid from all sources . about 58% of this amount was generated by the federal government through appropriations , loan guarantees , and tax credits . for the federal government , providing access to postsecondary education for low - income students has been the focus of student aid programs . federal grant aid from all programs totaled $19.6 billion in the last academic year , while federally backed loan disbursements totaled $59.6 billion . from federal , state , institutional , and private sources , grant aid to students — which does not have to be repaid and therefore lowers out - of - pocket payments — totaled $63.9 billion . 89-329 as amended by p.l . where data are available , this report considers all types of postsecondary education institutions: public , private not - for - profit , and private for - profit . few students in american higher education are asked to pay the full cost of their education . although tuition and fees are an important source of revenue at all types of institutions , other sources of revenue help defray the total costs , and students are then asked to pay significantly less . as shown in table 1 , for public institutions , the primary source of subsidy revenue is state appropriations ( and local appropriations for some community colleges ) , and public institutions are increasingly relying on private philanthropic support and endowment income as well . private non - profit institutions rely heavily on donations , income earned from endowments , supplements from affiliated religious organizations , and other sources of support . private for - profit institutions , by contrast , are most likely to be tuition dependent and to have few other sources of revenue . two approaches to cost — revenues and expenditures — are discussed below , because both are used in discussions of college costs ; however , references to college costs in the remainder of this report refer to expenditures . the price of higher education has increasingly become a topic of both public and congressional debate .