he said that "it is vital for our country . it is fundamental to continue this path of growth and social redistribution that we have started in my country. he says he is now governing not as a leftist but as a moderate . hoping to regain credibility with peru's business sector and international financial institutions , he has pledged to maintain orthodox macro - economic policies . garcía has appointed a fiscal conservative as finance minister and cut the pay of government workers . he also has sought to reassure poor peruvian citizens that he is addressing their needs by pledging austerity measures such as halving the government palace's annual spending and redirecting the funds to a rural irrigation project . garcía has embraced the ptpa in his efforts to strengthen the bilateral relationship with the united states and to fight poverty and inequality in peru . recognizing that a free trade agreement would not be sufficient to eliminate inequality , president garcía has initiated a number of internal reforms that would help spread benefits of free trade to the poorer regions of the country and reduce the level of poverty . over half of peru's population lives below the poverty line . poverty is concentrated in rural and jungle areas , and among the indigenous population . the comprehensive free trade agreement would eliminate tariffs and other barriers to goods and services . this section summarizes several key provisions in the original agreement text as provided by the united states trade representative ( ustr ) , and the legally binding amendments agreed upon by the united states and peru in june 2007 . the amendments reflect the bipartisan trade framework that was agreed upon by congress and the bush administration on may 10 , 2007 . implementing legislation for a ptpa was considered by the u.s. congress under title xxi ( bipartisan trade promotion authority act of 2002 ) of the trade act of 2002 ( p.l . 107-210 ) on an expedited basis that is limited in debate and with no amendments . gaining passage of a ptpa was a high priority for the government of peru . peruvian president alan garcía perez met with president bush on at least two occasions to discuss the free trade agreement . after an april 2007 meeting , president garcía stated that he was in the united states to promote a free trade agreement with the united states . the bush administration was a strong supporter of the expansion of free trade with peru and issued a statement in october 2006 that a ptpa would be mutually beneficial "in strengthening bilateral ties while leveling the trade playing field , spurring job creation , and reducing poverty and inequality" . on july 9 , 2007 , president bush reaffirmed his support for the agreement and called on congress to approve the ptpa by the beginning of august 2007 . house democratic leaders expressed concerns in 2007 and early in 2009 regarding peru's labor and environmental laws , with particular concern regarding workers rights to freely associate and collectively bargin . they believe that peru's adoption of new labor laws and regulations in 2008 created loopholes to laws that had been passed by the peruvian government in 2007 to strengthen worker rights .