legal gaps . to a large degree , the illegal wildlife trade continues to flourish due to complex socioeconomic and political conditions that are often beyond the scope of targeted international programs and agreements . such structural conditions include conflict , corruption , poverty and the absence of livelihood alternatives , persistent demand for illicit wildlife products and a lack of public awareness of the consequences of such demand , as well as other environmental pressures that contribute to wildlife population losses ( eg , environmental degradation , habitat loss , and ecological fragmentation ) . to address illicit trade in endangered wildlife , the international community has established a global policy framework to regulate and sometimes ban exports of selected species . domestic , bilateral , regional , and global efforts are intended to support international goals of sustainable conservation , effective resource management , and enforcement of relevant laws and regulations . the flagship international mechanism to control wildlife trade is the 1975 convention on international trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora ( cites ) . through cites , approximately 5,000 species of animals and 29,000 species of plants are subject to varying levels of trade restrictions , depending on the extent to which they are at risk of extinction . among other activities , the secretariat makes periodic recommendations that trade be suspended with certain countries found to be in violation of cites commitments . a total of 178 governments have committed to cites , including the united states . although the scope of international initiatives for environmental conservation is vast , there are several international or regional efforts that are specifically geared toward combating the criminal aspects of wildlife trafficking , sharing law enforcement information for the purpose of criminal investigations and prosecutions , and building capacity among wildlife enforcement officials to detect and prevent illegal trade in wildlife . additionally , several high - level international statements have been adopted in recent years , including by the united nations and asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) , which identify the issue of wildlife trafficking as a key global concern . the united states addresses the international illegal wildlife trade through domestic enforcement and laws , as well as through foreign policy . u.s. efforts to prohibit aspects of wildlife trade originated with the lacey act of 1900 and have been enhanced through provisions in the lacey act amendments of 1981 , the endangered species act of 1973 , and other laws . recently , increased awareness of wildlife trafficking as a potential problem has caused some observers and policymakers to question the efficacy of existing u.s. and international responses and consider new options for responding to such illicit activity . key implementing agencies for u.s. initiatives against wildlife trafficking include the department of interior's fish and wildlife service ( fws ) as well as the state department and usaid . fws has multiple domestic and international responsibilities related to combating wildlife crime .