it will not be updated . when it first requested funding in 2007 , the bush administration argued that the proposed gmd european capability would help defend u.s. forces stationed in europe , u.s. friends and allies in the region , as well as to defend the united states against long - range ballistic missile threats from iran . in its last budget request for fy2009 , the bush administration requested $712 million for development , fielding , and military construction of the european gmd element . some $618 million was available from the fy2009 defense budget for the european 3 rd site , had polish and czech ratification gone forward . for example , the european gbi would consist of two rocket stages in contrast to the three - stage gbi deployed today . this particular two - stage configuration was never tested and was a basis for additional questions about the proposed system's effectiveness . proponents of the system would argue that the two - stage version is fundamentally the same as the three - stage system , however . in europe , the gbi reportedly would not need the third stage to achieve the range needed to intercept its intended target . this issue raised the question for some observers at the time as to whether other u.s. systems designed for shorter or medium - range ballistic missile threats , such as patriot , thaad ( terminal high altitude area defense ) , or aegis ( sea - based bmd ) might be more appropriate for addressing the current and prospective iranian ballistic missile threat to europe . dod's missile defense agency ( mda ) argued during the tenure of the bush administration that those systems would not have been adequate to counter prospective iranian ballistic missile threats over the mid - term and longer . deployment of the silos and interceptors in poland was scheduled to begin in 2011 with completion in 2013 . this timeline was not certain , however , given the delay in ratifying the bmd agreement . the interceptors were to have been deployed at redzikowo , near the town of slopsk in northern poland . the field of the 10 interceptors itself would likely have comprised an area somewhat larger than a football field . the area of supporting infrastructure was likely to be similar to a small military installation . in addition , a u.s. x - band radar ( a narrow - beam , midcourse tracking radar ) , that was being used in the pacific missile test range , would have been refurbished and transported to a fixed site at a military training base in the czech republic . the site currently identified was in the heavily forested brdy military training area , about 150 kilometers southwest of prague . the x - band radar with its large , ball - shaped radome ( radar dome ) is several stories in height . a second , transportable forward acquisition radar would have to have been deployed in a country never identified , but closer to iran . some european press accounts once mentioned the caucasus region , but the bush administration never publicly indicated where this radar might be located .