appendix a . president's science and technology policy advisors appendix b . historical ostp fundin . 113-6 as described below . the reports accompanying p.l . 113-76 directed ostp to reexamine possible reorganizations of federal stem programs for consideration in a future fiscal year after engaging in an inclusive development process involving the interagency community and external stakeholders and taking into consideration program evaluations and other evidence of program success ; report on the funding , authorities , and other resources necessary to support dissemination of federal stem education research findings ; report on federal agency progress in developing plans for public access to federally funded research findings ; and report on the assessment of rare earth mineral criticality . in addition , ostp is encouraged to report on collaborative relationships and activities and directed identify international collaborative opportunities is the area of neuroscience . 113-73 , which made further continuing appropriations for fy2014 , was a continuing resolution providing funding through january 18 , 2014 , for ostp operations ( along with the rest of the federal government ) at a rate equal to fy2013 . 113-46 , the continuing appropriations act , 2014 , was a continuing resolution providing funding through january 15 , 2014 , for ostp operations ( along with the rest of the federal government ) at a rate equal to fy2013 . 113-6 , the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 , provided fy2013 appropriations of $5.7 million , following rescission , for ostp ( along with appropriations for the rest of the federal government ) . it also contained statutory language prohibiting expenditure of the ostp funds to develop , design , plan , promulgate , implement , or execute a bilateral policy , program , order , or contract of any kind to participate , collaborate , or coordinate bilaterally in any way with china or any chinese - owned company unless such activities are specifically authorized by a law enacted after the date of enactment of this act . this prohibition extended the original prohibition established for fy2011 . the consolidated and further continuing appropriations act , 2013 , further clarified that this prohibition shall not apply to activities that ostp certifies ( 1 ) pose no risk of resulting in the transfer of technology , data , or other information with national security or economic security implications to china or a chinese - owned company ; and ( 2 ) will not involve knowing interactions with officials who have been determined by the united states to have direct involvement with violations of human rights . the ostp must submit any such certification to congress at least 30 days prior to the activity . while the former requirement was also present in the fy2012 appropriations act , the latter requirement is new to fy2013 and reportedly reflects an existing agreement between congress and ostp . the reports accompanying p.l .