figure 1 . global change in forest cover , 2000-2005source: the u.n. food and agriculture organization , global forests resources assessment ( rome , italy: 2006 ) , 320 pp.note: dark lines represent the tropics of cancer and capricorn . the role of forests in the carbon cycle and the extent of deforestation and its impact on ghg emissions are primary reasons deforestation is addressed in climate change legislation . many experts contend that protecting forests or preventing deforestation may be less expensive than other technologies to reduce co 2 emissions , and provide other environmental and socioeconomic benefits such as preserving biodiversity . others contend that increasing carbon sequestration through restoration and preventing deforestation , though compelling in theory , might be challenging and more expensive in practice . bills that address deforestation propose in their findings that international deforestation is a major contributor to ghg emissions , and that foreign countries with forests have a role in preventing deforestation and engaging in restoration and afforestation activities . some argue that congressional intent to address deforestation is misplaced with funding initiatives to prevent deforestation in foreign countries . they question the ability of some foreign countries to implement and monitor forest restoration and preservation programs , and the potential value to the united states of implementing these programs . further , they argue that funds should be focused on domestic efforts to address forest restoration and carbon sequestration technologies . this crs legislative analysis covers key issues and policies addressed by three selected climate change bills introduced in the 110 th congress that include international deforestation: s. 3036 , h.r . implementing forest protection programs in the tropics can be challenging for several reasons . some assert that the causes of deforestation vary in different regions and that a "one size fits all" approach to reduce deforestation might not be successful . for example , deforestation in the amazon basin is driven , in part , by livestock and soybean production , which leads to the conversion of forests to pastures and farms . in contrast , in parts of central africa , deforestation is driven , in part , by fuelwood extraction and charcoal production . policies that are flexible and address diverse economic , social , and cultural influences are expected to be most successful , according to some . observers also contend that deforestation programs will require consistent and effective monitoring and measuring systems that quantify changes in forest cover and provide accurate accounting of forest carbon stocks . for example , some contend that the coverage and quality of satellite imagery in tropical countries is inadequate to estimate forest cover and rates of deforestation on small scales . some also suggest that consistent and tested methods for establishing baseline and historical changes in forest cover and carbon stocks need to be implemented in any global plan to address deforestation . in some developing countries , monitoring and enforcement capacity may be lacking . some contend that funding should be first directed at improving infrastructure and the capacity to measure carbon stocks , monitor emissions and land use , and enforce forest carbon activities . enforcement obligations to prevent deforestation might be a challenge in developing countries .