about 30,000 returned to laos . in 2003 , the united states agreed to accept about 15,000 hmong who had taken refuge at the wat tham krabok temple in central thailand , after the thai government announced that it would disperse those living there . between 2005 and 2009 , the thai government reportedly repatriated over 3,000 lao - hmong under an agreement with the lao government . approximately 4,500 remained at the huai nam khao camp in thailand's phetchabun province . thailand has long been reluctant to allow unhcr involvement for fear of encouraging an influx of refugees from laos and other neighboring countries , and reportedly has restricted international access to the camp . although many hmong in thailand have expressed fear of harassment or persecution if they go back to laos , thai authorities and some international observers have estimated that a minority – between 15% and 25% of the huai nam khao group – would likely qualify as political refugees , while the remainder are "economic migrants. in december 2009 , the thai army began deporting the hmong at huai nam khao , claiming that about half had agreed to go voluntarily . another group of 158 lao - hmong at a detention center in nong khai , thailand , have been granted u.n. refugee status . services constitute about 27% . other major economic sectors include metals extraction , hydropower , timber , rubber , and tourism . the lao economy grew by an estimated 4.5% in 2009 , down from 7.5% in 2008 , and is expected to grow by 7% in 2010 . laos is becoming economically integrated with its neighbors . the lpdr's principal trading partners are thailand ( 35% ) , vietnam ( 15% ) , and china ( 8.5% ) . thailand is the largest export market for lao goods , buying $626 million in 2008 while vietnam imported $216 million and china $140 million . the eu is also a major regional trading partner and a large market for lao products . laos is still not heavily dependent upon foreign trade , however , and has been somewhat insulated from the global economic downturn . vietnam , china , thailand , and south korea are the lpdr's largest foreign investors . many chinese and vietnamese companies have invested in the mining sector while thai enterprises have played a large role in the development of hydropower . china reportedly has begun to rival australia as the main investor in minerals extraction . according to many observers , the lpdr does not engage in widespread persecution of religious groups and religious freedom has improved , particularly in urban areas . the department of state reported , "in most areas officials generally respected the rights of members of most religious groups to worship , albeit within strict constraints imposed by the government. however , non - mainstream or non - buddhist religious activities , particularly among religious and ethnic minorities , often continue to experience repression at the local level . from 2000 through 2003 , the united states commission on international religious freedom ( uscirf ) recommended that the u.s. state department designate laos as a "country of particular concern" for systematic and egregious violations of religious freedom .