the provision in h.r . 3970 increases the period to 20 years . the treatment for intangibles was enacted to simplify compliance and end disputes about the proper recovery period for intangibles which were not easily classified or separated from good will , which was assumed to be non - depreciable . the u.s. treasury disputes the revenue gains projected by the joint committee on taxation and the current administration opposes the change , while the clinton administration supported it . the third provision relates to inter - corporate dividend deductions . to prevent too much double tax at the corporate level , while still discouraging chains of partially owned corporations ( which allows one corporation to exert control over many others ) current law allows a partial , but not full , deduction for certain dividends paid between corporations . for a firm 80% owned , there is a 100% dividend deduction , for firms with 20% or more ownership , there is an 80% deduction , and for firms with less than 20% ownership there is a 70% deduction . the bill would reduce the 80% and 70% deductions to 70% and 60% ( other than wholly owned subsidiaries ) . this provision would prevent a reduction in the intercorporate tax burden as a result of the rate cut . these taxes would actually rise slightly . for 20% owned the tax rises from 7% ( 0.3 times 35% ) to 9.15% ( 0.2 times 30.5% ) ; for less than 20% owners , the tax rises from 10.5% ( 0.3 times 35% ) to 12.2% ( 0.4 times 30.5% ) . the remaining provisions are relatively small in revenue impact . they include a provision that would prevent corporations from currently excluding payments from tax that may be uncollectible in the future , rather than taking these losses into account in the future . the stock option provision is aimed at taxpayers who hold options in subchapter s corporations ( corporations that elect to be taxed as partners ) in combination with a large share of the stock held by a tax exempt employee stock ownership plan ( esop ) . this treatment allows much of the s corporation to avoid tax while taxable shareholders accumulate value through options . another provision would eliminate benefits for the remaining domestic international sales corporations ( a form of organization that was eliminated in general many years ago ) . the final provision relates to tax free spin - offs of subsidiaries by parents , where tax is imposed on the parent if the parent receives value in excess of their tax basis in the subsidiary . included in the definition of value is debt of the parent assumed by the subsidiary . this provision would apply that tax to debt assumed prior to the spin - off . most of these extenders are discussed in a crs report rl32367 , certain temporary tax provisions ( " extenders " ) expired in 200 7 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . of the individual items in table a - 1 , the most significant in revenue impact is the optional deduction for state and local sales taxes .