deepening. at the hearing , senator kohl announced his plan to "propose a national registry to require disclosure of payments and gifts. it would appear that any proposal would likely require pharmaceutical companies to disclose gifts and payments made to physicians . groups opposing a federal disclosure provision argue that disclosure is unnecessary because existing guidelines within the medical and pharmaceutical - marketing professions discourage unethical behavior . they also argue that gifts and payments often benefit patients , as physicians receive product samples , attend educational seminars , and receive detailed information about particular medications . at the senate hearing , a representative from the pharmaceutical company trade association pharmaceutical research and manufacturers of america ( phrma ) refuted the suggestion that unethical ties between pharmaceutical representatives and physicians are prevalent . she stated that pharmaceutical representatives associated with phrma adhere to a strict ethical code , one that "starts with the fundamental principle that a healthcare professional's care of patients should be based , and should be perceived as being based , solely on each patient's medical needs and the healthcare professional's medical knowledge and experience. a representative from the american medical association ( ama ) similarly highlighted the ethical codes already in place within the medical profession , discussed below , which he believes discourage improper conduct . he also stated that pharmaceutical company representatives provide physicians with the "necessary tools to make the right prescribing decisions" and stressed that physicians depend on close relationships with pharmaceutical industry representatives in order to receive "valid scientific information. supporters of a federal disclosure provision emphasize concern about the effects of gifts and payments on both the cost of prescription medication and on health care quality . they point to recent data showing that payments from pharmaceutical companies influence some physicians' decisions to prescribe certain medications , occasionally resulting in over - prescribing of the most expensive medications or even causing unnecessary health risks for patients . they also argue that the ethical guidelines such as the ama rules discussed below are insufficient deterrents because they "are not being followed. at the senate hearing , senator mccaskill argued that the same concerns that prompted federal limits on gifts from lobbyists to politicians apply to pharmaceutical company - physician relationships . also at the hearing , a medical school professor testified that "the medical profession has become excessively dependent on the largesse of [the pharmaceutical] industry. he further asserted that such dependence has a "negative influence on the quality and cost of patient care. similarly , a researcher testified that although most physicians deny any such influence , research shows that contact between physicians and pharmaceutical representatives often influences prescribing habits . regarding disclosure as the specific mechanism for addressing these issues , senator kohl stated that disclosure would provide needed "transparency," perhaps by creating a public record of financial ties between pharmaceutical companies and prescribing physicians . two sets of ama guidelines provide ethical guidance to practicing physicians . first , ama's principles of medical ethics provide "standards of conduct which define the essentials of honorable behavior" for physicians . second , the ama code of medical ethics "serves as the primary compendium of medical professional ethical statements in the united states.