appendix a . fuel costs . air emissions controls for coal and natural gas plants . this financial analysis of new power plants provides estimates of the operating costs and required capital recovery of each generating technology through 2050 . plant operating costs will vary from year to year depending , for example , on changes in fuel prices and the start or end of government incentive programs . the implication is that if power plant capital costs continue to increase rapidly , the competitive position of the combined cycle will improve compared to all other technologies . if capital costs decline , the competitive position of the other technologies will substantially improve versus the combined cycle . however , even assuming a 25% drop in capital costs compared to the base case , the combined cycle is still competitive with all other technologies . as noted above , the cost of building power plants has recently increased dramatically . whether costs will continue to increase , remain steady in real dollar terms , or decline is unknown . table 11 illustrates the effect on the cost of power of assuming a uniform 25% increase or decrease in capital costs for all technologies compared to the base case . power costs change by about + / - 20% for each technology except for the gas - fired combined cycle plant ( + / - 12% ; see column 3 ) . this is because the combined cycle has a relatively low capital cost and a high capacity factor . table 11 shows that the power cost of the combined cycle is about half as sensitive to changes in capital costs as the other generating technologies . the implication is that continued rapid escalation in the cost of building power plants will favor the economics of combined cycles . this is illustrated by table 12 . in the base case ( column 3 ) , the power costs of wind , nuclear , and igcc coal are about a third higher than the combined cycle . in the high capital cost case ( column 4 ) the difference widens to almost 50% . on the other hand , decreases in capital costs , whether the result of market forces or government incentives , would reduce the cost of power from the other technologies about twice as much as for the combined cycle . this is illustrated by the low capital cost case ( column 5 ) , in which all the non - solar technologies are within 21% or less of the generating cost of the combined cycle . the estimates of carbon - related allowance costs and control technology costs used in this analysis are subject to an exceptional degree of uncertainty , including whether congress will actually pass carbon control legislation . the results of this analysis are therefore equally uncertain . with the carbon control assumptions used in this analysis , coal - fired generation is expensive , ranging from about $100 to almost $120 per mwh . the least expensive options include zero - carbon emission technologies: geothermal ( $59.23 per mwh ) , nuclear ( $83.22 ) and wind ( $80.74 ) .