however , this was down from 13.9% in june 2011 . such policies have contributed to china's large annual trade surpluses . the effect could be compounded if this action triggered a more general financial reaction ( or panic ) , in which all foreigners responded by reducing their holdings of u.s. assets . the initial effect could be a sudden and large depreciation in the value of the dollar , as the supply of dollars on the foreign exchange market increased , and a sudden and large increase in u.s. interest rates , as an important funding source for investment and the budget deficit was withdrawn from the financial markets . this could result in higher interest rates and lower investment rates , all else equal , which could reduce long - term growth . a reliance on foreign governments such as china , to finance the u.s. current account deficit ( which includes the u.s. merchandise trade deficit ) by increasing their foreign exchange reserves may prolong the necessary adjustment process . such investors would presumably require higher interest rates than those prevailing today to be enticed to buy them . it remains to be seen whether this adjustment process began in the united states in 2008 , or whether the rise in private saving and decline in the current account deficit was only a temporary response to the recession . some economists contend that , although the low u.s. savings rate is a problem , the u.s. current account deficit and high levels of foreign capital flows to the united states are also reflections of the strength of the u.s. economy and its attractiveness as a destination for foreign investment , and therefore discount the likelihood that foreign investors will suddenly shift their capital elsewhere . some economists view china's purchases of u.s. securities as a type of subsidy that is transferred from chinese savers to u.s. consumers and borrowers in the form of lower - cost chinese products and lower u.s. interest rates . one economist in 2007 estimated that a chinese move away from long - term u.s. securities could raise u.s. interest rates by as much as 50 basis points . higher interest rates would cause a decline in investment spending and other interest - sensitive spending . all else equal , the reduction in chinese treasury holdings would cause the overall foreign demand for u.s. assets to fall , and this would cause the dollar to depreciate . if the value of the dollar depreciated , the trade deficit would decline , as the price of u.s. exports fell abroad and the price of imports rose in the united states . the magnitude of these effects would depend on how many u.s. securities china sold ; modest reductions would have negligible effects on the economy given the large size of u.s. financial markets . since china held about $1.6 trillion of u.s. private and public securities ( largely u.s. treasury securities ) as of june 2012 , any reduction in its u.s. holdings could potentially be large . if there were a large reduction in its holdings , the effect on the u.s. economy would still depend on whether the reduction was gradual or sudden .