there currently are no standards for these technologies . most systems are able to communicate only with technologies developed by the same manufacturer . this limits the interoperability of smart grid technologies and limits future choices for companies that choose to install any particular type of technology . the department of energy's ( doe's ) office of electricity delivery and energy reliability in partnership with industry is developing standards for advanced grid design and operations . in addition , doe is funding research and development projects in this area . transmission line losses are minimized . the three phases of power are carried over three wires that are connected to large transmission towers . close to the ultimate consumer , the power is stepped - down at another substation to lower voltages , typically less than 10 kv . at this point , the power is considered to have left the transmission system and entered the distribution system . the transmission system continues to become more congested , and siting of transmission lines continues to be difficult . to try to maximize operation of existing infrastructure , efforts are being made in both industry and government to modernize electric distribution equipment to improve communications between utilities and the ultimate consumer . the goal is to use advanced , information - based technologies to increase power grid efficiency , reliability , and flexibility , and reduce the rate at which additional electric utility infrastructure needs to be built . some utilities have been using smart metering: meters that can be read remotely , primarily for billing purposes . however , these meters do not provide communication back to the utility with information on voltage , current levels , and specific usage . similarly , these meters have very limited ability to allow the consumer the ability to either automatically or selectively change their usage patterns based on information provided by the utility . the term smart grid refers to a distribution system that allows for flow of information from a customer's meter in two directions: both inside the house to thermostats and appliances and other devices , and back to the utility . it is expected that grid reliability will increase as additional information from the distribution system is available to utility operators . this will allow for better planning and operations during peak demand . for example , new technologies such as a programmable communicating thermostat ( pct ) could connect with a customer's meter through a home area network allowing the utility to change the settings on the thermostat based on load or other factors . pcts are not commercially available , but are expected to be available within a year . it is estimated that a 4% peak load reduction could be achieved using smart grid technologies . both regulatory and technological barriers have limited the implementation of smart grid technology . the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) regulates the wholesale transmission system and the states regulate the distribution system . in general , the federal government has not interfered with state regulation of the electric distribution system . however , the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact05 ) required states to consider deploying smart meters for residential and small commercial customers .