such auctions are called uniform - price auctions . 5 ) by a 42-52 vote . on february 10 , 2009 , treasury secretary timothy geithner outlined a "financial stability plan" intended to address continued financial and economic turmoil . geithner said that he aimed "to use private capital and private asset managers to help provide a market mechanism for valuing the assets. according to some experts , market pricing of such assets implies that reverse auctions would play an important role in the plan . many proposed plans to address financial turmoil involve asset purchases by federal entities . market - based pricing would probably involve auctions or similar mechanisms . this report provides congress with information on the uses , design , and functions of auctions . it reviews some common types of auctions used by the federal government and some of the issues of auction design that may face the treasury department . the deterioration in the credit quality of mortgage - related assets and similar types of assets , according to many experts , is closely linked with the credit crunch that emerged in august 2007 , and which worsened in the fall of 2008 . many have therefore argued that creating a government - sponsored vehicle to absorb troubled assets , either directly by asset purchases or indirectly by acquiring equity shares in institutions that hold troubled assets , would strengthen lenders' balance sheets , which in turn would stimulate new lending . thus , the federal government , in this view , can encourage lending by shouldering some portion of risks associated with troubled assets . government purchases of troubled assets , however , present two types of risks to federal stakeholders . first , uncertainty about the fundamental value of troubled assets implies that federal stakeholders will bear financial risks , especially when those risks are related to systematic economic trends . second , the government may overpay for troubled assets or for equity in firms that hold such assets . in early february 2009 , the chair of the eesa congressional oversight board expressed concern that the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) had overpaid for assets it had acquired . details of secretary geithner's proposals have not yet been released . the plan outline released on february 10 , 2009 , indicates that market - based asset purchases , which presumably would involve auction mechanisms , would play an important role . congress , therefore , may wish to understand how treasury proposals determine asset purchase prices when it considers enabling legislation and while it conducts on - going oversight of tarp and related programs . in early october 2008 , the bush administration proposed using reverse auctions to purchase mortgage - related securities from financial institutions , which are similar to the multiple - unit dutch auctions that the treasury uses to sell government securities . while the bush administration focused on other strategies to address continuing financial turmoil , a "financial stability plan" outlined by president obama's treasury secretary , timothy geithner , may include reverse auctions as part of the proposed "public - private investment fund. in a reverse auction , a buyer accepts bids from multiple potential sellers .