appendix a . current u.s. polar icebreakers and polar research ships this appendix provides background information on current u.s. polar icebreakers and polar research ships . those are the numbers that you would need to do it . snowe: admiral titley , how would you respond to the high latitude study and has the navy conducted its own assessment of its capability ? rear admiral david titley , oceanorgrapher and navigator of the navy: ma'am , we are in the process right now of conducting what we call a capabilities based assessment that will be out in the summer of this year . we are getting ready to finish that — the coast guard has been a key component of the navy's task force on climate change , literally since day one when the chief of naval operations set this up , that morning , we had the coast guard invited as a member of our executive steering committee . so we have been working very closely with the coast guard , with the department of homeland security , and i think admiral papp — said it best as far as the specific comments on the high latitude study but we have been working very closely with the coast guard . january 2011 dhs office of inspector general report a january 2011 report on the coast guard's polar icebreakers from the dhs office of the inspector general stated the following: the coast guard does not have the necessary budgetary control over its [polar] icebreakers , nor does it have a sufficient number of icebreakers to accomplish its missions in the polar regions . currently , the coast guard has only one operational [polar] icebreaker [i.e. , healy ] , making it necessary for the united states to contract with foreign nations to perform scientific , logistical , and supply activities . without the necessary budgetary control and a sufficient number of icebreaking assets , the coast guard will not have the capability to perform all of its missions , will lose critical icebreaking expertise , and may be beholden to foreign nations to perform its statutory missions . the coast guard should improve its strategic approach to ensure that it has the long - term icebreaker capabilities needed to support coast guard missions and other national interests in the arctic and antarctic regions . regarding current polar icebreaking capabilities for performing arctic missions , the report states the following: the coast guard's icebreaking resources are unlikely to meet future demands . [the table below] outlines the missions that coast guard is unable to meet in the arctic with its current icebreaking resources . the report also states the following: should the coast guard not obtain funding for new icebreakers or major service life extensions for its existing icebreakers with sufficient lead - time , the united states will have no heavy icebreaking capability beyond 2020 and no polar icebreaking capability of any kind by 2029 . without the continued use of icebreakers , the united states will lose its ability to maintain a presence in the polar regions , the coast guard's expertise to perform ice operations will continue to diminish , and missions will continue to go unmet .