see table 1 . according to the gao , the dndo is not using existing information on funding in the various architecture levels to coordinate with other agencies on the overall strategic direction of detection efforts . congress might expand or reduce agency funding levels to more closely match the levels determined by dndo to meet the needs of the global nuclear detection architecture , increase overall funding for all aspects of the global nuclear detection architecture to increase redundancy , or decrease funding if it believes other funding priorities are more important . shifting funding between layers of the architecture has complex ramifications: it may imperil international agreements , lead to perceptions of weakness or strength in the various programs , or cause interagency disagreements . unless the global nuclear detection architecture has a robust evaluative system with clear metrics that tie architecture performance to program funding , changes in investment in the different layers of the global nuclear detection architecture may not yield optimal risk reduction . it is difficult to assess without careful evaluation whether shifting funds from one program to another will have a positive or negative net impact ; the relative size of the two programs is not necessarily the relevant criterion for assessing its impact on the global nuclear detection architecture . moreover , dndo is not statutorily empowered to direct changes in the funding of other agencies . only through higher - level budgetary policy decisions can interagency funding profiles be changed . this situation may result in a mismatch between the optimal investment levels for the global nuclear detection architecture and the actual investments made . congress might choose to provide the dndo director with the authority to review and assess the budgets of other departments and agencies involved in the global nuclear detection architecture and to comment or recommend alternative budget allocation to other departments and agencies or directly to the office of management and budget . another possible approach would be for congress to require that agencies create a single global nuclear detection architecture budget , to provide congress with a more transparent correlation between agency funding and the global nuclear detection architecture . for example , an annual budget supplement is issued for the national nanotechnology initiative , another multi - agency federal endeavor with a large budget . such a budget supplement for nuclear detection might be coordinated by dndo through an interagency process ; the homeland security council , national security council , or national science and technology council ; or through one of the agencies participating in the global nuclear detection architecture . alternatively , congress might vest a budgetary coordinating role within the office of science and technology policy rather than within dndo . congress established an office of the united states coordinator for the prevention of weapons of mass destruction proliferation and terrorism within the white house . the head of this office is to advise the president , formulate national strategy and policy , lead interagency coordination and implementation , and oversee development of a comprehensive , coordinated budget for weapon of mass destruction proliferation and terrorism prevention .