each section is divided into more specific topics . actions with an identifiable deadline appear in italic . this report contains numerous citations to house rules , which may be found , along with the parliamentarian's notes , in constitution , jefferson's manual , and rules of the house of representati ve s o f the united states , one hundred fifteenth congress . an explanatory document of house rules and precedents , arranged by parliamentary subject - matter , is house practice: a guide to the rules , precedents , and procedures of the house . the congressional research service ( crs ) maintains a set of reports on the legislative process and congressional procedures , including the budget process and budget procedures , and congressional organization that is wide ranging in format , coverage , and subject matter . crs has an even wider range of reports on hundreds of legislative issues . all crs reports are available on the crs website at http: / / www.crs.gov . the office of the parliamentarian is the official source of parliamentary advice for committees , although parliamentarians do not attend committee meetings to assist the chair , unlike their service to the presiding officer during a meeting of the house . crs's specialists and analysts on congress also provide confidential parliamentary assistance and training for committee and subcommittee chairs , majority and minority committee members , and majority and minority staff . crs policy specialists and analysts may assist committees , members , and staff confidentially in framing policy issues , developing legislative options , planning hearings , providing written and oral policy and legislative analyses at all stages of the legislative process , and appearing as nonpartisan witnesses at hearings . the house routinely meets for so - called early organization in november , just a week or so after the election , with organizational activities continuing into december and even into january or later . the november meetings typically occur simultaneously with the orientation activities planned for members - elect and might overlap with a so - called lame - duck session . a committee chair controls the selection of committee staff , authorizes expenditures from the committee budget , establishes operational and ethics policies , determines committee travel allocations , decides the content of the committee website , and assumes responsibility for administration of the committee's rooms , paperwork , and other operations . the chair negotiates and decides on the allocation of budget , resources , and duties with the minority . a committee chair establishes the committee agenda , divides work between the subcommittees and the full committee , determines procedural strategy , calls hearings , selects witnesses and determines the order of their testimony , presides over hearings and markups , chooses the markup vehicle and pursues an amendment strategy , prepares the committee report accompanying legislation , and discusses , or might negotiate , any of these matters with the ranking minority member . rules and practices of the house vest discretion with a committee chair , but he or she must be vigilant and well served by committee staff in using this discretion .