a conference is pending . opposing members expect the president to veto any bill that repeals the "mexico city policy. some health experts assert that congressional hiv prevention stipulations are not well - balanced , place too much emphasis on abstinence until marriage , and limit countries' ability to use prevention funds in a manner that is most relevant to local conditions . 108-25 , which delineates how pepfar funds should be allocated , stipulates that between fy2006 and fy2008 , 20% of global hiv / aids funds are to be used for prevention efforts , of which at least 33% should be expended for abstinence - until - marriage programs . in 2006 , the government accountability office ( gao ) found that pepfar's spending requirements limited the flexibility with which prevention funds could be spent . gao estimated that in order to meet the 33% proviso , between fy2004 and fy2006 , ogac increased spending on prevention by almost 55% and mandated that country teams spend half of prevention funds on sexual transmission prevention and two - thirds of those funds on abstinence / faithfulness ( ab ) activities . in its congressionally mandated report , the institute of medicine ( iom ) reached similar conclusions . some health specialists argue that these policies consume limited resources and time , as they place additional reporting requirements on implementing partners . britain's department for international development ( dfid ) reports that from 2003 to 2004 and 2006 to 2007 , the ugandan government was reporting on 684 different aid instruments and associated agreements . critics suggest that if congress reauthorizes pepfar , it should eliminate these spending restrictions , coordinate reporting requirements and funding processes with other donors , and urge the united states to sign on to the international health partnership . some in congress have supported legislation that was introduced to remove the spending provisions . the hiv prevention act ( s. 1553 ) and the protection against transmission of hiv for women and youth act ( h.r . 1713 ) would strike the 33% abstinence - until - marriage spending requirement from p.l . the fy2008 house foreign operations appropriations would allow the administration to determine whether to apply the 33% abstinence - until - marriage provision to global hiv / aids programs . access to generic hiv / aids treatments is another possible issue to arise in reauthorization debates . shortly after pepfar was launched , the bush administration expressed skepticism about broad - based use of generic arv medication . the administration asserted that who's prequalification process was inadequate , and that generic drugs purchased with pepfar funds had to be first inspected by the u.s. food and drug administration ( fda ) . the administration argued that since who is not a regulatory body , its adherence to stringent fda standards could not be ensured . this policy sparked a debate with critics contending that the process was unnecessary and delayed the distribution of arvs . in january 2005 , gao reported that the policy limited the selection of arv products available , did not fully support the treatment strategies of the focus countries , and was not optimally coordinated with other multinational initiatives .