in april 2008 , u.s . ambassador james moriarty reportedly articulated three key dimensions to american foreign policy toward bangladesh . weakened external demand for textiles and labor problems are contributing causes for this slowdown , though there are signs that textiles are already recovering . the garment sector in bangladesh accounts for 80% of exports and 40% of industrial jobs . key export markets include the united states ( 25.2% ) , germany ( 12.7% ) , the united kingdom ( 9.9% ) , france ( 5.5% ) , and italy ( 3.9 ) % . private consumption in bangladesh now accounts for some 65% of gdp . some have attributed the rise of islamist influence in bangladesh to the failure of bangladeshi political elites to effectively govern . this has been described as a crisis of hegemony of the rulers who have failed to provide moral leadership or effectively represent the interests of the masses . many believe this has created political space for the islamists to gain influence . the may 2008 attacks in jaipur , india suggests that islamist extremists from bangladesh remain a threat in the region . the may 13 bombings in jaipur are thought to have killed 80 and wounded 200 . natural gas accounts for 80% of bangladesh's commercial energy consumption . though there have been negotiations to build a pipeline to export gas to india these have not come to fruition . it has been reported that indian investigators believe that the bangladeshi group harkat ul - jihad - al - islami is responsible for the attacks . it also observed that "there was a significant drop in the number of extrajudicial killings by security forces," though members of the security forces continued to act "with impunity and committed acts of physical and psychological torture. bangladesh was originally founded on secular - socialist principles and firmly grounded in an ethnic bengali nationalism as opposed to a muslim religious identity . such attacks also threaten to undermine inter - communal harmony in india as indian muslims increasingly fear reprisals for such attacks . the caretaker government indicated its resolve to fight islamist extremism by executing six leaders of the islamist extremist group jamaatul mujahideen bangladesh ( jmb ) in march 2007 . the previous bnp government also demonstrated new - found resolve to fight terrorism before it stepped down , despite having islamist political parties in its coalition . there is a fear among some observers that the current crisis confronting bangladesh may create a political or security vacuum that radical islamists may seek to fill . the political context for the potential influence of islamist extremism is demonstrated by the role that islamist parties played as coalition partners in the previous bnp government . the bnp government of khaleda zia ruled with coalition support from the jamaat islami ( ji ) and islami okiya jote ( ioj ) political parties . these two political parties have an islamist political agenda and are thought to have ties to radical extremists . because of the near even electoral balance between the bnp and the al in the pre - 2007 political environment , the islamist political parties , ji and ioj in particular , enjoyed political influence disproportionate to their support among the bangladeshi electorate .