limit building and use of wideband networks . in the second report and order , the fcc assigned itself the role of champion and protector for public safety interests , nationwide emergency communications , and interoperable networks . under the umbrella of the communications act , it would undertake to monitor and regulate the actions of the public safety broadband licensee and the companies formed to manage the obligations of the d block license holder . congressional oversight of the public - private partnership therefore would be placed squarely within the jurisdiction of the committees dealing with telecommunications . in extending the scope of its authority to write service rules for auctions , the fcc has made a commitment to oversee and adjudicate the operation of a network that , when completed , could have an asset value in the tens of billions of dollars . a large part of that asset would be under the control of the public safety broadband licensee , governed by its board of directors in accordance with fcc regulations . among the voting members of the board , as currently constituted , four have been appointed directly by the fcc . these channels will be administered by states and localities through the existing regional committee structure . all rpcs with approved band plans are required by the fcc rule making to submit amended band plans . the networks built on the narrowband frequencies will be financed through long - standing procedures that use a combination of local , state , and federal funds . spectrum is to be allocated for broadband communications ( high speed data transmission , video , and voice ) in 10 mhz of frequencies at 763 - 768 mhz and 793 - 798 mhz . these frequencies are to be assigned to the public safety broadband licensee that would also be responsible for the administration of two guard bands , each covering one megahertz , at 768 - 769 mhz and 798 - 799 mhz . guard bands are created to act as buffers against interference from other operations on nearby frequencies . in order to accommodate the new band plan , some public safety network operators will have to modify equipment already purchased for use on 700 mhz frequencies . some of the cost of these changes would be covered by the commercial d block licensee . ( discussed below , in section on 700 mhz rebanding. ) the intended commercial partner in the public - private partnership would be the winning bidder for block d. the fcc ruled that eligible bidders for block d in auction 73 that qualified as small businesses under existing fcc rules would be entitled to a bidding credit ( a reduction in the amount due on the wining bid ) of 15% for companies with average attributable gross revenues of $40 million in the past three years and 25% for companies with average annual earnings of no more than $15 million . many start - up companies could have qualified as designated entities under this designation . the network sharing agreement ( nsa ) was created to be the keystone of the public - private partnership ; its rules are to be the contractual mortar uniting the two licensees .