public health has historically been a matter of state regulation . the vaccination laws were enacted under states' authority to regulate the public health of their citizens . the federal government , however , does have some authority to act in the realm of public health . also , the actual connection to public health might affect whether the government's interest is compelling . for example , although courts have recognized a compelling state interest in statutes preventing the spread of disease , it may be more difficult to find a compelling state interest in requiring individuals to have health insurance . thus , the government's interest may vary depending on the specific requirements imposed by the legislation . if the legislation does further a compelling governmental interest , it must also use the least restrictive means . that is , the government must make the burden as narrow as possible . this test may be met by providing alternative means of compliance with the legislation . in the context of the vaccination laws , for example , the government might allow individuals with religious objections to vaccination requirements to be quarantined or isolated to avoid infecting others , rather than receive the vaccination . in the context of universal health care insurance , the government might allow an exemption for individuals with religious objections and also allow individuals who objected without qualifying religious reasons to pay into a state fund rather than receive insurance coverage . these types of accommodations may be deemed the least restrictive means of advancing the government's interest if a court determines that they satisfy both the individual's free exercise of religion and the government's interest in protecting public health . there may be other accommodations that would satisfy the requirement of tailoring the legislation narrowly to meet strict scrutiny requirements . thus , when determining whether a mandatory health care program would require a religious exemption , two factors are critical to the outcome of the analysis . first , the constitutionality may depend on the nature of the mandatory health care program ( eg , whether it is a required medical procedure or a required payment for an insurance program ) . second , the constitutionality may depend on the structure of the program ( eg , whether the program provides the required participants options with which to comply in order to meet the program objectives ) . these factors would affect the extent of the burden placed on an individual's religious exercise and significantly impact the strict scrutiny analysis . because legislation that mandates participating in health care programs may conflict with religious beliefs , congress may choose to include an exemption for relevant religious objections even if it is not required . the exemption would provide an alternative for certain people based on their religious belief that would not be available to other people who do not share that religious belief . thus , some individuals may claim that the exemption violates the establishment clause ( by providing a benefit to groups based on religion ) . the establishment clause prohibits preferential treatment of one religion over another or preferential treatment of religion generally over nonreligion .