111-171 ) in may 2010 . in the help act , congress crafted amendments to the hope act , targeting those preferences that had so far appeared to demonstrate the greatest promise of promoting haitian apparel exports to the united states . an analysis of the apparel trade data from haiti , as seen in table 2 , indicates that haitian apparel producers were increasing their use of the tariff preferences , particularly after hope ii was passed in 2008 . from 2007 to 2009 , the proportion of apparel entering under hope ii grew from 3.3% to 26.9% of total apparel entering duty free under all preference programs ( cbtpa and hope act ) . although there may have been some switching of exports entering the u.s. market from cbtpa to hope ii , data reveal that in 2009 there was a 137% jump in the use of the woven tpl and a 41% increase in the use of the value - added rule , likely in response to hope ii . by 2009 , a small portion of apparel began to enter under the knit tpl as well , but there has been little use of other special import rules provided to haitian apparel exports . in addition , data not shown reflect that the statutory caps on the amount of apparel allowed to enter duty free are still far from being exceeded . for example , in 2009 haiti filled 5.2% of its overall apparel quota , 2.1% of the knit apparel cap , and 22.8% of the woven cap . haitian apparel producers lobbied for specific changes including extending the program to 2028 , increasing the tpls for knits and fabrics , reducing the value - added rule to 50% for five years , reducing the earned income allowance from 3-to - 1 to 1-for - 1 , and expanding the apparel and non - apparel items that would be eligible for duty - free treatment . the haitian apparel industry benefits from a comparative advantage that rests on low - wage production and proximity to the u.s. market , augmented by flexible trade preferences created by the u.s. congress in the hope act , as amended . because the united states is the primary market for haitian apparel exports , these "uniquely" generous trade preferences based largely on duty - free treatment for apparel articles made with third - country inputs , especially fabric , are expected to lead to increased foreign investment in apparel manufacturing . job growth and production increases in the apparel industry since hope i was passed in 2006 are early indicators that the strategy may have been taking hold before the earthquake occurred . in the aftermath of the january 12 , 2010 earthquake , the apparel industry faces a number of problems in returning to full production , including damaged factories , a devastated work force , and interrupted finance and logistical capabilities . congress has chosen to respond to haiti's needs by amending the hope act to enhance even further market access for haitian apparel and other exports . two important considerations guided congressional action in addition to a broad - based concern over haiti's economic and social problems .