each of these cases is discussed in - depth below . in skinner , a panel of the ninth circuit had voided on fourth amendment grounds federal railroad administration ( fra ) regulations requiring breath , blood , and urine tests of railroad workers who are involved in train accidents . the supreme court ruled that the entire testing regulation , even portions applicable to certain employee rule infractions that were merely permissive rather than mandatory upon the railroads , carried sufficient government "encouragement , endorsement , and participation ... to implicate the fourth amendment. on the merits , the majority held that because "the collection and testing of urine intrudes upon expectations of privacy that society has long recognized as reasonable," fra testing for drugs and alcohol was a "search" that had to satisfy constitutional standards of reasonableness . the "special needs" of railroad safety , however , made traditional fourth amendment requirements of a warrant and probable cause "impracticable" in this context . nor was "individualized suspicion" deemed by the majority to be a "constitutional floor" where the intrusion on privacy interests are "minimal" and an "important governmental interest" is at stake . according to the court , covered rail employees had "expectations of privacy" as to their own physical condition that were "diminished by reasons of their participation in an industry that is regulated pervasively to ensure safety...." in these circumstances , the majority held , it was "reasonable" to conduct the tests , even in the absence of a warrant or reasonable suspicion that any employee may be impaired . the court also rejected another line of attack against the challenged tests which proceeds from the generally accepted scientific and judicial view that standard test protocols are capable indicators only of prior drug use but are not a measure of current job impairment or drug influence . because of this fact , a number of lower federal courts had voided certain drug tests for not being reasonably related to legitimate governmental interests in assuring employee fitness or competence . in skinner , however , the majority found the information provided by the tests to be a valid investigative tool which "may allow the fra to reach an informed judgment as to how a particular accident occurred. in addition , the government "may take all necessary and reasonable regulatory steps to prevent and deter" forbidden drug use by the covered employees . in the von raab case , handed down on the same day as skinner , the supreme court upheld drug testing of u.s. customs service personnel who sought transfer to certain "sensitive" positions , namely those involving drug interdiction , carrying firearms , or access to classified information , without a requirement of reasonable individualized suspicion . the testing procedure was administered once the employee sought transfer to the sensitive position upon five days notice by the customs service . thus , the drug test in von raab was conditioned on the employee's own action in seeking a transfer and no adverse consequence flowed from a later withdrawn transfer application .