this was not always the case , however . although veterans have always been present among the homeless population , the studies from the 1980s and 1990s found that cohorts serving in the vietnam and post - vietnam eras were overrepresented while veterans of world war ii and korea were less likely to be homeless than their nonveteran counterparts . in 2010 , approximately 1.8 million veterans were women . the fourth section of this report discusses three of these issues . the first is the va's plan to end homelessness among veterans . a second issue is ensuring that an adequate transition process exists for returning veterans to assist them with issues that might put them at risk of homelessness . third is the concern that adequate services might not exist to serve the needs of women veterans . depending on circumstances , periods of homelessness may vary from days to years . the federal response to the needs of homeless veterans , like the federal response to homelessness generally , began in the late 1980s . congress , aware of the data showing that veterans were disproportionately represented among homeless persons , began to hold hearings and enact legislation in the late 1980s . among the programs enacted were health care for homeless veterans , domiciliary care for homeless veterans , and the homeless veterans reintegration program . also around this time , the first national group dedicated to the cause of homeless veterans , the national coalition for homeless veterans , was founded by service providers that were concerned about the growing number of homeless veterans . while homeless veterans are eligible for and receive services through programs that are not designed specifically for homeless veterans , the va funds multiple programs to serve homeless veterans . the majority of homeless programs are run through the veterans health administration ( vha ) , which administers health care programs for veterans . the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) , which is responsible for compensation and pensions , education assistance , home loan guarantees , and insurance , operates one program for homeless veterans . in addition , the department of labor ( dol ) is responsible for programs that provide employment services for homeless veterans while the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) collaborates with the va on two additional programs . many of these programs are summarized in this section . table 4 , below , shows historical funding levels for seven programs that target services to homeless veterans . following table 4 , table 5 shows funding for housing provided through the hud - va collaboration known as hud - vash . hud has funded section 8 vouchers for homeless veterans since fy1992 , but after the initial appropriation for the vouchers , hud does not separately report the amount of funds necessary to provide rental assistance for each of the vouchers in subsequent years . researchers have created three categories of homelessness based on the amount of time that individuals are homeless . first , transitionally homeless people are those who have one short stay in a homeless shelter before returning to permanent housing .