we are not there yet . we are not talking about invoking that yet . the feed and forage act has been used in the past in circumstances quite similar to those facing the defense department in fy2008 . it has been used , for instance , to sustain major military operations , including combat operations in southeast asia in the 1960s and transportation of personnel to the persian gulf during operation desert shield / desert storm , when appropriated funds were not sufficient . table 2 summarizes uses of the feed and forage act since 1960 . as the table shows , when amounts are adjusted to today's prices , the feed and forage act has been invoked to finance quite substantial obligations of funds – in fy1968 , for example , during the vietnam war , when , in fy2008 prices , $7.4 billion was used and in fy1991 , for operation desert shield / desert storm , when $2.6 billion was used . the feed and forage act gives the department of defense considerable flexibility to marshal funding for military operations in the event of unexpected developments . the potential use of substantial amounts to carry on combat operations , particularly if congress has denied or refused to act on funding for a war , may be of concern to congress because of its implications for congressional war powers , including the power of the purse . during the vietnam war , use of the feed and forage act ignited a vigorous debate over war powers issues . in 1973 senators mathias and church sponsored hearings on the law , and in 1974 and 1975 , senator abourezk proposed repealing the act because , he argued , it eroded congressional authority . use of the feed and forage act under current circumstances may warrant similar concerns . unless congress were to enact language restricting funding for iraq "in this or any other act," use of funding under the feed and forage act would not appear to be subject to any limitations . the act has other has limitations as well . significantly , while the act permits the defense department to obligate funds ( i.e. , sign contracts or hire civilian personnel ) , in dod's interpretation , it does not permit actual expenditures ( i.e. , outlays ) of funds without congressional appropriations . this would require contractors to agree , likely at some cost to the government , to contracts that might defer actual payments . in effect , the law allows the defense department to obligate congress to provide what are known as "deficiency appropriations," which were quite frequently enacted up until the 1950s , but have not been used often since then . the enactment of deficiency appropriations may , however , be delayed . while the use of the feed and forage act has an extensive history , there are some other authorities in standing law that might be used to extend army and marine corps operations , but for which crs is not aware of any precedents . one such provision is 10 usc 165 . title 10 u.s. code is the standing law that establishes the department of defense and includes most of the statutory language that governs its organization and operations .