once a member is seated , however , that member may be subject to certain discipline by the senate . no law or rule exists providing that a member of the senate who is indicted for or convicted of a crime must forfeit his or her congressional salary . it should be noted that members of congress do not automatically forfeit their offices even upon conviction of a crime that constitutes a felony . there is no express constitutional disability or "disqualification" from congress for the conviction of a crime , other than under the fourteenth amendment for certain treasonous conduct after having taken an oath of office . for example , senate republican conference rules have provided for the temporary loss of one's position as the chairman or ranking member of a committee , and the temporary loss of one's leadership position , if the senator has been indicted for a felony ; and if the senator is convicted , the replacement of the chair / ranking member on the committee . although members of the house of representatives convicted of an offense that may result in two or more years' imprisonment are instructed under house rule xxiii ( 10 ) to "refrain from participation in the business of each committee of which he is a member , and a member should refrain from voting" on any question on the floor of the house until his or her presumption of innocence is restored ( or until the individual is reelected to congress ) , there is no comparable provision in the senate rules . concerning a sitting member of the senate ( or house ) who is either indicted for or convicted of a felony offense , it should be noted that the united states constitution does not provide for nor authorize the recall of any united states officials , such as united states senators , representatives to congress , or the president or vice president , and thus no senator or representative has ever been recalled in the history of the united states . under the constitution and congressional practice , members of congress may have their services ended prior to the normal expiration of their constitutional terms of office by their resignation , death , or by action of the house of congress in which they sit by way of an expulsion or by a finding that a subsequent public office accepted by a member is "incompatible" with congressional office ( and that the member has thus vacated his seat in congress ) . the recall of members of congress was considered during the drafting of the federal constitution , but no such provisions were included in the final version sent to the states for ratification , and the drafting and ratifying debates indicate a clear understanding and intent of the framers and ratifiers of the constitution that no right or power to recall a senator or representative from congress existed under the constitution . as noted by an academic authority on this subject , the constitutional convention of 1787 considered but eventually rejected resolutions calling for this same type of recall [recall of senators as provided in the articles of confederation]... .