most recently , p.l . other crs reports provide much more detailed discussions and analyses of major hea provisions . since that time , comprehensive amendment and reauthorization of the hea has occurred seven additional times . the principal objective of the hea is to expand postsecondary education opportunity , particularly for low - income individuals , and to increase affordability for moderate income families as well . the heart of the legislation is its student aid programs authorized under title iv , which provide student aid in the form of grants , loans , and work - study assistance . there are seven titles of the hea that authorize numerous programs and provisions designed to provide assistance to postsecondary students and institutions . the seven titles of the hea are: title i — general provisions title ii — teacher quality enhancement title iii — institutional aid title iv — student assistance title v — developing institutions title vi — international education programs ; and title vii — graduate and postsecondary improvement programs each of these titles and the major programs under each are discussed in greater detail . title i of the hea includes four parts , which establish the general provisions for the remainder of the hea . many of the provisions affect institutions' participation in the title iv student aid programs . title ii authorizes grants for improving teacher education programs , strengthening teacher recruitment efforts , and training prospective teachers . this title also includes the reporting requirements for states and ihes regarding the quality of teacher education programs . title iii is intended to provide support for less - advantaged institutions serving students from low - income or racial minority backgrounds . there are six parts authorizing programs for ihes that serve select groups of students , including historically black colleges and universities ( hbcus ) , alaska native and native hawaiian - serving institutions , and tribally controlled colleges and universities ( tccus ) . additionally , title iii , part a authorizes funding for less - advantaged institutions and those serving low - income students . title iv of the hea contains eight parts which authorize a broad range of programs and provisions . as the most notable title of the hea , the programs authorized under title iv are the primary sources of federal aid to support postsecondary education . in 1998 congress authorized the inclusion of grants to hispanic - serving institutions ( hsis ) under title v of the hea . prior to 1998 , the hsi program was a section of title iii , part a . title v of the hea is solely dedicated to authorizing grants for hsis . title vi contains four parts that authorize an array of international and foreign language studies programs and business and international education programs to strengthen domestic ihes in foreign languages and in area and international studies . title vii authorizes several graduate education programs , as well as a grant program designed to support innovation and improvement in postsecondary education . it also authorizes grants for urban community service and demonstration programs to enable ihes to better serve disabled students . title vii , part a authorizes several graduate education programs .