art . i , section 8 , cl . 12 ) and to declare war ( art . i , section 8 , cl . the purpose of the act is to provide for , strengthen , and expedite the national defense by protecting servicemembers , enabling them to "devote their entire energy to the defense needs of the nation. the scra protects servicemembers by temporarily suspending certain judicial and administrative proceedings and transactions that may adversely affect their legal rights during military service . forgiveness of all debts or the extinguishment of contractual obligations on behalf of servicemembers , who have been called up for active duty , is not provided , nor is absolute immunity from civil lawsuits granted . instead , it provides for the suspension of claims and protection from default judgments . in this way , it seeks to balance the interests of servicemembers and their creditors , spreading the burden of national military service to a broader portion of the citizenry . many of the scra provisions are especially beneficial for reservists activated to respond to a national crisis , but many provisions are also useful for career military personnel . one measure that affects many who are called to active duty is the cap on interest at an annual rate of 6% on debts incurred prior to a person's entry into active duty military service ( section 207 ) . other measures protect military families from being evicted from rental or mortgaged property ( §§301 and 303 ) ; from cancellation of life insurance ( §§402 through 409 ) ; from taxation in multiple jurisdictions ( §§510 and 511 ) ; from foreclosure of property to pay taxes that are due ( §§501 and 511 ) ; and from losing certain rights to public land ( §§501 through 508 ) . this report provides a section - by - section summary of the scra , codified in 50 u.s.c . §3901 et seq . sections 201 through 208 describe the general relief available in most kinds of court actions . they serve to suspend civil liabilities of military personnel and preserve causes of action either for or against them . sections 301 through 308 provide protections from eviction and loss of other benefits or rights due to the failure of a servicemember to meet payments on rent , loans , mortgages , or insurance policies . unlike the other parts of the scra , the rights described in these sections can be asserted by a servicemember's dependents in their own right . title iv provides relief from insurance premiums and guarantees servicemembers continued coverage under certain commercial life insurance policies . the fifth broad category of provisions of the scra provides certain rights regarding public lands and relieves servicemembers from having to pay certain taxes to multiple jurisdictions . it also prevents the attachment of certain personal or real property in order to satisfy tax liens . title vi provides courts the authority to deny remedies that would abuse the purpose of the scra , indicates how a servicemember's military and financial status can be established in court , and covers other procedural requirements .