separately , p.l . 109-432 amended title iv - e of the social security act to require states to have in effect procedures for verifying the citizenship or immigration status of each child in foster care ( whether or not the state claims title iv - e support for the child ) . finally , this law amended section 1123a of the social security act to specifically require that state compliance with this new federal requirement be checked as part of periodic conformity reviews ( e.g . the child and family services review ) . these changes were effective as of june 20 , 2007 ( six months after the enactment of p.l . the change was made effective as if it was included in the dra . 109-171 ) that affect children in foster care . this program supports provision of advocates for abused or neglected children who are the subject of court proceedings . it is administered within the office of justice programs ( ojp ) at the department of justice ( doj ) , and legislation amending it was reported by the house and senate judiciary committees . the changes enacted affect a broad spectrum of child welfare policies , which range from who is an eligible child and what are eligible costs for which states may claim reimbursement under the title iv - e foster care and adoption assistance program to the provision of new support for services to children affected by a parent / caretaker's abuse of methamphetamine or other substances and to required collaboration between welfare agencies and courts . the recently enacted laws also added a number of specific new requirements for state child welfare agencies . with regard to children in foster care , each state must have in place new or revised policies or procedures related to ( 1 ) the quality and quantity of caseworker visits ; ( 2 ) consultation with medical professionals on health treatment ; ( 3 ) placement of children across state lines ; ( 4 ) verification of citizenship or immigration status ; and ( 5 ) background checks of prospective foster and adoptive parents . further , states are required to have in place policies or procedures enabling them to continue providing necessary child welfare services during a disaster . these changes were enacted in seven bills , each of which is briefly discussed below in order of their enactment . the fair access to foster care act of 2005 ( p.l . 109-113 ) permits states to claim reimbursement under title iv - e of the social security act on behalf of otherwise eligible foster children whose maintenance payments are provided to foster parents or institutional foster care providers via a for - profit foster care placement agency . prior law stipulated that if a state sought to claim federal title iv - e support on behalf of an otherwise eligible foster child , the child's maintenance payments could only be made by a public or non - profit agency .