b . flood plains , wetlands , or municipal watersheds . c. congressionally designated areas , such as wilderness , wilderness study areas , or national recreation areas . d. inventoried roadless areas . e. research natural areas . f. american indians or alaska native religious or cultural sites . g. archaeological sites , or historic properties or areas . ... 31.2 - categories of actions for which a project or case file and decision memo are required ... 6 . timber stand and / or wildlife habitat improvement activities which do not include the use of herbicides or do not require more than one mile o f low standard road construction... . examples include but are not limited to: ... b. thinning or brush control to improve growth or to reduce fire hazard including the opening of an existing road to a dense timber stand . c. prescribed burning to control understory hardwoods in stands of southern pine . d. prescribed burning to reduce natural fuel build - up and improve plant vigor . hazardous fuels reduction activities using prescribed fire , not to exceed 4,500 acres , and mechanical methods for crushing , piling , thinning , pruning , cutting , chipping , mulching , and mowing , not to exceed 1,000 acres . examples include but are not limited to: a . removal of individual trees for sawlogs , specialty products , or fuelwood . b . commercial thinning of overstocked stands to achieve the desired stocking level to increase health and vigor . salvage of dead and / or dying trees not to exceed 250 acres , requiring no more than ½ mile of temporary road construction . the proposed action may include incidental removal of live or dead trees for landings , skid trails , and road clearing . this patchiness makes understanding and controlling wildfires difficult at best . wildfires occasionally burn houses , in a zone commonly called the wildland - urban interface . in recent years , it seems one or more fires annually have burned down several to a few hundred homes and outbuildings ( sheds , garages , etc. ) these structures generally have ignited in one of three ways: through direct contact with fire , through radiation ( heating from exposure to flames ) , and through firebrands . the likelihood of a structure burning from one of these ignition methods is called home ignitability . wildlands and natural resources can also be damaged by wildfires . wildfire damages vary widely , depending on the nature of the ecosystems burned as well as site - specific conditions . activities to modify wildland biomass fuels can reduce damages , although the cost and effectiveness also vary . finally , for fuel reduction activities on federal lands , delays and modifications — related to endangered species concerns and public involvement in decision - making — can affect the cost of fuel treatments . as more acres and more homes have burned in the past few years , and more people are at risk from wildfires , congress has faced increasing pressures to protect structures and resources . congress decides what programs to authorize and fund , and many options exist .