that power is broad . it encompasses inquiries concerning the administration of existing laws as well as proposed or possibly needed statutes. the court did not limit the power of congressional inquiry to cases of "wrongdoing. it emphasized , however , that congress's investigative power is at its peak when the subject is alleged waste , fraud , abuse , or maladministration within a government department . the investigative power , the court stated , "comprehends probes into departments of the federal government to expose corruption , inefficiency , or waste. "[t]he first congresses" held "inquiries dealing with suspected corruption or mismanagement by government officials" and subsequently , in a series of decisions , "[t]he court recognized the danger to effective and honest conduct of the government if the legislative power to probe corruption in the executive branch were unduly hampered. accordingly , the court now clearly recognizes "the power of the congress to inquire into and publicize corruption , maladministration , or inefficiencies in the agencies of government. the inherent contempt power is not specified in a statute or constitutional provision , but has been deemed implicit in the constitution's grant to congress of all legislative powers . in an inherent contempt proceeding , the offender is tried at the bar of the house or senate and can be held in custody until such time as the contemnor provides the testimony or documents sought , or until the end of the session . inherent contempt was most often used as a means of coercion , not punishment . a statutory criminal contempt provision was first enacted by congress in 1857 , in part because of the inadequacies of proceedings under the inherent power . in cases of criminal contempt , the offender is cited by the subcommittee , the committee , and the full house or senate , with subsequent indictment by a grand jury and prosecution by the u.s. attorney . criminal contempt , unlike inherent contempt , is intended as a means of punishing the contemnor for non - compliance rather than to obtain the information sought . a statutory civil enforcement procedure , applicable only to the senate , was enacted in 1978 . under that procedure , a witness , who refuses to testify before a senate committee or provide documents sought by the committee can , after being served with a court order , be held in contempt of court and incarcerated until he agrees to testify . moreover , the house and senate have authorized standing or special committees to seek civil enforcement of subpoenas . while the contempt power was exercised both by the english parliament and by the american colonial assemblies , congress's first assertion of its contempt authority occurred in 1795 , shortly after the ratification of the constitution . at the time , three members of the house of representatives reported that they had been offered what they interpreted to be a bribe by men named robert randall and charles whitney . the house of representatives interpreted these allegations as sufficient evidence of an attempt to corrupt its proceedings and reported a resolution ordering their arrest and detention by the sergeant - at - arms , pending further action by the house .