department of state . the secretary of state is responsible for coordinating all international counterdrug programs implemented by the u.s. government , including foreign counternarcotics assistance . the state department identifies fighting the production , transportation , and sale of illegal narcotics among its primary goals . every march , the state department's bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs ( inl ) produces the international narcotics strategy report ( incsr ) , which describes the efforts of key countries to attack all aspects of the international drug trade , including anti - money laundering during the previous calendar year . u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) . usaid provides assistance for long - term economic and social development . the usaid administrator serves concurrently as the state department's director of u.s. foreign assistance , with a rank equivalent to deputy secretary of state . usaid plays a role in counternarcotics development assistance , especially regarding alternative livelihood programs , which are designed to offer alternatives to farmers that will enable and encourage them to discontinue planting poppy and other illicit crops . to support u.n . member states in combating drugs , unodc conducts field - based technical assistance projects internationally and conducts research and analysis on current drug market trends . regional counterdrug - related organizations also supplement multilateral efforts globally . such efforts include the inter - american drug abuse control commission ( cicad ) , which is the drug control arm of the organization of american states ( oas ) and the drug advisory programme ( dap ) of the colombo plan . cicad serves as the regional policy forum for all aspects of western hemisphere illegal drug issues . dap supports drug demand reduction , treatment , and rehabilitation in the asia and pacific regions . other international counternarcotics initiatives include the u.s. - russia counternarcotics working group , which began in 2011 ; the group of eight roma - lyon group meeting , which addresses a variety of counterterrorism and anti - crime issues , including counternarcotics cooperation ; and the u.s. - sino joint liaison group on law enforcement cooperation , a subset of which includes a justice department - led counternarcotics working group . related international efforts also reinforce counternarcotics policies through their cross - cutting focus on such transnational phenomena as money laundering , drug trafficking - financed terrorism , corruption , organized crime , and global health . the united states has been involved in international drug control since at least the beginning of the 20 th century . contemporary u.s. counternarcotics efforts were brought to the forefront of u.s. policy debates in the late 1960s . in 1971 , president richard nixon declared that illicit drugs were america's "public enemy number one. at the same time , however , others criticize the international drug control system for failing to achieve the united nations' stated goal of "eliminating or reducing significantly" by 2008 the production and availability of synthetic drugs and precursors , as well as the cultivation of the coca bush , cannabis plant , and opium poppy .