this program was funded through fy2015 . in 2000 , congress authorized the department of justice ( doj ) , through kristen's act ( p.l . 106-468 ) , to make grants to establish a national clearinghouse for missing adults and provide technical assistance to law enforcement agencies in locating missing adults . this grant was funded from fy2002 through fy2006 . the federal government has also supported efforts to establish databases to track and identify missing adults , their relatives , and unidentified human remains . the first section of this report discusses demographics and record keeping of missing adults and unidentified remains , as well as some of the factors that may contribute to the disappearance of adults . this section also discusses federally funded databases that are used to track data on missing adults and unidentified individuals . the second section of the report describes the federal programs and initiatives to assist in locating missing adults , including funding data where applicable . finally , the third section discusses issues about the federal role in missing adult cases . certain circumstances can make adults vulnerable to going missing . adults may go missing because of an abduction or foul play . this response is complicated by a number of factors . unlike children , adults have the legal right to go missing in most cases and may do so to seek protection from a domestic abuser and other related reasons . there is no definitive estimate of the number of adults who go missing , because some adults are not known to be missing or are not reported to databases that compile data on missing persons . however , three federally supported data sources provide some insight into this number: the missing person file at the fbi's national crime information center ( ncic ) ; the fbi's national dna index system ( ndis ) , which stores information on offenders and arrestees , forensic evidence , as well as individuals believed to be missing , their relatives , and unidentified human remains ; and the national missing and unidentified persons system ( namus ) , administered by doj's national institute of justice ( nij ) . profiles of missing individuals entered into one database do not necessarily populate other databases , although some missing individuals may be reported to more than one of the databases . therefore , numbers of missing persons should not be added across any of the databases . the ncic unidentified person file , namus , and ndis contain information about unidentified decedents , or remains . however , the true number of unidentified missing adult cases is unknown because remains can go undiscovered , or if they are recovered , they may not be reported to the databases or retained . in a census conducted by doj in 2004 , medical examiners and coroners reported a total of 13,486 unidentified human remains on record , though about 51% of medical examiner and coroners' offices lacked policies for retaining records such as x - rays , dna , or fingerprints that could identify missing individuals . ( the report also found that 90% of offices serving large jurisdictions did retain such records. )