( see figure 2 . ) this came after decades of exploration activity that began as early as 1913 . offshore gas wells are permitted in the canadian great lakes , but offshore oil wells are prohibited . if a gas well shows evidence of oil , it must be closed and plugged , according to canadian regulations . directional oil and gas drilling is allowed under the canadian great lakes , and has been extensively done in lake erie . in lake erie , annual natural gas extraction rose to 15.2 billion cubic feet ( bcf ) in 1985 and has since declined to about 10 bcf in 2000 . oil production through directional drilling into lake erie has developed in ontario . there are 100 wells to date at an average depth of 2,800ft and 2.2 miles horizontal offset ( i.e. , drill location to target reservoir ) . table 1 provides statistics on u.s. oil and natural gas production in the great lakes , all of it in michigan state waters . oil and gas production under the great lakes in michigan has been variable over the past few years . the average annual production of natural gas under the great lakes in michigan from 2000 to 2009 has been approximately 1.1 billion cubic feet ( bcf ) , whereas oil production averaged 660 barrels annually over the same period with no production from the years 2005 to 2007 . there are several potential consequences associated with oil and gas drilling in or near large waterbodies such as the great lakes . possible negative effects include oil spills , discharge of contaminated drilling fluids , and effects of the "footprint" of the drilling infrastructure . possible positive effects include increased revenues for the region and state , increased employment , and greater domestic energy production . under ยง503 of the energy and water appropriations act ( ewa ) of 2002 ( p.l . 107-66 ) , the u.s. army corps of engineers was directed to conduct a study of the potential environmental effects of oil and gas drilling activity in the great lakes . this report was completed in 2005 and contains a detailed discussion of the potential environmental effects of drilling under the great lakes . this section will provide an overview of some of the potential consequences of drilling under the great lakes and provide data , where available , on unintended oil and gas releases into the great lakes . congress has the authority to regulate the use of the great lakes , including the development of oil and gas , under the commerce clause of the constitution . the repercussions of congressional action , however , depend to some extent upon the characterization of the regulated resource . if the body of water constituting the great lakes and its underlying resources are state - owned , some forms of federal regulation could amount to a taking . if these resources are federal property , a taking would not occur . oil and gas drilling under the great lakes is opposed by many who contend that the potential environmental risks associated with drilling do not justify the potential economic gain .