these tests are to be repeated on a regular basis . the 2002 arrest of benjamin arellano felix , head of the tijuana cartel , and the 2003 arrest of gulf cartel head osiel cárdenas , led to a realignment of mexican cartels and increased turf wars . while in prison , arellano felix and cárdenas forged an alliance against the sinaloa cartel and its ally the juárez cartel . cartels are now largely aligned into two blocks in support of the gulf and sinaloa cartels . below is a description of three turf wars: nuevo laredo ( across the border from laredo , texas ) , guerrero ( in southern mexico ) , and michoacán ( in central mexico ) . these examples are illustrative but not exhaustive descriptions of cartel violence in mexico . since taking office in december 2006 , president calderón has made combating drug cartels and drug violence a top priority of his administration . he has called increasing drug violence in mexico a threat to the mexican state , and has sent 24,000 soldiers and federal police to nine states to combat the cartels . mexico's attorney general , eduardo medina mora , indicated in april 2007 that the government's anti - cartel initiative will expand beyond counter - cartel police and military operations to include institutional and operational reforms . he also stated that the only way mexico can successfully defeat the cartels unless it gets more cooperation from the united states in combating arms trafficking and money laundering from the united states to mexico . in october 2007 the white house office of national drug control policy reported that the mexican government's increased pressure on cartels coincided with cocaine shortages in 37 u.s. cities and a 24% increase in the retail price of cocaine during the second quarter of 2007 . president calderón maintains that his administration will stand up to threats of violence by the cartels and that it will take at least two years to take back control of mexico . while many support the government's plan , critics note that drug violence continues . according to press reports , a mexican government report from early 2007 charged that "the cartels remain intact and executions have spread to previously violence - free areas. press reports indicate that between 1,800 and 1,900 mexicans were killed in cartel related violence in the first nine months of 2007 ; the mexican government does not maintain statistics on cartel murders . in addition to the anti - drug operations , president calderón has increased salaries of troops involved in counter - cartel operations by nearly 50% ; placed the federal preventative police ( pfp ) and the federal investigative agency ( afi ) under one commander as part of his plans to create a unified federal police force ; and announced the "platform mexico" initiative to improve federal , state , and local law enforcement capacity to exchange information on drug cartels , including the creation of a database that will cover 5,000 police stations by 2009 . president calderón has indicated that he will use extradition as a major tool to combat drug traffickers .