the hopwa formula remained the same until 2016 . the ryan white program formula change came about shortly after the program's enactment . in 1995 , at the request of two senators from the labor and human resources committee , the general accounting office ( gao , now the government accountability office ) examined funding disparities per person living with aids that resulted from using cumulative aids cases to distribute ryan white funds . it proposed several data changes that would result in more equitable per - case funding , including a way to weight cdc data to arrive at an estimate of persons living with aids . the next year , in 1996 , congress reauthorized the ryan white program and changed the way in which grants to metropolitan areas were distributed to use cdc estimates of persons living with aids ( p.l . the data change included hold - harmless provisions to ensure that the shift in funding would not be too dramatic . since then , in 2006 , the ryan white program formula was further modified to incorporate living hiv cases in addition to living aids cases . as a result of advances in medical science and in the care and treatment of persons living with hiv and aids , individuals are living longer with the disease . as the number of those with hiv and aids grows , so do the jurisdictions that qualify for formula - based hopwa funds . since 1999 , there has been a steady increase in the number of jurisdictions that meet the eligibility test to receive formula - based hopwa funds . funding for the hopwa program steadily increased from the time the program was created , and , since fy2010 , funding has ranged between $330 million and $335 million . ( see table 1 . ) the number of households receiving hopwa housing assistance ( including short - term housing assistance , housing provided through community residences , or rental assistance in permanent housing ) has generally declined from fy2003 through fy2015 . ( see table 1 . ) grantees may use funds for housing referral services and for emergency or short - term housing . between fy2003 and fy2009 , the number of households served dropped from 78,467 to 58,367 . however , households assisted have declined since fy2012 , reaching 54,647 in fy2015 . these general reductions in households served could be due to such factors as increased housing costs and households remaining longer in housing units . in addition to funds for housing provided through hud , funds appropriated to the department of health and human services ( hhs ) ryan white hiv / aids program may be used to provide short - term housing assistance to persons living with hiv / aids . the ryan white comprehensive aids resources emergency act ( p.l . 101-381 ) established the ryan white program in 1990 . the chain project is a longitudinal study , begun in 1994 , of a sample of individuals living with hiv / aids in new york city and the northern suburbs . in 2007 , researchers released a study that used the chain data to examine the effects of stable housing on health care for individuals living with hiv and aids .