the senate passed s.res . 554 on may 7 , 2008 , calling for congress "to stand ready to appropriate additional funds , beyond existing emergency international disaster assistance resources , if necessary to help address dire humanitarian conditions throughout burma in the aftermath of cyclone nargis and beyond. on june 30 , 2008 , president bush signed into law p.l . 110-252 , which provides fy2008 and fy2009 supplemental appropriations for overseas military operations , international affairs , and some domestic programs . the law provides funding for urgent humanitarian assistance worldwide , including support for critical needs in burma . it also states , "as the peace and development council ( spdc ) has compounded the humanitarian crisis in burma by failing to respond to the needs of the burmese people in the wake of cyclone nargis and by refusing offers of assistance from the international community , the department of state and usaid should seek to avoid providing assistance to or through the spdc. prior to the arrival of cyclone nargis , several members of congress had indicated their opposition to burma's planned constitutional referendum . after the cyclone struck , on may 6 , 2008 , the house of representatives passed h.con.res . 317 "condemning" the constitutional referendum and calling on the spdc to enter into "meaningful political dialogue" with burma's opposition groups . since the spdc announced its plan to hold the plebiscite , the senate has not passed any legislation relating directly to the constitutional referendum . even after the immediate post - cyclone emergency has passed , experts expect the country to face a potentially severe food shortage for up to two years . the areas struck by cyclone nargis were important sources of rice , seafood , pork , and chicken for burma ; it is unlikely that the rest of the country will be able to step up food production to replace the lost output of the cyclone - devastated regions . it is also uncertain if burma will be able import enough food to replace its lost domestic output because of damage to its transportation infrastructure and a shortage of foreign exchange . as a result , burma may require food assistance for many months and possibly years . in addition , in the first few days after cyclone nargis , food prices in burma reportedly increased by 100% or more . while this spike in food prices is likely to subside to some extent in the coming weeks , it is also likely that prices will not return to their pre - cyclone levels . in addition to the challenge of recovering from the destruction caused by the cyclone , the people of burma will probably face higher — and possibly rising — food prices for many months . given that most households in burma were living in poverty before the arrival of nargis , the higher food prices will place more strain on the burmese people . it is noteworthy to recall that widespread protests in burma in september 2007 began as a demonstration against an unannounced increase in fuel prices . burma's potential long - term need for food assistance presents two possible concerns to congress .