critics of h.r . 2830 asserted that , by superseding nanpca's existing savings clause , the legislation could be read as limiting the application of the cwa to invasive species in ballast water discharge . if it were read in that manner , they contended , it would backtrack from longstanding provisions of law previously adopted by congress in nanpca and nisa , thus weakening existing law . from their perspective , the result could exclude states and the public from participating in most regulatory decisions , place environmental decisions in the hands of the coast guard rather than epa , preclude epa and citizen enforcement actions under the cwa , and freeze development of improved technology - based treatment standards . finally , it should be noted that the federal court's order that epa must regulate "discharges incidental to the normal operation of vessels" ( discussed previously ) continues to apply , even if h.r . 2830 or other similar ballast water legislation had been enacted . thus , except for categories of vessels exempted or covered by a temporary delay pursuant to congressional action ( eg , p.l . 110 - 299 ) , even if similar legislation were to be enacted in the future , epa still is required to regulate vessel discharges such as deck runoff , oily bilge water releases , and graywater ( laundry and sink wastewater ) discharges . like h.r . 2830 , the vgp mandates mid - ocean ballast water exchange for ships traveling outside the 200-nautical - mile exclusive economic zone ( eez ) of the united states . this requirement already applies under the coast guard's 2004 mandatory ballast water management rule ( codified at 33 cfr part 151 ) . epa's vgp also requires ballast water exchanges at least 50 nautical miles from shore for vessels engaged in pacific nearshore voyages , which are not covered by the coast guard's mandatory exchange procedures . further , like h.r . permit issuance requires opportunities for public participation . opponents of h.r . 2830 noted that epa could use the cwa authority to promulgate stringent ballast water management standards with uniform minimum treatment standards based on technology . on the other hand , the legislation's supporters contended that while the cwa's permit - based approach works well for industrial plants and other fixed , stationary dischargers , it would not work well for mobile sources , such as vessels , particularly if state - issued permits were to call for requirements that could vary from one location to another . the federal courts have held that epa already could have promulgated effluent limitation guidelines for ballast water and other vessel discharges . the clean water act prohibits the discharge of pollutants from a point source into the navigable waters of the united states without a permit . vessels are defined in the law as point sources . in 1973 , epa promulgated a regulation that excluded discharges incidental to the normal operation of vessels ( including ballast water , but not including sewage vessel discharges , which are regulated under cwa section 312 ) from cwa permitting requirements .