3221 or other bills were not considered . for example , proposals to increase the use of transportation fuels derived from biomass could increase competition for the biomass supplies utilized in this analysis to comply with the rps targets . after the house completed action on h.r . 3221 , informal bipartisan negotiations over the omnibus energy bills began between the house and senate . the rps provision ( title ix , subtitle h ) in the h.r . 3221 continues to be key issue . on december 1 , 2007 , the ranking member of the senate committee on energy and natural resources stated that the house leadership's intent to include an rps led him to cease negotiations . further , on december 3 , 2007 , the white house reportedly announced that it may veto the negotiated bill , if it includes an rps and certain other provisions . on december 4 , 2007 , united press international reported that , in a press conference , doe secretary bodman warned against the inclusion of "a narrow , one - size - fits - all renewable portfolio standard. case b assumed that no claims would be made for energy efficiency credits . the results for both cases showed that rps "tends to reduce projected natural - gas - fired electricity generation relative to the eia reference case. eia found that overall natural gas prices would be lower in the rps cases and that residential expenditures would be relatively flat , until late in the period , and would grow by 0.4% to 0.8% by 2030 . eia includes a caveat about its findings: ... it should be noted that the rps proposal was modeled on a standalone basis , so its possible interactions with other policy changes proposed in h.r . the report found that the rps provision: ... is similar in many respects to rps proposals that have previously been analyzed by eia . our analysis shows that the rps , taken alone , tends slightly to increase projected electricity prices and costs by 2030 , while tending to reduce the use of natural gas for electricity generation and natural gas prices . cumulative discounted residential energy expenditures through 2030 , which are projected to total $2,874 billion in the reference case , are unchanged or fall slightly , with a reduction of approximately $400 million ( .01 percent ) in one of the two rps cases modeled . the report examined a case a , which assumed that energy efficiency credits would be claimed to the maximum extent possible and would not result in significant sales reductions . 3221 ( title ix , subtitle h ) . in november 2007 , the doe energy information administration ( eia ) submitted a report that describes the potential impacts of the 15% rps provision in h.r .