110-53 , sec . 1602 ) that requires the tsa to establish a system to screen 100% of cargo transported on passenger aircraft by the summer of 2010 . unlike the requirement for 100% checked baggage screening which was tied to a specific technology , namely eds , the mandate for 100% screening of cargo placed on passenger aircraft can be met using a variety of approaches , including x - ray systems , eds , trace detection technologies , canine teams , and possibly other methods for physical examination as approved by the tsa . the recent mandate in p.l . 110-53 to develop and implement such a strategy appears to address this need . however , further congressional oversight of the tsa's progress in implementing the strategic plan for emerging checkpoint screening technologies may be scheduled to ensure that appropriate and effective program and budgetary decisions are made to achieve strategic goals . the 9 / 11 commission emphasized the need for the federal government to take over the role of checking passenger names to allow for thorough vetting of passengers against the comprehensive , consolidated terrorist watchlist maintained by the federal government . while this objective has largely been accomplished by customs and border protection ( cbp ) for all inbound international flights , efforts to deploy a system for federal prescreening of passengers on all domestic flights has been repeatedly delayed amid continued controversy over privacy rights , protection of personal data , and adequate procedures for redress when individuals are falsely denied boarding or singled out for additional screening . while congress has generally concurred with the 9 / 11 commission's view that comprehensive passenger prescreening against the consolidated watchlist is needed , congress has also been sensitive to these privacy rights , data protection , and redress concerns , and through legislation has placed specific contingencies related to these issues on system implementation , and has repeatedly directed the gao to carefully scrutinize the tsa's progress in addressing specific requirements for full - scale system deployment . further congressional oversight of tsa's progress toward implementing federally run passenger prescreening on domestic flights may be called for , as the strategic plan indicates that implementation of this initiative is expected in 2008 . the 9 / 11 commission also recommended that ongoing initiatives to integrate checked baggage explosives detection systems ( eds ) with airport baggage handling systems should be expedited . congress has placed an emphasis on funding airport projects to integrate eds in - line with baggage handling conveyors , establishing the aviation security capital fund for this purpose as part of the vision 100 – century of aviation reauthorization act ( p.l . nonetheless , the gao estimates that making the needed changes at all airports in the united states to integrate eds equipment will not be completed until 2024 if future funding remains consistent with historic funding levels for thee activities .