appendix a . legislative history of the former presidents act prior to 1958 , chief executives leaving office entered retirement without federal assistance . by the end of the 19 th century , public sentiment reportedly dictated that it was not appropriate for former presidents to engage actively in business affairs . suitable post - presidency occupations included practicing law , obtaining a university professorship , or writing for a newspaper or magazine . pursuant to h.r . others , like ulysses s. grant , suffered financial losses and had personal possessions taken by creditors . andrew carnegie's offer in 1912 , discussions began in congress about providing former presidents and their spouses with annual pensions . that year , industrialist and philanthropist andrew carnegie reportedly offered to fund $25,000 annual pensions for all future former presidents and their widows until they were provided for by the federal government . the pensions were to be funded by the carnegie foundation of new york , which was founded just a year earlier . the new york times reported that many members of congress deemed it inappropriate for a private corporation to provide pensions to former presidents . former president william howard taft publicly declined to become the first beneficiary of carnegie's former president's pension fund when he left office in 1913 . at the time , some members of congress and the public believed that carnegie's proposal was intended to bring attention to the financial difficulties that some former presidents faced after leaving federal office . on that count , carnegie's gambit was a success . in december 1912 , two bills were introduced in congress to provide pensions for former presidents and their widows . the proposed ho use legislation ( h.r . 26464 ) would have provided a $2,000 per month pension for former presidents , a $1,000 per month pension for widows , and a $200 per month pension for minor children under age 21 , if both parents were deceased . the bill was referred to the house committee on pensions and was not reported . legislati on introduced in the senate ( s. 7519 ) would have provided a $10,000 annual retirement pension for the president as c ommander - in - c hief of the army . it would also have provided an annual pension of $5,000 for the unmarried widows of former presidents . the bill was referred to the senate committee on pensions , but it was not reported . truman's finances the idea to provide pensions to former presidents was largely forgotten until president harry s. truman left office in 1953 . in view of former president truman's financial limitations in hiring an office staff to handle his mail and requests for speeches once he left the white house , the senate considered legislation in 1955 to provide retirement benefits to former presidents . the legislation aimed "to maintain the dignity of that great office" and to prevent an ex - president from engaging "in business or [an] occupation which would demean the office he has held or capitalize upon it in any way deemed improper. the proposal passed the senate , but was never acted on by the house committee on post office and civil service .