the information had been compressed , but not encrypted . data breaches involving sensitive personal information may result in identity theft and financial crimes ( eg , credit card fraud , phone or utilities fraud , bank fraud , mortgage fraud , employment - related fraud , government documents or benefits fraud , loan fraud , and health - care fraud ) . identity theft involves the misuse of any identifying information , which could include name , ssn , account number , password , or other information linked to an individual , to commit a violation of federal or state law . this is what is commonly referred to as a sectoral approach to the protection of personal information . some critics say that current laws focus too closely on industry - specific uses of information , like credit reports or medical data , rather than on protecting the privacy of individuals . others believe the sectoral approach to the protection of personal information reflects not only variations in the types of information collected ( eg , government , private sector , health , financial , etc .

 ) , but also differences in the regulatory framework for particular sectors . others advocate a national standard for entities that maintain personal information in order to harmonize legal obligations . others distinguish between private data held by the government and private data held by others , and advocate a higher duty of care for governments with respect to sensitive personal information in the u.s. public sector and to data breaches . the following report describes information security and data breach notification requirements included in the privacy act , the federal information security management act , office of management and budget guidance , the veterans affairs information security act , the health insurance portability and accountability act , the health information technology for economic and clinical health act , the gramm - leach - bliley act , the federal trade commission act , and the fair credit reporting act . the payment card industry has also issued security standards and reporting requirements for organizations that handle bank cards . the payment card industry data security standard ( pci dss ) is an industry regulation developed by visa , mastercard , and other bank card distributors . it requires organizations that handle bank cards to conform to security standards and follow certain leveled requirements for testing and reporting . the core of the pci dss is a group of principles and accompanying requirements designed to build and maintain a secure network , protect cardholder data , maintain a vulnerability management program , implement strong access control measures , monitor and test networks , and maintain an information security policy . pci dss went into effect december 31 , 2006 . on october 1 , 2008 , the pci security standards council ( pci ssc ) announced general availability of version 1.2 of the pci dss that does not introduce any new major requirements to the existing standard , but does change some practices . entities that fail to comply with pci dss face fines and increases in the rates that the credit card companies charge for transactions , and potentially can have their authorization to process payment cards revoked .