corals ) and their dependent species. ( p. 11 ) "sea level rise under warming is inevitable... . the eventual contributions from greenland ice sheet loss could be several metres ... should warming in excess of 1.9-4.6 o c above pre - industrial be sustained over many centuries. ( p. 21 ) "some systems , sectors and regions are likely to be especially affected by climate change . terrestrial ecosystems: tundra , boreal forest and mountain regions because of sensitivity to warming ; mediterranean - type ecosystems because of reduction in rainfall ; and tropical rainforests where precipitation declines coastal ecosystems: mangroves and salt marshes , due to multiple stresses marine ecosystems: coral reefs due to multiple stresses ; the sea ice biome because of sensitivity to warming water resources in some dry regions at mid - latitudes and in the dry tropics , due to changes in rainfall and evapotranspiration , and in areas dependent on snow and ice melt agriculture in low - latitudes , due to reduced water availability low - lying coastal systems , due to threat of sea level rise and increased risk from extreme weather events human health in populations with low adaptive capacity. the report did not find a significant trend in continental precipitation . nor did it find systematic changes in how often or where severe droughts have occurred in the contiguous united states over the past decades . however , the demands and competition for water resources have increased in some regions , so that the vulnerability to drought is more severe . in 2007 , the ipcc fourth assessment report concluded that "[m]ost of the observed increase in globally - averaged temperatures since the mid - 20 th century is very likely due to the observed increase in anthropogenic ghg concentrations. according to the report , natural phenomena , such as volcanoes , solar variability and land cover change , have undoubtedly influenced the observed climate change , but the dominant driver of change since the 1970s is estimated to be the increase of greenhouse gases ( ghg ) in the earth's atmosphere due to emissions from human - related activities . the ccsp reanalysis of north american climate data concluded that there is more than a 66% likelihood that more than half the average continental warming since 1951 has been due to human activities , but also that the regional differences in summer surface temperatures are unlikely to have been driven by human influences alone . the reanalysis found that sea surface temperatures likely have affected temperature trends , regional differences in temperature and regional and seasonal differences in precipitation . it also concluded that sea surface temperatures have likely contributed to multi - year droughts . the ipcc concluded in 2007 that: "... discernible human influences extend beyond average temperature to other aspects of climate. this illustrates the caution that should be exercised in trying to detect changes in trends in the context of variability . one or a series of hot or cool years , or a few extreme weather events , do not necessarily represent more than normal climate variability .