or , is it sufficient to amend existing laws ? should new laws be created to cover such action ? there are constitutional principles that limit the authority of all governmental entities ( federal , state , and local ) to enact cyberharassment and / or cyberbullying statutes , namely the first and fourteenth amendments . with the proliferation of potential uses and abuses of the internet , the crime of internet harassment presents challenges for law enforcement personnel , legislators , educators , and parents . these challenges are exacerbated by a lack of uniformity in defining the terms cyberharassment and cyberbullying . in addition , jurisdictional limits and the anonymity of the internet sometimes make it difficult for law enforcement personnel to identify , locate , arrest , and prosecute alleged offenders . while states generally assert jurisdiction over law enforcement authority within their borders , congress may legislate , pursuant to the commerce clause , internet activities . or congress may elect to adopt a wait - and - see approach , monitoring state internet harassment - related activities and the types of behavior prosecuted . legislators and school administrators continue to grapple with ways of combating cyberbullying , in light of recent high - profile teen suicides , while maintaining the free flow of information and opinion on the internet . as internet harassment may cause its victims emotional harm as opposed to physical harm , legislators must determine what level , if any , of harassment should be criminalized . while traditional harassment statutes may provide some guidance in drafting legislation and / or school policies , it is important to differentiate between the one - to - one communication of a telephone or e - mail communication and the one - to - many communication of a posting on a public website . in drafting legislation or school policies , legislators and school administrators must consider the constitutional constraints of the first and fourteenth amendments . statutes and school policies must be narrow enough not to infringe upon protected speech . in addition , such restrictions must provide adequate notice of what activities constitute internet harassment . while school administrators arguably have more leeway in adopting internet harassment policies , they are still generally limited to restricting speech that substantially or materially disrupts the educational process . to facilitate this goal , it may be desirable for legislation and school policies to include definitions for all relevant terms such as "annoy," "harass," "repeated communication," "alarm," or "torment," as these may be too vague or subjective , which may lead to an inordinate amount of prosecutorial discretion . or should prosecution of such activity remain at the state level ? these are just some of the questions legislators may consider in addressing the problem of internet harassment of children . while these policy considerations are noteworthy , this report focuses on the applicable constitutional constraints legislators may consider in drafting legislation in this area . internet harassment is a new phenomenon that presents a challenge for law enforcement , legislators , educators , and parents . the term internet harassment lacks a uniform definition but usually encompasses cyberstalking , cyberharassment , and / or cyberbullying .