these panels can be quite large . the ozone review panel , for example , had 23 members . casac and the public make suggestions regarding the membership of the panels on specific pollutants , with the final selections made by epa . the panels review the agency's work during naaqs - setting and naaqs - revision , rather than conducting their own independent reviews . the ozone standard affects a larger percentage of the population than any of the other naaqs . nearly half the u.s. population currently lives in ozone nonattainment areas , 140 million people in all . since the standard has been strengthened as a result of the current review , more areas will be affected , and those already considered nonattainment may have to impose more stringent emission controls . controlling ozone pollution is more complicated than controlling many other pollutants , because ozone is not emitted directly by pollution sources . rather , it forms in the atmosphere when volatile organic compounds ( vocs ) react with nitrogen oxides ( nox ) in the presence of sunlight . the ozone concentration is as dependent on the temperature and amount of sunshine as it is on the presence of the precursor gases . ozone is a summertime pollutant , in general . other factors being equal , a cool , cloudy summer will produce fewer high ozone readings than a warm , sunny summer . there are also complicated reactions that affect ozone formation . in general , lower emissions lead to less ozone , particularly lower emissions of vocs . but under some conditions , higher emissions of nox lead to lower ozone readings . this makes modeling ozone air quality and predicting attainment more difficult and contentious than the modeling of other air pollutants . most stationary and mobile sources are considered to be contributors to ozone pollution . thus , there are literally hundreds of millions of sources of the pollutants of concern and control strategies require implementation of a wide array of measures . among the sources of vocs are motor vehicles ( about 40% of total emissions ) , industrial processes , particularly the chemical and petroleum industries , and any use of paints , coatings , and solvents ( about 40% for these sources combined ) . service stations , pesticide application , dry cleaning , fuel combustion , and open burning are other significant sources of vocs . nitrogen oxides come overwhelmingly from motor vehicles and fuel combustion by electric utilities and other industrial sources . epa is prohibited from taking cost into account in setting naaqs , but to comply with an executive order , the agency generally produces a regulatory impact analysis ( ria ) analyzing in detail the costs and benefits of new or revised naaqs standards . the agency released an ria for the final standards on march 14 ; the major conclusions regarding benefits and costs were also included in text slides dated march 12 that were posted on the agency's website . the ria shows a wide range of estimates for benefits , from a low of $2 billion annually to a high of $19 billion annually in 2020 .