98-473 ) was enacted . it directed ojjdp to lead federal efforts to recover missing children and establish a national resource center on missing children . ncmec has served as the resource center since 1984 . the missing children's assistance act has been amended multiple times to further specify the responsibilities of ojjdp and ncmec in responding to missing and exploited children . for example , ojjdp supports training and technical assistance to strengthen community responses to child victimization cases , among other activities . current funding authorization under the missing children's assistance act is $40 million for each of fy2014 through fy2018 . of this amount , up to $32.2 million is to be allotted to ncmec . ( the appendix provides a description of the original act and its amendments. ) this grant was administered as part of the doj mentoring program . the federal government has since provided additional resources in support of missing and exploited children . selected activities have been subsumed under the mec program . doj first funded the icac task force program in 2008 to support state and local law enforcement agencies in combatting online enticement of children and the proliferation of pornography . this law provided two authorizations for the icac task force program — one for $60 million for fy2009-fy2013 for icac activities generally , including grants for icac task forces , and one for $2 million for each of fy2009-fy2016 for the national icac data system , which facilitates online law enforcement investigations of child exploitation . the child protection act of 2012 ( p.l . 112-206 ) , signed into law on december 7 , 2012 , authorized annual appropriations of $60 million for the icac task force program generally ( including the data system and the national strategy for child exploitation prevention and interdiction , discussed later in this report ) through fy2018 . the providing resources , officers , and technology to eradicate cyber threats to our children act of 2017 ( protect our children act of 2017 , p.l . 115-82 ) extended annual authorizations of $60 million for the icac task force program generally through fy2022 . ojjdp contracts with fox valley technical college in wisconsin to provide technical assistance , which focuses on strengthening multi - disciplinary responses in child victimization cases . assistance is provided through distance learning , webinars , onsite technical assistance , or classroom formats . the program additionally supports program administration , printing of publications for missing children's day , and grant programs that vary from year to year . for example , the program contributed funding to a doj mentoring grant in fy2017 that focuses on mentoring for child victims of commercial sexual exploitation and domestic trafficking . separately , ojp first provided funding ( $10 million in discretionary appropriations ) in 2002 for states and localities to develop amber alert programs . the prosecutorial remedies and other tools to end the exploitation of children today act of 2003 ( protect act , p.l . 108-21 ) , enacted in 2003 , directed the attorney general to create a national amber alert program , including appointing a coordinator and developing standards for issuing an alert .