3010 to the committee on appropriations . the other type of motion to recommit includes instructions and must be offered "forthwith," meaning that if the house adopts such a motion , the measure remains on the house floor and the committee chair ( or designee ) immediately rises and reports the bill back to the house with any amendment ( s ) contained in the instructions of the recommittal motion . the house votes on agreeing to the amendment ( s ) before moving to final passage of the bill as it may have been amended . typically , if the motion to recommit has been agreed to , the amendment in the instructions is agreed to by voice vote . however , amendment ( s ) in the instructions are subject to division of the question if it consists of two or more separable substantive propositions . when a motion to recommit with instructions is offered , the clerk will report it in the following form: mr. hunter moves to recommit the bill , h.r . 3159 , to the committee on armed services with instructions to report the same back to the house forthwith , with the following amendments . in subsections ( a ) ( 1 ) and ( b ) ( 1 ) of section 2 , strike "no unit" each place it appears and insert the following: "subject to section 3 , no unit".. . both types of motions to recommit are debatable for 10 minutes . the majority floor manager of a bill or joint resolution may ask that debate time be extended to one hour . in either case , debate time is equally divided between the member making the motion and a member opposing it . instructions in a motion to recommit generally may not propose to do that which may not be done by amendment under the rules of the house . for example , instructions that do any of the following would be out of order: propose an amendment that is not germane to the measure ; amend or eliminate an amendment already adopted by the house , unless permitted by a special rule ; propose an amendment in violation of rule xxi clause 2,4 , or 5 . propose an amendment in violation of rule xxi , clause 10 , "the paygo rule," and authorize a committee to report at any time or direct a committee to report by a date certain . the motion to recommit has its antecedents in the british parliament and has existed since the first congress . prior to 1909 , however , it operated differently than it does today , and priority in recognition for the offering of the motion to recommit was not reserved for a member opposed to the measure . instead , as former speaker of the house joseph g. cannon remarked: the object of this provision [for a motion to recommit] was , as the chair has always understood , that the motion should be made by one friendly to the bill ... often , the majority floor manager of a bill would make a "straight" motion to recommit with the expectation that it would be defeated .