senior u.s. officials , including outgoing u.s . while all practitioners agreed that civilian agencies are best placed , by training and experience , to lead the governance and economics lines of operation , civilian efforts have been hampered by the relatively limited resources of their agencies , and by delayed and limited staffing . military forces , with far greater numbers of "boots on the ground," have sometimes stepped in to spearhead these efforts , and have consistently played at least a supporting role . the 2007 surge included a revitalization of the civilian / military provincial reconstruction team effort . so have the major categories of activities ( or "lines of operation" ) — political , economic , essential services , diplomatic — used to help achieve the objectives . what have evolved greatly over time are the views of commanders in the field and decision - makers in washington , d.c. , about the best ways to achieve "security" and how that line of operation fits with the others . this section highlights key episodes and turning - points in the theory and practice of oif military operations , including early operations during formal occupation , "fallujah ii," coin operations in tal afar , operation together forward , the operations associated with the 2007 "new way forward," and surge follow - on operations in 2008 . the review suggests that the application of counter - insurgency ( coin ) theory and practice grew over time , but by no means steadily or consistently . as of the beginning of 2009 , the iraqi security forces ( isf ) consisted of three major groups: the army , navy and air force under the ministry of defense ( mod ) ; the iraqi police service , the national police , and the department of border enforcement under the ministry of interior ( moi ) , as well as the facilities protection service that was still being consolidated under the moi ; and the iraqi special operations forces that report to the counter - terrorism bureau , under the office of the prime minister . developing the isf and the security ministries that oversee them is a critical component of the role of u.s. and coalition forces in iraq — a role that has evolved over time in response to events on the ground and changes in u.s. strategy . a central tenet of counter - insurgency is reaching out to the local population and securing at least their acceptance , if not their active support . in iraq , a number of u.s. military commanders have pointed to changes in the attitudes and behavior of the iraqi population as the most important difference between 2008 and earlier periods . in december 2007 , for example , the out - going commander of multi - national division - baghdad , major general joseph fil , noted: "i attribute a great deal of the security progress to the willingness of the population to step forward and band together against terrorist and criminal militia. coalition and iraqi government efforts to reach out to the iraqi population have increasingly fallen under the broad semantic rubric of "reconciliation.