it will be updated periodically . the united states has long considered the caribbean basin a strategically important region based on its proximity and unique geographic features . it straddles the divide between north and south america ( see figure 1 ) , is home to important sea - lanes , raw materials , trade and investment opportunities , and historically has been a first line defense against the encroachment of foreign powers . a broad range of u.s. interests in the region has been reflected in u.s. foreign policies dating from the monroe doctrine in the early 19 th century , through the cold war era , culminating in the caribbean basin initiative ( cbi ) in the 1980s , to the current effort to thwart illegal drug trafficking , money laundering , and terrorist activities . in all cases , the united states has sought to foster social , economic , and political stability in the region , while also maintaining an eye on its own economic , commercial , and strategic interests . caricom comprises a group of 12 island and 3 larger coastal nations in and around the caribbean sea , bordered by the atlantic ocean to the east , south and central america to the south , the gulf of mexico to the west , and the united states to the north . although caricom members share many cultural and historical similarities , as seen in table 1 , their population , land size , economies , per capita income , and social indicators ( eg , life expectancy ) can vary considerably , a reality that caricom responded to by designating some of its members as less developed countries ( ldcs ) , making them eligible for "special and differential treatment. collectively , these former british , dutch , and french territories constitute a richly diverse cultural mosaic of european , african , and native influences that find themselves , paradoxically , "united by the very sea that also divides them. the tension between unity and division is a common theme throughout caribbean society , leading to what might be considered the "caricom challenge:" how to integrate a diverse area in a manner that will meet individual country and regional development goals , in a equitable and mutually supporting way , without negating national identities and aspirations . the caricom countries inherited narrow production structures from their colonial economic heritage . as captive producers and consumers for the european states , caribbean economies were developed to "complement" their counterparts across the atlantic ocean . spawned by foreign investment and sustained by protected trade , plantation economies arose based largely on sugar and banana production . minerals extraction and tourism came along much later . the colonies were equally dependent on european imports for manufactured goods and food , a relationship that endured for centuries and carried forward into the post - independence period . as a result , the caribbean trade regime remained relatively undiversified , sheltered from competition , and poorly linked to domestic food and manufacturing production that could have promoted broader - based development . the caribbean economies , therefore , were poorly positioned to make the leap to global competition .