in contrast , p.l . 110-329 provided authority for dhs to receive the proceeds of the sale of plum island . the dhs , through informational sessions in the eis process , has attempted to allay these concerns and has stated that community acceptance , or at least minimal community resistance , was one of the nbaf site criteria . however , continued community outreach may be a key factor in determining whether nbaf will suffer delays that have threatened construction of other high - containment laboratories . these types of diseases are termed zoonotic . scientific and medical understanding of zoonotic diseases in their animal hosts may lead to the discovery and development of new medical countermeasures for the animals themselves , as well as for humans . to safeguard the united states against the impacts of naturally occurring and intentional animal disease outbreaks , the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) engages in animal disease research , including research into highly contagious animal pathogens and animal diseases not native to the united states . such research activities have historically been performed at the plum island animal disease center ( piadc ) , located on plum island , an island near long island , new york . when creating the department of homeland security ( dhs ) in 2003 , congress transferred the operation of the piadc facility from usda to dhs , though usda still maintains an active research program at piadc . the dhs , in cooperation with usda , has established its own research and development program at piadc . as the federal government undertakes new efforts in human biodefense and defense against agroterrorism , dhs has characterized the piadc facility as "reaching the end of its life cycle" and lacking critical capabilities . the dhs asserts that piadc can no longer continue as the primary facility performing this research . homeland security presidential directive 9 ( hspd - 9 ) , issued by president g.w . bush , tasks the secretaries of agriculture and homeland security to develop "a plan to provide safe , secure , and state - of - the - art agriculture biocontainment laboratories that research and develop diagnostic capabilities for foreign animal and zoonotic diseases. the secretary of homeland security is directed to coordinate an acceleration and expansion of new and current countermeasure development . these countermeasures are to be against the intentional introduction or natural occurrence of catastrophic animal , plant , and zoonotic diseases , including "countermeasure research and development of new methods for detection , prevention technologies , agent characterization , and dose response relationships for high - consequence agents in the food and the water supply. the department of homeland security announced it will establish a new facility , the national bio - and agro - defense facility ( nbaf ) , to meet the obligations of hspd - 9 . this facility would have high - containment laboratories able to hold the pathogens currently under investigation at piadc , as well as other pathogens of interest . the dhs engaged in a site - selection process to determine the location for the nbaf . after evaluating several sites , dhs released a draft and a final environmental impact statement ( eis ) addressing each site .