airport. the acaa contains no statutory reference to communicable diseases , but the regulatory text specifically addresses them . additionally , the regulatory definition of "individual with a disability" appears to include individuals with communicable diseases . similarly , courts generally accept communicable diseases as falling within the scope of "disability" under the ada if the diseases meet the same parameters that other physical or mental impairments must satisfy . although no federal court has reached the issue , it follows that courts would likely reach similar conclusions under the acaa . the regulations prohibit various actions by carriers against individuals with communicable diseases . namely , a carrier may not " ( 1 ) [r]efuse to provide transportation to the passenger ; ( 2 ) [d]elay the passenger's transportation ... ; ( 3 ) [i]mpose on the passenger any condition , restriction , or requirement not imposed on other passengers ; or ( 4 ) [r]equire the passenger to provide a medical certificate. however , an exception applies when "the passenger's condition poses a direct threat. the regulations define "direct threat" as "a significant risk to the health or safety of others that cannot be eliminated by a modification of policies , practices , or procedures , or by the provision of auxiliary aids or services. carriers have discretion in determining whether a given passenger poses a "direct threat. the carrier must make an "individualized assessment , based on reasonable judgment ... to ascertain: ( i ) [t]he nature , duration , and severity of the risk ; ( ii ) [t]he probability that the potential harm to the health and safety of others will actually occur ; and ( iii ) [w]hether reasonable modifications of policies , practices , or procedures will mitigate the risk. however , note that within the scope of their discretion , carriers must choose the "least restrictive response" from the passenger's point of view . for example , a carrier should not "refuse transportation to the passenger if ... [it] can protect the health and safety of others by means short of a refusal. the department of transportation regulations require most air carriers to take specific actions in order to fulfill the acaa's broad nondiscrimination requirement . note that these requirements are minimum standards only . aircraft must conform to multiple accessibility requirements under the regulations . first , "aircraft with 30 or more passenger seats on which passenger aisle seats have armrests" must be "equipped with movable aisle armrests on at least one - half of the aisle seats in rows in which passengers with mobility impairments are permitted to sit under faa or applicable foreign government safety rules. second , each aircraft with 100 or more passenger seats must offer priority space in its cabin for storing at least one folding wheelchair . third , aircraft with "more than one aisle in which lavatories are provided shall include at least one accessible lavatory. finally , aircraft with more than 60 passenger seats providing one or more accessible lavatories must provide an "on - board wheelchair" for passengers' use . generally , air carriers may not require that an individual with a disability travel with an attendant .