to what end ? and how conditional does congress want federal aid to fusion centers to be ? the current regime of hsgp funding includes some limited conditions for funding fusion centers . however , the fusion center guidelines remain entirely voluntary even for recipients of federal hsgp funds . as a result , for example , the federal government has no formal and systematic means of auditing whether each center is appropriately protecting civil liberties , or using federally funded intelligence analysts in a manner that is consistent with national goals and objectives for fusion centers , should they be explicitly defined . as outlined above , should congress determine it wishes to take action on this option , a range of possible legislative tools are available , as discussed below . the most obvious option is to continue the current manner of funding — that is , using the hsgp grants as the federal mechanism to make funding available for states and localities for potential allocation to state and regional fusion centers . this process is reliant on state grant applications , and the flow of federal funds to state / regional fusion centers is largely determined by the sub - federal designees that make homeland security grant allocation decisions within each state and / or municipality . furthermore , fusion centers compete with a wide range of homeland security initiatives for funding . while certain elements of hsgp funding are geared toward supporting fusion center development , there is no targeted funding stream directly allocated to fusion centers themselves . if the approach to funding fusion centers remains the status quo , then secretary chertoff's statement that dhs has not "... signed on to fund fusion centers in perpetuity...." will remain true . without a dedicated funding stream , and / or another large - scale terrorist attack within the united states , it is unclear whether fusion centers will continue to receive federal funding , as well as sub - federal resources , to continue their current functions as outlined in this report . pros and cons . arguments in favor of maintaining the status quo include those who suggest such an option would result in a natural progression of the current funding model . it would allow for a certain amount of continuity in funding streams and methods of allocating funds . such an option would likely result in minimal hsgp program disruption . arguments against this option might include that the status quo would continue to leave the fundamental sustainability question — one that is foremost in the collective mind of fusion centers — unanswered . maintaining the status quo may have a drawback as it might perpetuate uncertainty about sustainable federal aid . this uncertainty might continue to hamper how fusion centers plan their information technology and human resource needs for the future . under this potential option , the current grant program could be slightly altered to address some of the oft cited hurdles that state and local officials believe impede the flow of federal grant funds to fusion center projects . two such alterations to be considered include increasing the duration of grant cycles in order to allow for enhanced continuity and human resource planning , particularly for contract - supported intelligence analysts .