each has its own applications . those interested in how individual income taxes affect the economic behavior of households should have a clear understanding of the ways in which the three rates differ and the implications of these differences for the economic analysis of income taxes . strs are the rates prescribed by law that apply to specified ranges of taxable income . for any individual , the applicable rate depends on her / his taxable income . since the federal income tax is progressive in nature , taxpayers with relatively low taxable incomes face lower strs than do taxpayers with relatively high taxable incomes . effective rates , by contrast , whether marginal or average , measure how strs are affected by tax provisions that modify someone's taxable income or tax liability . a taxpayer's mer shows the percentage of an additional dollar of income that is taxed , while her / his aer indicates how much of her / his total income is taxed . in general , someone's average tax rate is lower than her / his marginal tax rate . still , for many individuals , the interaction between special provisions in the tax code and their specific financial circumstances leads to differences between their effective and statutory rates . among the provisions that can drive a wedge between the two rates are the earned income tax credit ( eitc ) , the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) , and personal exemptions and deductions . personal circumstances that can cause mers to diverge from strs include the sources of income , itemized deductions , the number of children ( if any ) eligible for the child tax credit and the eitc , and filing status . most economists believe that taxpayers change their economic behavior in response to mers , not to statutory rates . drawing on a standard model of consumer behavior , they argue that a person's mer influences important decisions concerning whether and how much to work , how much to spend , and how much to save . for example , someone's mer may help determine whether he takes on an overtime shift , bargains for wages and benefits , takes a second job , or even enters the labor force . the idea that mers help shape an individual's economic behavior can be extended to an entire tax system , including federal payroll and excise taxes and state and local taxes . a broader analysis along these lines , however , goes beyond the scope of this report . the current income tax is largely a product of the tax reform act of 1986 ( tra86 ; p.l . among other things , the act reduced the individual tax rate structure to two statutory rates: 15% and 28% . tra86 also imposed a 5% surcharge on the taxable income of certain upper - income households , effectively adding a third marginal tax rate of 33% . since the enactment of tra86 , several other major changes in the federal individual income tax rate structure have been made . the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ( obra90 ; p.l . 101-508 ) eliminated the 5% surcharge and replaced it with a statutory rate of 31% .