figure 1 . u.s. fruit and vegetable trade ( excluding nuts ) , 1990-2015source: compiled by crs from data in the u.s. international trade commission's trade dataweb database ( version 2.8.4 ) . includes fresh and processed products ; excludes nuts . a number of factors are shaping current competitive market conditions worldwide and global trade in fruits and vegetables . in the buildup to the 2008 farm bill ( food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , p.l . 110-246 ) , the trade situation contributed to demands by the u.s. produce sector that congress consider expanding support for domestic fruit and vegetable growers in farm bill legislation . historically , specialty crops had not benefitted from the federal farm support programs traditionally included in the farm bill , compared to the long - standing support provided to the main program commodities ( such as grains , oilseeds , cotton , sugar , and milk ) . the 2008 farm bill , and later the 2014 farm bill ( agricultural act of 2014 , p.l . 113-79 ) , provided additional support for programs supporting fruit and vegetable production , as well as programs addressing existing trade barriers and marketing of u.s. specialty crops . this report presents recent trends in u.s. fruit and vegetable trade , and highlights some of the factors contributing to these trends . this summary excludes trade data for tree nuts and processed tree nut products . although not presented here , u.s. exports and imports of tree nuts and processed tree nut products ( excluding peanuts ) have shown continued increases and , generally , a growing u.s. trade surplus . a number of factors are shaping current competitive market and trade conditions worldwide , and may be contributing to trends in u.s. fruit and vegetable trade: a relatively open u.s. import regime and lower average import tariffs in the united states , with products from most leading suppliers entering the u.s. duty - free or at preferential duty rates ; increased competition from low - cost or subsidized production of fruit and vegetable products ; continued non - tariff trade barriers to u.s. exports in some countries , including restrictive import and inspection requirements , technical product standards , and sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) requirements ; opportunities for counter - seasonal supplies , driven , in part , by increased domestic and year - round demand for fruits and vegetables ; and other market factors , such as exchange rate fluctuations and structural changes in the u.s. food industry , as well as increased u.s. overseas investment and diversification in market sourcing by u.s. companies . starting in 2005 , the specialty crop farm bill alliance began promoting recommendations for the 2008 farm bill , initially through the efforts of the united fresh produce association and a number of specialty crop organizations nationwide . the alliance's goal has continued to work toward enhancing the competitiveness of u.s. fruits , vegetables , tree nuts , and other specialty crops by promoting specific programs and provisions as part of the periodic omnibus farm bill , including the most recent 2014 farm bill .