figure 1 . stafford loans for students in public colleges & universities , 1987-2006 ( in billions of dollars ) source: data provided by department of education.note: totals for 50 states and d.c. foreign loans excluded . figure 2 . stafford loans for students in private colleges & universities , 1987-2006 ( in billions of dollars ) source: data provided by department of education.note: totals for 50 states and d.c. foreign loans excluded . the college cost reduction and access act the college cost reduction and access act ( p.l . 110-84 ) , enacted in september 2007 , cut interest rate subsidies to lenders and increased the proportion of default costs borne by lenders . some have argued that reductions in federal family education loan ( ffel ) subsidies , as well other changes in the ffel program , would lead some student loan providers to exit the market . lender withdrawal announcements in early 2008 , some student lenders announced plans to restrict loans in response to tightening credit conditions and cuts in federal subsidies put in place by the college cost reduction and access act . in february 2008 , the pennsylvania higher education assistance program ( pheaa ) announced they would suspend making federally guaranteed loans . since then , many other lenders announced plans to suspend participation in federally guaranteed student loan programs . according to finaid.org , as of july 14 , 2008 , 96 lenders had indicated that they would suspend originating ffel loans and an additional 24 indicated that they would only suspend originating consolidation loans . in addition , 27 lenders announced that they would suspend new private loans . in total , as of july 14 , 2008 , 125 lenders had indicated that they would suspend participation in private loans and some part of the ffel program . the secretary of education , in a march 4 , 2008 , letter to financial aid professionals , requested that financial aid offices relay information on lenders' intentions to curtail student loans to the u.s. department of education . for example , sallie mae ( slm corp. ) took a $1.5 billion write - down stemming from financial positions it took that would have increased in value had its stock price risen . some observers contend that student lenders have overstated their recent troubles and that loans remain available through the federal direct lending program ( fdlp ) . the following sections describe key provisions of the ffel loan program and outline changes made by the college cost reduction and access act . although reductions in interest rate subsidies for ffel lenders have attracted the most attention , other legislative changes may also have important effects on the student loan market . lender subsidy formulae the formulae determining interest rates that student borrowers pay and the yields ( including certain subsidies ) received by ffel lenders for various types of federally guaranteed loans are set by legislation . these formulae have been changed many times since 1981 . other changes in program details , such as higher origination fees paid to the federal government , have reduced lenders' profit rates .