the categories are defined as follows . the nato sofa is a multilateral agreement that has applicability among all the member countries of nato . as of june 2007 , 26 countries , including the united states , have either ratified the agreement or acceded to it by their accession into nato . the nato sofa is the only sofa that was concluded as part of a treaty . there are currently 24 countries , non - members of nato , subject to the nato sofa through their participation in the nato partnership for peace ( pfp ) program . the program consists of bilateral cooperation between individual countries and nato in order to increase stability , diminish threats to peace , and build strengthened security relationships . the individual countries that participate in pfp agree to adhere to the terms of the nato sofa . the united states has concluded sofas where the underlying authority for the agreement is a treaty ratified by the u.s. senate . the united states entered into a sofa with japan in 1960 under the authority contained in article vi of the treaty of mutual cooperation and security previously concluded between the countries . additionally , the united states entered into a sofa with korea in 1967 under the authority in article v of the mutual defense treaty previously concluded between the two countries . the united states entered into sofas with australia and the philippines after concluding treaties with the respective countries . in the case of australia , the u.s. senate advised ratification of the anzus pact in 1952 . in 1963 , nine years after ratification of the pact , australia and the united states entered into an agreement concerning the status of u.s. forces in australia . the united states entered into a sofa with the philippines in 1993 after concluding a mutual defense treaty with the country in 1952 . the agreements with australia and the philippines can be distinguished from the agreements with japan and korea in that they cite general obligations under the previously concluded treaty , while the agreements with japan and korea cite to a specific authority ( i.e. , article vi and article v , respectively ) contained in the underlying treaty . the united states is a party to the inter - american treaty of reciprocal assistance ( rio treaty ) , for which the u.s. senate advised ratification december 8 , 1947 . the united states then entered into military assistance agreements with guatemala , haiti , and honduras . the agreements cite obligations created under the rio treaty and address status of u.s. personnel in each of the countries . the united states expanded on the status protections contained in the military assistance agreements by later concluding sofas with each of the countries . in all three , the military assistance agreements were cited as the basis of the new agreement . as previously discussed , congress approved compacts changing the status of the marshall islands , micronesia , and palau from former territories and possessions to that of being freely associated states ( fas ) . the language of the compacts calls for a sofa to be concluded between the respective parties .