in response , the u.s . ambassador to argentina , earl anthony wayne , stressed that judicial independence is one of the pillars of the u.s. system , and emphasized that u.s. relations with argentina remain friendly . during july 16 , 2008 floor consideration , the house approved h.amdt . 1117 ( hinchey ) by voice vote , which became section 426 of the bill . the provision calls for a report ( in unclassified form , but may include a classified annex ) within 270 days by the director of the central intelligence agency ( cia ) that includes a description of any information in possession of the intelligence community with respect to the accession to power of the argentine military in 1976 , violations of human rights committed by officers or agents of the argentine military and security forces , and operation condor and the fate of argentine people targeted , abducted , or killed during such operation , including children born in captivity whose status remains unknown . the report also is to include a compilation of information that has been declassified . not later than one year after the original report , and annually thereafter for three years , the director of the cia is to submit an update of the compilation of information that has been declassified . 7205 ( jackson - lee ) . judgment evading foreign states accountability act of 2008 . introduced september 28 , 2008 ; referred to the committee on financial services and in addition to the committee on foreign affairs . among its provisions , the bill takes a number of measures against foreign countries that fail to satisfy u.s. court judgements of more than $1 million for more than six months . most significantly , the measure would bar access to u.s. capital markets to the foreign state in default and bar domestic corporations of a foreign state from access to u.s. capital markets if the foreign state has been in default for more than two years . some observers fear that the case could have a negative effect on bilateral relations . on september 11 , 2008 , argentina's foreign ministry issued a communique that referred to the accusations in the trial as irresponsible and based on material produced by the fbi with the knowledge of political authorities in the united states . after duran was convicted in early november , argentina's minister of justice asserted that antonini had been hired and paid for his testimony . in recent years , u.s. concerns have increased over activities of the radical lebanon - based islamic group hezbollah and the sunni muslim palestinian group hamas in the tri - border area ( tba ) of argentina , brazil , and paraguay , which has a large muslim population . the tba has long been used for arms and drug trafficking , contraband smuggling , document and currency fraud , money laundering , and the manufacture and movement of pirated goods . according to the state department's april 2008 country reports on terrorism , the united states remains concerned that hezbollah and hamas are raising funds among the sizable muslim communities in the region and elsewhere in the territories of the three countries .