appendix a . selected issues in u.s. - german relations — current status economic ties germany is the world's fifth - largest economy and the largest in europe , accounting for about one - fifth of the european union's ( eu ) gdp . successive u.s . administrations have supported esdp as a means to enhance european defense capability and interoperability , but washington has also insisted that eu defense policy be tied to nato . to this end , u.s. leaders have welcomed merkel's renewed emphasis on nato - eu links . while germany remains committed to nato as the pillar for european security , some germans have questioned the u.s. commitment to nato , and a perceived u.s. preference to pursue independently defined national interests within the alliance rather than to define and pursue the collective interests of the alliance . domestic political considerations and german public opinion could continue to play a key role in shaping u.s. - german relations . president obama's popularity in germany suggests that many germans view the new u.s. administration's foreign policy as a welcome change from the perceived unilateralism of the unpopular george w. bush administration . however , some observers caution that public expectations of the new president have been unreasonably high and note that policy differences between the two countries remain , particularly in areas where public opposition is high . for example , in the face of the global economic slowdown , german leaders on both sides of the political spectrum resisted calls from the obama administration to stimulate economic growth through larger domestic spending measures . in the foreign policy domain , while german officials have welcomed the obama administration's strategic review of afghanistan / pakistan policy , they have essentially ruled out sending more than 500 additional combat troops or relaxing constraints on those troops currently serving in afghanistan . germany is also the largest european trade and investment partner and the second largest overall of the united states . total two - way trade in goods between the countries totaled $152 billion in 2008 . u.s. exports to germany in 2008 were worth about $54.5 billion , consisting primarily of aircraft , and electrical and telecommunications equipment . german exports to the united states — primarily motor vehicles , machinery , chemicals , and heavy electrical equipment — totaled about $97.5 billion in 2008 . the united states is the number - one destination for german foreign direct investment ( fdi ) ; 11.5% of all u.s. fdi is in germany . u.s. firms operating in germany employ approximately 800,000 germans , and an estimated 670,000 americans work for german firms in the united states . like the united states , germany is experiencing a relatively sharp decline in economic growth . germany's export - based economy contracted 5% in 2009 , and unemployment has been slowly but steadily rising since the end of 2008 . however , although u.s. - german economic and trade ties remain strong , the global financial crisis and ensuing economic downturn have exposed u.s. - german differences on the cause of and the appropriate response to the crisis .