they're not my weapons . and there are limits to what i know . certainly at a worst - case scenario with respect to pakistan , i worry a great deal about those weapons falling into the hands of terrorists and either being proliferated or potentially used . and so , control of those , stability , stable control of those weapons is a key concern . and i think certainly the pakistani leadership that i've spoken with on both the military and civilian side understand that . for example , then - chairman of the joint chiefs of staff mullen stated during a may 14 , 2009 , hearing before the senate armed services committee that "we're limited in what we actually know" about islamabad's nuclear arsenal . nevertheless , u.s. officials have expressed confidence regarding the security of islamabad's nuclear weapons . defense intelligence agency director stewart stated in february 2016 that "islamabad continues to take steps to improve its nuclear security , and is aware of the threat presented by extremists to its program. more recently , white house press secretary josh earnest stated on october 15 , 2015 , that we continue to have confidence that the government of pakistan is well aware of the range of potential threats to its nuclear arsenal , and we continue to be confident that pakistan has a professional and dedicated security force that understands the importance and the high priority that the world places on nuclear security . ambassador olson told the house foreign affairs committee on december 16 , 2015 , that washington has "confidence in the capabilities of ... the pakistani security forces to control and secure their nuclear weapons," adding that islamabad has "specifically taken into account the insider threat" to its nuclear arsenal . a former administration official wrote in september 2014 that the likelihood [of] terrorists obtaining nuclear weapons or nuclear material from pakistani facilities is currently very low because of the extraordinary measures the pakistan government and military have taken over the last decade... pakistani nuclear materials do not pose the concerns that they once did . under secretary of state for arms control and international security rose gottemoeller expressed confidence in the security of pakistan's nuclear arsenal during a march 17 , 2016 , senate foreign relations committee hearing , but added that pakistan's "battlefield nuclear weapons" are a security concern because such weapons "cannot be made as secure" when deployed . other governments have also voiced opinions regarding the security of pakistan's nuclear arsenal . for example , indian national security adviser m. k. narayanan said that the arsenal is safe and has adequate checks and balances . similarly , then - secretary of state for foreign and commonwealth affairs david miliband told the charlie rose show on december 15 , 2008 , that islamabad's nuclear weapons " are under pretty close lock and key.