some of these are addressed here . one possible model for addressing potential liability concerns associated with ccs , especially the possibility of catastrophic loss , is the price - anderson act , which addresses liability associated with nuclear energy facilities . under the price - anderson act , nuclear power licensees are required to initially assume all liability for damages associated with their operations that are awarded to the public , though they may bring contribution actions if they feel that others are to blame . in addition , licensees must waive most of their legal defenses following an "extraordinary nuclear occurrence. the act further requires licensees that operate reactors with at least 100 megawatts of generation capacity to obtain the maximum liability coverage readily available on the insurance market ( currently $375 million ) . damages that exceed that amount are covered by the "price - anderson fund," which is funded with retrospective premiums assessed equally against all licensees of 100 megawatts or greater . that is , if a nuclear incident with liability in excess of $375 million occurs , that excess liability is covered equally by all the licensees . these retrospective payments are capped in order to limit the potential financial burden following a major accident . cumulative liability per incident is capped at $12.6 billion as of the date of this report . it is the successor agency to the icc . pipelines , like railroads , are "common carriers" and thus are used by more than one company for the transportation of goods . therefore , the ica also assigned the icc ( and thus the stb ) oversight authority over pipelines transporting a commodity other than "water , gas or oil. however , unlike ferc , the stb does not require pipeline companies to file tariffs and justify their rates . instead , the stb acts as a forum to resolve disputes related to pipelines within its jurisdiction . parties who wish to challenge a rate or another aspect of a pipeline's common carrier service may petition the stb for a hearing ; there is no ongoing regulatory oversight . thus , there are two federal regulatory agencies that , generally speaking , have jurisdiction over interstate pipeline rate and capacity allocation matters . however , as explained below , both of these agencies appear to have explicitly rejected jurisdiction over co 2 siting and rates , and there is no legislative or judicial history indicating that their rejections were improper . these decisions , the reasoning behind them , and the status of federal jurisdiction over co 2 pipelines are covered in the next section . carbon dioxide is sometimes used for a process referred to as enhanced oil recovery ( eor ) . in eor , a gas is injected into a well under high pressure in order to aid in extraction of the oil . in some cases companies have used pipelines to transport co 2 over state lines ( i.e. , in interstate commerce ) for eor purposes . one such pipeline is the cortez pipeline , which runs through colorado , new mexico , and texas . the cortez pipeline was the subject of an instructive regulatory dispute over co 2 pipeline jurisdiction .