2011 et seq. ) governs significant nuclear cooperation between the united states and other states . the united states has agreements for civil nuclear cooperation in place with almost 50 countries . such agreements , known as "123 agreements," provide the framework and authorization for cooperation , but do not guarantee certain exports , technology , or material . before significant nuclear exports can occur , the state department , with the advice of the department of energy , negotiates an agreement , which must meet criteria listed in section 123.a. cooperation between the united states and russia on civilian nuclear energy is not new , but the level has fluctuated depending on broader political developments . the united states and the soviet union concluded a limited 10-year agreement for nuclear cooperation in 1973 to allow for cooperation in controlled thermonuclear fusion , fast breeder reactors , and fundamental research . the 1973 agreement also established a joint committee on cooperation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy that was to meet annually . this agreement was extended in 1983 and in 1988 , and exchanges on safety practices significantly increased after the 1986 chernobyl power plant accident . the two superpowers convened a joint coordinating committee for civilian reactor safety starting in 1988 . after the fall of the soviet union and prior to july 2006 , moscow's nuclear commerce with iran presented the chief obstacle to concluding a broad u.s. - russian nuclear cooperation under section 123 . project - specific agreements were concluded throughout this period . several factors may have contributed to the shift in u.s. policy under the george w. bush administration: a tougher line by moscow since 2003 with respect to iran , especially russia's agreement with iran to take back spent nuclear fuel from the russian - built bushehr reactor ; president bush's embrace of nuclear power as an alternative to reliance on hydrocarbons ; president bush's proposals to multi - lateralize the nuclear fuel cycle and develop proliferation - resistant technologies through the global nuclear energy partnership ( gnep ) ; and russia's own proposals to host an international fuel center that would store and reprocess spent fuel and enrich uranium for fresh fuel . under the obama administration , officials have expressed support for the nuclear cooperation agreement with russia , but were waiting for the "appropriate time" to submit the agreement to congress . president obama's letter of may 10 , 2010 , outlines ways in which the current administration sees this agreement as being beneficial for u.s. interests , primarily in that it would contribute to "the growth of clean , safe and secure nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. the letter cites several areas of recent "progress" in cooperation between the united states and russia: russian support for a new united nations security council resolution on iran . signature on april 8 , 2010 , of the new start treaty that would reduce the number of deployed strategic nuclear weapons . signature on april 13 , 2010 , of the protocol to amend the 2000 u.s. russian plutonium management and disposition agreement , which will dispose of at least 34 metric tons of excess weapons plutonium in each country . russia's establishment of an international nuclear fuel reserve in angarsk .