appendix a . food aid , such as the p.l . 480 food for peace program , is funded in the agriculture appropriations bill , although it is also considered foreign aid . several floor amendments reduced funding for department of state diplomatic and consular affairs general administration to fund increases in some foreign aid accounts ( see "foreign operations" section below ) . other floor amendments included the following: a leahy amendment to require the secretary of state to establish visa processing facilities in iraq within 180 days of enactment was adopted by unanimous consent . it also requires a report to congress no later than 30 days after enactment on funding and security requirements for consular operations in iraq in fy2008 . a cardin amendment to increase funding for the commission on security and cooperation in europe by $333,000 and to reduce funds for state's diplomatic and consular affairs general administration by the same amount was adopted by unanimous consent . the foreign operations portion of the senate bill , as it was reported out of committee , is similar to the house bill in many respects , including language that would allow the provision of contraceptives to ngos who are ineligible to receive funding because of mexico city restrictions . the white house has stated that it will likely veto a bill that contains this provision . like the house bill , it does not provide assistance to iraq . the senate bill differs from the house version in several aspects . the senate bill provides $1.2 billion for the millennium challenge corporation , $600 million below the house level and $1.8 billion below the request . for a second year , the senate bill incorporates all health - related funding from various accounts into one global health programs account that totals $6.531 billion , including pepfar funds . the house bill maintains separate accounts . the senate bill provides $4.479 billion for foreign military financing , which is $20 million above the house level , and $57 million below the request . the senate bill provides $2.915 billion for the economic support fund , which is $258.5 million more than the house , but $404.6 million less than the request . the senate bill continues funding for a democracy fund , not requested by the administration , that would receive $177 million in fy2008 . the house bill proposes no separate democracy fund account . the senate completed action on h.r . 110-128 ) on september 6 , 2007 , and adopted several amendments , including a controversial repeal of the long - standing mexico city policy . the overall funding level remains the same as the committee - reported bill and the house - passed measure . major amendments approved on the floor include the following: a boxer amendment to repeal the mexico city policy was adopted by a vote of 53-41 . the mexico city policy bars u.s. aid to international family planning organizations that perform or promote abortions , even if they use their own funds to do so .