funding . 110-378 authorizes fy2009 appropriation levels for the bcp , tlp , and related activities that exceed the levels authorized for fy2004 by $35 million ( these are the only recent years for which congress has specified authorized appropriation levels ) . the law also increases the authorized annual minimum levels of bcp funding available for states and territories . it further requires hhs to reallocate unused bcp funds from one state to another . the amount allocated to states for fy2009 and fy2010 may not be lower than the amount appropriated to the states in fy2008 . requirements . 110-378 allows youth to remain in a program funded under the bcp and tlp longer they were able to under the prior law , although the law imposes additional criteria for youth who stay longer at tlp - funded programs . the law also changes the definition of "homeless youth" to permit youth older than age 18 and 22 to stay at bcp - and tlp - funded programs , respectively , but only under certain circumstances . another change made by the law specifies that in funding grants for research and other projects related to runaway and homeless youth , hhs is to give priority to applicants that serve diverse youth and represent diverse geographic regions of the u.s. ( the term "diverse" is not defined. ) other requirements pertain to bcp and tlp plans submitted by grant applicants . accountability . 110-378 requires hhs to promulgate regulations that specify performance standards for public and non - profit entities that receive bcp , tlp , and sop grants . the law further requires hhs to periodically submit to congress an incidence and prevalence study of runaway and homeless youth ages 13 to 26 , as well as the characteristics of a representative sample of these youth . hhs must consult with the u.s. interagency council on homelessness in developing the study . the law also directs the government accountability office ( gao ) to evaluate the process by which organizations apply for bcp , tlp , and sop , including hhs's response to these applicants . gao is to submit a report on its findings to congress . the discussion below provides more details of these provisions . 110-378 changes program requirements related to ( 1 ) the length of time that youth are eligible to stay in basic center program and transitional living program facilities ; ( 2 ) the definition of homeless youth and runaway youth ; ( 3 ) bcp and tlp plans submitted by applicants ; and ( 4 ) applicants that are to be prioritized under the street outreach program . the reconnecting homeless youth act of 2008 includes provisions that seek to improve accountability of programs and activities authorized by rhya , including requiring hhs to establish performance standards for bcp , tlp , and sop grantees ; directing gao to evaluate the process by which grants are awarded under the three programs ; and requiring hhs to periodically submit a report to congress that contains estimates of runaway and homeless youth and certain characteristics of the population .