it is a court of last resort. at the june 2010 meeting of icc states parties in kampala , uganda , participants initiated mechanisms for increasing coordination between donors on strengthening national justice systems . the united states , which participated in the meeting as an observer , has expressed support for such efforts . the prosecutor's selection of cases also has proven controversial . as one pair of authors has written , "perceptions of the icc on the ground have at times been damaged by insufficient efforts by the court to make clear the basis on which individuals have been the subject of warrants and of particular charges , while those of apparently equal culpability have not. this is exactly the role of the i.c.c . for example , some have criticized icc prosecutions in uganda , the drc , and car for focusing on alleged abuses by rebel fighters to the exclusion of those reportedly committed by government troops . the decision to pursue drc opposition leader jean - pierre bemba gombo has provoked accusations that the prosecutor was swayed by political bias or , potentially , excessive pragmatism , since other congolese and car politicians accused of similar abuses have not been pursued to date . icc supporters have responded that the prosecutor is mandated to focus on particularly serious cases , and that investigations are ongoing in these countries . one of the most persistent criticisms of the icc's actions in africa has been that by prosecuting participants in ongoing or recently settled conflicts , the court risks prolonging violence or endangering fragile peace processes . by removing the bargaining chip of amnesty from the negotiating table , critics allege , the icc may remove incentives for peace settlements while encouraging perpetrators to remain in power in order to shield themselves from prosecution . some analysts observe that in such cases , "it is difficult to tell victims of these conflicts that the prosecution of a small number of people should take precedence over a peace deal that may end the appalling conditions they endure and the daily risks they face. concerns that the aims of "justice" and "peace" may conflict have been particularly prominent in connection with sudan , kenya , and the lord's resistance army . similar concerns have recently been voiced with regard to libya , where qadhafi has refused to cede power . as one commentator recently argued , "in the past , africa's deposed heads of state could count on a comfortable exile in a friendly country.. . but since the international criminal court was established in 2002 , rulers who have committed war crimes or human rights violations against their own people have found their exile options substantially diminished. in sudan , some observers have argued that the attempt to prosecute president bashir complicated implementation of the 2005 comprehensive peace agreement for southern sudan and the peace process in darfur , by providing an incentive to the ruling party's inner circle to cling to power .