appendix a . impact of child support pass - through and disregard policy on families with no earnings or specified earnings , analysis of selected states there are significant differences among states in terms of their tanf cash benefit payments , and how they treat earnings , work expenses , and child support income . all of these factors must be taken into account in order to calculate a family's cash welfare benefit and total income . this appendix provides more detail on the impact of deficit reduction act ( dra , p.l . 109-171 ) provisions on families , depending on their income status and the amount of child support paid on their behalf , in each of six states: california , illinois , maine , maryland , oklahoma , and west virginia . the analysis is limited to the following income sources: tanf cash benefit payments , earnings , and child support payments from noncustodial parents . in each of the six states the situation of a mother with two children and no earnings , part - time minimum wage earnings , and full - time minimum wage earnings is examined . with regard to the minimum wage , this analysis uses the higher of $7.25 per hour ( the new fully phased - in federal minimum wage ) or the state minimum wage . monthly earnings are calculated by multiplying the hourly wage rate by 8 hours per day multiplied by five days per week and multiplied by a factor of 4.33 . for purposes of tanf eligibility and benefit computations , the 4.33 factor is not used in maryland , which is required by its tanf manual to use a factor of 4.00 to determine the monthly amount or in west virginia , which is required by its tanf manual to use a factor of 4.30 to determine the monthly amount . the analysis in this appendix compares the total monthly income of the mother with two children under the state's current policy regarding treatment of earnings and child support pass - through and disregard , with dra policy . the analysis assumes that the state would opt to pass - through and disregard up to $200 per month of child support payments with the federal government sharing in the cost . also , the analysis only examines child support payments between $0 and $500 per month ( the tables show this range in $100 dollar increments ) . california california currently provides a $50 child support pass - through and disregard to tanf recipients who receive at least $50 per month in child support payments from noncustodial parents . the maximum monthly cash tanf benefit for a 3-person family in california is $723 . in determining tanf benefits , $225 plus 50% of remaining gross monthly earnings is not counted ( i.e. , this amount is disregarded ) . although this analysis assumes that california will adopt the new pass - through and disregard policy authorized under dra , whether or not california will do so in reality is not known at this time . there have been initiatives in california to eliminate the existing $50 child support pass - through and disregard policy .