this report will not be updated . discussion of subsequent developments appears in another crs product that supersedes this report . for additional detail , see crs report r43976 , funding of presidential nominating conventions: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . although pecf funding of convention operations has been in place since the 1976 election cycle , the role of federal convention funding remains subject to debate in congress and beyond . most of that debate , however , occurs within the broader discussions of presidential public financing and "hard" versus "soft" money in campaigns . congress has several options for revisiting the federal role in pecf funding , if it chooses to do so . the role of the federal government in funding convention security is a fairly new development since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 . as federal , state , and local governments further refine their homeland security activities generally , and specifically convention security operations , congress may consider different options for how the federal government provides funding for state and local costs incurred in securing convention venues . presidential public funds and security funds come from separate revenue sources . they are allocated differently , are used for different purposes , and are subject to different points of debate . although both presidential public funds and security funds support conventions , congress may reassess them separately . a variety of policy issues surrounds convention financing . some observers have questioned why federal funds subsidize conventions , considering the availability of substantial private resources and that they are party , rather than governmental , events . others have contended that private funds , particularly so - called "soft money," which falls outside the scope of federal campaign finance law , have become too pervasive in conventions and that tighter restrictions are needed . these divergent views on the use of public funds to support party conventions also appear in other contexts in the debate surrounding campaign finance policy . two taxpayer - supported revenue sources are available to conventions: ( 1 ) presidential public campaign funds ; and ( 2 ) security funds . approximately $136.5 million from those sources went toward the 2012 democratic and republican national conventions . no third parties received convention funds for the 2012 election cycle . the 2012 democratic and republican conventions received a total of approximately $36.5 million from the presidential election campaign fund ( which generally excludes security costs ) . before proceeding , it is important to note the distinction between presidential public funds and security funds . these conventions are run by and for parties , without a formal role for the federal government . federal funds do , however , provide certain financial support to convention committees that choose to accept public money . additionally , congress appropriates federal funding for the securing of the convention venues . every four years , the two major political parties , and some third parties , select their presidential nominees at conventions .