what should the royalty rate be ? and how does congress decide what a fair royalty rate is ? how does one balance the various considerations , such as efficiency and administrative considerations in deciding whether to impose a royalty ? any depletion deduction in excess of cost depletion is considered by economists to be a tax subsidy or incentive because the present value of the total amount deducted typically exceeds the initial investment . in other words , the total amounts that can be recovered through percentage depletion generally exceed the total investment cost of the property . this is true even with the net - income limitation , which limits the deduction to 50% of the taxable income from the mine ( irc §613 ( a ) ) . what would be the economic effects of introducing a system of royalty payments and other rental payments where one did not exist ? would a royalty harm the domestic and international competitiveness of the u.s. hardrock mining industry ? finally , what taxes and fees does the hardrock mineral industry pay , and do they have any bearing on the question of whether to impose , or the magnitude of , a royalty ? the first section of this report provides a brief history of the 1872 mining law , including the mineral leasing system and royalty payment requirements for the energy minerals . the second section discusses the economic rationale for the payment of royalties on hardrock minerals . it ( 1 ) addresses the question of the appropriate economic basis for payment of royalties to the federal government as landowner , ( 2 ) compares royalties based on market value with alternative criteria such as royalties based on gross income from depletion and net smelter return , ( 3 ) examines the question of an appropriate royalty rate , and ( 4 ) discusses some of the likely economic effects of royalty - free provision of public lands , as well as the effects of introducing a royalty . the fifth and final section examines the federal tax provisions , including the three tax subsidies that affect the hardrock minerals industry , as well as claims and patent fees that the industry pays . note that the question of payment of royalties from hardrock mineral production on public lands is part of a much broader debate relating to reform of the mining law of 1872 , which encompasses many other issues — such as whether public domain lands should be patented — which are not addressed in this report . the general mining law of 1872 ( 17 stat . 91 ) can be traced to 16 th century english and spanish property and mineral rights laws and customs , which , as practiced in colonial america , formed the basis for the granting of the rights to lands including those containing minerals , including a share of the minerals ( a royalty ) . one of the earliest statutes was the "royal code of 1783. . this spanish law became the basis for acquiring mineral rights in spanish colonies in the americas , and was used to settle claims disputes .