what is drought ? drought is commonly defined as a lack of precipitation over an extended period , usually a season or more , relative to some long - term average condition . history suggests that severe and extended droughts are inevitable and part of natural climate cycles . while forecast technology and science have improved , regional predictions remain limited to a few months in advance . what causes drought ? the physical conditions causing drought in the united states are increasingly understood to be linked to sea surface temperatures ( ssts ) in the tropical pacific ocean . studies indicate that cooler - than - average ssts have been connected to the severe western drought in the first decade of the 21 st century , severe droughts of the late 19 th century , and precolonial north american "megadroughts. the 2011 severe drought in texas is thought to be linked to la niña conditions ( cooler - than - average ssts ) in the pacific ocean . what is the future of drought in the united states ? the prospect of extended droughts and more arid baseline conditions in parts of the united states could suggest new challenges to federal programs and water projects , which were conceived or constructed largely on the basis of 20 th - century climate conditions . some studies suggest a transitioning of the american west to a more arid climate , possibly resulting from the buildup of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere , raising concerns that the region may become more prone to extreme drought than it was in the 20 th century . some models of future climate conditions also predict greater fluctuations in wet and dry years ; however , the net effect of such fluctuations is difficult to predict . what is federal drought policy ? although drought impacts can be significant , no comprehensive national drought policy exists . developing a national policy would be challenging because of split federal and nonfederal responsibilities ; the existing patchwork of federal programs ; and differences in regional conditions , risks , and available responses . in 2000 , the national drought policy commission provided recommendations to congress to improve drought policy . congress has acted on some of the recommendations ( eg , authorizing the national integrated drought information system ) , but not others ( eg , creation of a national drought council and a fund to support drought planning ) . given current conditions , congress may review the functioning and adequacy of existing federal responses and programs ( eg , access to and level of assistance provided , incentives for mitigation of drought risk , and preparedness of federal facilities ) . the likelihood of extended periods of severe drought , similar to conditions experienced centuries ago , and its effects on 21 st - century society in the united states raise several issues for congress . these issues include how to respond to recurrent drought incidents , how to prepare for future drought , and how to coordinate federal agency actions . for example , drought often results in agricultural losses , which can have local , regional , and national effects .