entitlement purchases . in planning the mandated , or entitlement , commodity purchases , usda agencies consult with commodity organizations and devise , by early spring , a tentative purchase plan for the next school year ( purchases may begin in may ) . the plan is based on prior year purchases , likely school needs , expectations of available funds , and any anticipated surplus or other market conditions in the coming year , among other things . ams issues the bid specifications for purchasing the products , generally in processed form , for delivery to state drop - off points . usda's farm service agency ( fsa ) administers the purchase contracts and pays the vendors . for fy2015 under section 32 , ams purchased $465 million in agricultural commodities ( including farm bill specialty crop purchases ) , primarily to fulfill a mandate in child nutrition law . sections 6 and 14 of the richard b. russell national school lunch act ( 42 u.s.c . 1762a ) "entitle" schools and other child nutrition program sponsors to commodities worth specific dollar amounts . contingency fund purchases of "bonus commodities. over the course of the year , usda taps the contingency reserve for so - called emergency surplus removals , which are then distributed as "bonuses" to domestic food assistance programs . the premise is that removing products from normal marketing channels helps to limit supply and thereby increase prices . usda may learn about these needs through its own commodity experts or be informed of surpluses or other economic problems by farm and industry organizations . besides schools and child care centers , recipients include soup kitchens , food banks , and others serving the needy . the annual total of contingency purchases — and thus the foods provided to these outlets — has varied from a low of $54 million in fy2008 to a high of $320 million in fy2009 ( table 1 ) . in fy2015 , bonus purchases , including fruits , vegetables , and meat products , totaled $306 million ( table 2 ) . historically , usda has had broad discretionary authority to spend section 32 money on direct farm assistance . this type of assistance includes payments to producers , sometimes to divert production from commercial markets and usually to counter low prices . such payments may be in exchange for destruction of a crop , or for diversion to livestock feed and / or to use as commodities for domestic feeding programs . diversion payments were last made in fy2001 for potatoes . other direct payments also have been made to agricultural producers for either economic or disaster - related reasons ; usually , these payments are transferred to usda's farm service agency ( fsa ) for disbursement . in fy1999 , for example , section 32 funded a total of $178.3 million in direct payments to smaller - sized hog producers , as part of a broader usda effort to assist the industry during a time of historically low prices . similar assistance continued in the 2000s as the administration used section 32 to pay for special disaster initiatives , including livestock drought losses in 2001-2003 and fruit trees and other specialty crop losses in 2005 caused by hurricanes .