other improvements in health . would reserve funds to make health insurance coverage more affordable ; improve health care and provide quality health insurance coverage for under - and uninsured ; improve and re - balance ltc ; increase parity between health insurance coverage for mental health and medical - surgical services ; and improve access to pediatric dental care for children from low - income families . pilot project on ltc provider background checks . provides up to $160 million for a three - year extension of a pilot program for national and state background checks for direct patient access employees of ltc facilities or providers . state internet sites to disclose medicaid payments . would authorize creation of state internet sites for the disclosure of information on providers that participate in and receive payment from state medicaid programs . demonstration waivers for low - income individuals with hiv . would provide for a demonstration project to use 1115 waivers for extending medicaid coverage to low - income hiv - infected individuals . the house budget committee reported a budget resolution ( h.con.res . 312 ) on march 7 , which was passed by the house on march 13 . the house's budget resolution contained 17 deficit - neutral provisions and 12 sense of the house provisions . the budget - neutral and sense of the house provisions that would affect medicaid and schip include the following: schip . 5613 , s. 2819 , would impose a moratorium until april 1 , 2009 , on implementation of seven medicaid regulations , but also included moratoria on two additional medicaid issues . one of the moratoriums in s. 2819 would suspend guidance contained in an august 17 , 2007 , letter from cms to state health officials ( 07-001 ) that limited states' ability to expand coverage under schip to families with incomes above 250% of the fpl . another moratorium would suspend the rules governing department appeals board ( dab ) hearings , which would give expanded authority to the secretary of hhs to review dab decisions involving disagreements between the federal government and states and give the secretary the authority to overturn dab decisions . the house budget resolution would reserve up to $50 billion in outlays over five years for reauthorization of schip . health care quality , effectiveness , and efficiency . this provision would include incentives and other support for health care information technology and electronic prescribing to protect privacy and improve quality . the provision also would include a public - private initiative for comparative effectiveness research , as well as mental health parity with medical surgical services including public programs , such as medicaid . medicaid regulations and administrative actions . the house budget would provide deficit - neutral reserve funds to prevent or delay medicaid regulations such as case management / targeted case management , rehabilitation , graduate medical education , and intergovernmental transfers . program integrity . up to an additional $198 million in fy2009 discretionary funding could be appropriated for the health care fraud and abuse control program . waste , fraud , and abuse , and health coverage affordability .