these projects are typically multipurpose facilities . in contrast , the remaining two - thirds of reclamation's facilities are also owned by reclamation ( i.e. , reclamation has title to the facilities ) , but their operation and maintenance has been transferred to a nonfederal entity ( "transferred works" ) . the corps is an active federal dam operator , while nrcs was a partner in the construction of many agricultural dams that are the responsibility of local entities , and is now a partner in their rehabilitation . the o&m prioritization programs for the corps and nrcs are summarized below . there is a process within reclamation for identifying and prioritizing rehabilitation funding needs of the water resources infrastructure that the agency has constructed since it was created in 1902 . however , as a result of increasing needs , constrained budgets , and the unique nature of the ownership arrangements for reclamation projects , many view the current process as inadequate . outside of the dam safety program , aging infrastructure that is owned and maintained by reclamation ( i.e. , reserved works ) is generally selected for expenditure either by internal criteria determined on the regional level , or else through directed spending by congress that provides support to individual projects . for infrastructure that is owned by the federal government but maintained by nonfederal interests ( i.e. , transferred works ) , there is no formal process to identify and assist in paying for major upgrades . other agencies , including the corps ( with regard to levees ) and the nrcs ( with regard to small dams ) face similar problems with the upkeep of infrastructure that was built by the federal government but is now maintained by nonfederal interests . as reclamation's maintenance needs increase , the prioritization process for aging infrastructure may receive increasing attention . an overarching question for congress is whether the efforts of reclamation and other agencies to identify and prioritize aging infrastructure are adequate . as previously noted , current practices within the corps , reclamation , and nrcs have generally provided limited funding for aging water resource projects that are owned and operated by the federal government , and have provided limited or no funding for upgrades to projects that are operated by nonfederal partners . due to potential needs for costly repairs and upgrades on reclamation facilities , the question of who should pay and how much , at both transferred and reserved works , will likely be raised repeatedly in the coming years . the question may be of particular concern for rehabilitation projects at transferred facilities , which the administration has generally refused to support in the past , and which have on occasion experienced major failures and subsequently received attention from congress . some claim that it is in the nation's best interests for the federal government to provide increased support for all facilities that are federally owned ( regardless of the operator ) because there are major societal costs to allowing these facilities to deteriorate . additionally , these interests argue that the difficulty that private entities have financing these upgrades necessitates aid by the federal government .