the plaintiffs did not appeal . it is also possible that an employment or housing ordinance aimed at unauthorized aliens could give rise to violations of 42 u.s.c . this provision , which was originally enacted as part of the civil rights act of 1870 , states that: all persons within the jurisdiction of the united states shall have the same right in every state and territory to make and enforce contracts , to sue , be parties , give evidence , and to the full and equal benefit of all laws and proceedings for the security of persons and property as is enjoyed by white citizens , and shall be subject to like punishment , pains , penalties , taxes , licenses , and exactions of every kind , and to no other . although the supreme court has held that an alien is a "person" for purposes of § 1981 , the court has not addressed whether unauthorized aliens are encompassed within the statute's definition of "person. the court , however , has held that unauthorized aliens are "persons" in the context of the fourteenth amendment , and , therefore , might be inclined to make a similar finding with respect to the definition of "person" under § 1981 . if unauthorized aliens are protected from discrimination by governmental actors under the statute , then states or localities that pass employment or housing ordinances aimed at unauthorized aliens may be liable for violations of § 1981 . indeed , a federal district court held in the lozano case that a local ordinance intended to deter the employment and housing of unauthorized aliens was a violation of § 1981 . the third circuit did not address this issue on appeal . in addition , although the supreme court has held that § 1981 prohibits alienage discrimination by governmental actors , the court has never addressed the question of whether § 1981 bars alienage discrimination by private actors . until 1991 , when congress amended § 1981 , the federal courts of appeals that had considered the issue were split with regard to this question . since the amendments to § 1981 , some courts have confirmed that the statute applies to private discrimination against aliens . as a result , it is possible , but not certain , that a court might find that an employer or landlord who , in complying with a state or local measure , refused to employ or rent to an unauthorized alien was in violation of § 1981 . the state of arizona has enacted several measures that place it in the vanguard of recent attempts to test the legal limits of state and local measures intended to deter unauthorized immigration . the restrictions on these benefits parallel the restrictions on federal benefits . it has been challenged by several parties on various grounds , including that it is preempted by federal law and deprives employers of due process . its e - verify and licensing provisions , in particular , have been upheld by the district court and the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit . the plaintiffs appealed to the supreme court , which granted certiorari .