micronesia straddles the north . the pacific island nations ( pins ) were among the last to regain independence following world war ii . countries that remain as territories include: guam , the mariana islands , and american samoa ( united states ) , new caledonia and french polynesia ( france ) , tokelau ( new zealand ) , and easter island ( chile ) . the 14 sovereign states of the region are formal democracies ( mostly parliamentary ) with loosely organized political parties and some incorporation of traditional tribal practices . since gaining independence , most pins have experienced relatively little political violence . human rights are generally respected and elections reported largely as "free and fair. freedom house rates eight countries as "free" and four ( fiji , papua new guinea , the solomon islands , and tonga ) as "partly free. fiji's rating has dropped since the december 2006 military coup . most of these countries , with the exception of fiji , papua new guinea , and the solomon islands , have limited natural and human resources upon which to launch sustained development . many small pacific island nations are hindered by weak resource and skilled labor bases , lack of economies of scale , primitive infrastructure , poor government services , and remoteness from international markets ; some are threatened by rising sea levels , as well . the asian development bank ( adb ) groups its member pacific island nations into three categories: 1 . countries with abundant natural resource endowments , good economic development potential , and relatively large populations ( the melanesian nations of papua new guinea , vanuatu , and solomon islands ) . countries that are relatively advanced with moderately good natural resource bases and modest growth prospects ( fiji , samoa , micronesia , tonga , and cook islands ) . island atoll nations with few natural resources and little development potential ( marshall islands , nauru , tuvalu , and kiribati ) . although development potential among the melanesian nations is good , poverty reduction and government capacity - building are pressing concerns . the adb recommends that foreign governments and multilateral institutions help the atoll nations to establish trust funds as principal sources of government revenue . the freely associated states ( fas ) , together with guam and the northern mariana islands , have been regarded as a security border of the united states , the defense of which is considered to be key to maintaining vital sea lanes . in addition to being home to the reagan ballistic missile defense test site at kwajalein atoll in the marshall islands , the fas are located strategically between hawaii and guam . according to some military experts , the fas provide a vast buffer zone for guam , which serves as the "forward military bridgehead" from which to launch u.s. operations along the asia - pacific security arc stretching from south korea and japan , through thailand and the philippines , to australia . the u.s. military is building up forces on guam to help maintain deterrence and respond to possible security threats in the pacific .