several factors are at work here . in the larger states , there are sometimes differences in available disposal capacity in different regions within the state . areas without capacity may be closer to landfills ( or may at least find cheaper disposal options ) in other states . a good example is illinois: the chicago area , which is close to two other states , exports significant amounts of waste out of state . downstate , however , illinois has substantial available landfill capacity , and imported 2 million tons from st. louis , other locations in missouri , and iowa . as noted earlier , the movement of waste also represents the regionalization and consolidation of the waste industry . in 2005 , the three largest firms ( waste management , allied waste , and republic services ) accounted for 66% of total revenues of the industry's 100 largest firms . these large firms offer integrated waste services , from collection to transfer station to disposal site , in many locations . often , they ship waste to their own disposal facility across a border , rather than dispose of it at an in - state facility owned by a rival . as small landfills continue to close — the number of u.s. landfills declined 63% between 1993 and 2004 , from 4,482 to 1,654 — this trend toward regionalization , consolidation , and waste shipment across state lines is likely to continue . the remainder of this report consists of a table summarizing waste import and export data , by state . all 50 states and the district of columbia are listed in alphabetical order , with data for the amount of waste exported , destination of exports , amount of waste imported , source of imports , and a state agency contact for additional information . the exceptions are noted in the appropriate tables . as a result , many of the totals reported here represent a best estimate rather than precise figures . the data show that total interstate waste shipments continue to rise: imports in the current survey totaled 42.2 million tons , 17% of the 245.7 million tons of municipal solid waste generated in the united states . this may have provided sufficient economic incentive for some haulers to dispose elsewhere . second , the state appears to be receiving less waste from new york city , whose mayor has adopted a goal of shipping all of new york city's waste by rail , rather than truck . pennsylvania has no landfills served by rail , so some of this waste has been diverted to large landfills in virginia that do have rail service . after pennsylvania , virginia is the largest waste importer , with imports totaling 5.7 million tons of msw and 1.3 million tons of other nonhazardous waste . waste imports to virginia have increased 45% since 2001 , when they totaled 4.1 million tons of msw and 0.7 million tons of other waste . the state has attempted to restrict imports , but has not been as successful as pennsylvania , in part because it has chosen a variety of measures that have run afoul of the constitution's interstate commerce clause .