§ 430.203 as "the process under which performance is reviewed and evaluated. performance management is ongoing , while performance appraisal is an event — a single moment of assessing completed job performance . because appraisals are inherently reflections on the past , some public administration experts suggest not using them . others point out , however , that effective appraisal criteria can help align employee performance with organizational goals , and help create a more satisfied and effective workforce by offering feedback and setting attainable goals . ineffective criteria can prompt conflict within an organization and lead to resentment and competition among workers . performance appraisals , therefore , should be precise and assist managers in ongoing performance management efforts . such elements may include , but are not limited to , objectives , goals , program plans , work plans , and other means of expressing expected performance . at the end of the appraisal cycle , a rating official and an employee may meet for a performance evaluation , or performance rating . an employee may have an unlimited number of critical and non - critical criteria on which he or she is measured . the appraisal may be written as a narrative or as a collection of short statements , or an employee may be assessed on a nominal or numeric rating scale . the national credit union administration ( ncua ) , for example , rates employees on roughly five performance criteria . each criterion has a five - tier scale that ranges from "exceptional" to "unsatisfactory. performance - based pay can be beneficial to both employees and the organization , but it also may present new issues in an organization that has historically used more traditional pay structures . in some cases , performance - based pay for federal workers may have increased retention of effective employees , increased overall employee productivity , led to cost savings for the organization , and aided in the attainment of organizational objectives in a more effective manner than under the gs pay scale . adopting merit pay , however , takes substantial time and additional financial resources at the beginning of the implementation . in other cases , performance - based pay in federal agencies has prompted lawsuits and mistrust of pay system administrators . experts suggest that organizations need to plan carefully the performance appraisal system that will inform merit pay , and the system must ensure that the financial rewards for effective performance are large enough to be desirable to employees . "with pay for performance , one needs to re - evaluate the motivation , retention , productivity , and organizational objectives continually , with the idea of fine - tuning the system to make sure rewards are aligned with desired performance. experts also observe that rating officials and employees must be trained in how best to use the performance - based pay system . supervisors , employees , and their representative unions must believe that a pay system is both fair and transparent .