other significant aspects of h.r . 3766 included the following: the federal charter would have provided for a national insurer to underwrite both life insurance and property / casualty insurance . the director would have had general regulatory authority over national insurers , including solvency oversight and policy forms , but rate regulation would have been left with state insurance regulators . even though the legislation had no provision for the licensing of insurance producers , the director would have had the authority to enforce unfair and deceptive practices rules against state - licensed producers with respect to the sale of insurance products issued by national insurers , and all states would have been subject to federal minimum standards . 2609 was incorporated into h.r . 4173 , which was ultimately enacted as the dodd - frank act and included some insurance provisions , but did not include a federal charter for insurance . representative moore introduced his amendment creating a federal license for reinsurers as a standalone bill , h.r . 6529 , on december 16 , 2010 . representatives melissa bean and edward royce introduced h.r . 1880 in the house on april 2 , 2009 . the bill was referred to the house financial services committee , house judiciary committee , and house energy and commerce committee . no hearings or markups were held on this bill . 1880 would have created a federal chartering and regulatory apparatus for the insurance industry , including insurers , insurance agencies , and independent insurance producers . the office of national insurance ( oni ) and a national insurance commissioner ( nic ) would have been established in the department of the treasury , but with significant independence ; the secretary of the treasury would have been forbidden from interfering in specific matters before the commissioner ; the oni's budget would have been funded by fees and assessments on insurers ; and the commissioner would have been appointed by the president , and confirmed by the senate for a five - year term . these terms are similar to those of other financial regulators , such as the office of the comptroller of the currency . the federal regulatory system in h.r . 1880 would have applied to property / casualty and life insurance and reinsurance , with the exception of title insurance . federally licensed insurance producers were specifically allowed to sell surplus lines insurance . holders of a national charter or license would have been exempt from most state insurance laws , including "any form of licensing , examination , reporting , regulation , or supervision by a state relating to the insurance operations of such insurer. thus , nationally licensed insurers , agencies , and producers would have been able to operate in the entire united states without fulfilling the requirements of the 50 states' insurance laws . this exemption , however , did not extend to state premium tax laws , so national insurers would have continued to pay these taxes . the bill would have affected state taxes with regard to surplus lines insurance , forbidding states that are not the home state of the insured from collecting these taxes . in terms of the substance of regulation , the most significant specific change in h.r .