standards . will uniform standards be national , regional , local , or site - specific in scope ? how will uniform standards address differences within different production areas , types of resources , and ecosystems ? will established protocols and management practices take into account these differences ? will these standards consist of an assigned value ? given the wide range in the types of environmental services , how will outcomes or benefits be measured and expressed as standards ? will there be penalties for non - compliance ? federal versus marketplace functions . what roles should government agencies play in actually establishing environmental services markets involving agriculture and forestry ? what roles will be strictly within the purview of the private - sector and independent credit markets ? is there a federal role beyond developing the reporting and credit registries that would require the board to act as intermediary between sellers and buyers ? who will be responsible for oversight of third party verification and certification , and for assigning market value to tradable credits within an environmental services market ? will the federal agencies play a role in market oversight , enforcement , risk management , and capital investment ? what other types of federal assistance may be needed to further facilitate the development of environmental services markets ? congressional reporting / timeline . how and when will the agencies involved in setting standards be expected to report their accomplishments to congress ? should reporting requirements be included as part of these provisions ? jurisdictional issues . what are the advantages of establishing usda as the lead role ? what lead role will usda play , given the mostly regulatory authority and statutory obligations of other likely participating federal agencies ? might putting usda as the lead create conflict of interest as both the regulator and promoter of standards ? are there other jurisdictional issues , such that this provision needs to be referred to other authorizing congressional committees ? how might existing state and local programs implemented by other agencies be affected ? how will the collaborative effort between usda and the other participating federal agencies be put into practice ? how will disagreements be addressed and resolved among all federal partners ? consistency with existing and possible future authorities and initiatives . will the agreed - upon decisions and standards resulting from such an effort be binding among all federal agencies ? what assurances are there that these decisions will not override the authorizing legislation regulating water and air quality , and wildlife habitat ? will regulatory agencies with authorizing legislation have the flexibility to not adopt the standards authorized by the board or other collaborative process , if they violate the individual agencies' authorizing statutes , or contain regulations , such as measurement protocols ? what are the possible implications if these decisions and standards are inconsistent with other existing regulatory guidelines and authorities ? will such a standard - setting framework and the agreed - upon standards be consistent with , or readily adapted to , other possible future regulatory initiatives , such as those involving climate change ?