the senate passed h.r . 5501 by voice vote , 80-16 , with a substitute amendment that inserted the language of s. 2731 after amendments were made on the senate floor . 1302 and s. 2433 , global poverty act of 2007 , require the president to develop and implement a comprehensive strategy to advance u.s. efforts to promote the reduction of global poverty , the elimination of extreme global poverty , and the achievement of the millennium development goal of reducing by one - half the proportion of people worldwide , between 1990 and 2015 , who live on less than $1 per day . language in the bills indicates that improving maternal and child health is part of this comprehensive strategy . the house passed the bill by voice vote on september 25 , 2007 , and referred it to the senate foreign relations committee . the senate version was placed on the senate calendar on april 24 , 2007 . commitment to global child survival act of 2007 , provide assistance to improve the health of newborns , children , and mothers in developing countries , and for other purposes . the house version was referred to the house foreign affairs committee . the senate version was reported out of the senate foreign relations committee and placed on the senate legislative calendar . 1225 , focus on family health worldwide act of 2007 , amends the foreign assistance act of 1961 to improve voluntary family planning programs in developing countries , and for other purposes . the bill was referred to the house foreign affairs committee . 2114 , repairing young women's lives around the world act , provides a u.s. voluntary contribution to the united nations population fund for the prevention , treatment , and repair of obstetric fistula . the bill was referred to the house foreign affairs committee . 2604 , united nations population fund women's health and dignity act , provides financial and other support to the united nations population fund to carry out activities to save women's lives , limit the incidence of abortion and maternal mortality associated with unsafe abortion , promote universal access to safe and reliable family planning , and assist women , children , and men in developing countries to live better lives . the bill was referred to the house foreign affairs committee . s. 1998 , international child marriage prevention act of 2007 , authorizes funds to reduce child marriage , and for other purposes . the bill was referred to the senate foreign relations committee . causes of maternal death vary significantly among regions . data collected from 1990 through 2006 indicate that hemorrhage caused about 34% and 31% of maternal deaths in africa and asia , respectively . in industrialized nations and latin america and the caribbean , hemorrhage caused an estimated 13% and 21% of maternal deaths , respectively ( table 5 ) . the united nations has found that regions with the lowest proportions of skilled health attendants at birth also have the highest maternal mortality rates . in sub - saharan africa , 43% of women gave birth with the assistance of a skilled birth attendant , 65% in south asia , and 99% in industrialized nations .