a schedule for completing this process has not been announced . to help determine the future direction of the gnep program , doe solicited studies from four industry consortia . the four studies , released by doe on may 28 , 2008 , describe concepts for advanced fuel recycling / reprocessing facilities , along with general cost estimates and schedules . the four teams have signed cooperative agreements with doe to continue developing "conceptual designs , technology development roadmaps , and business plans for potential deployment and commercialization of recycling and reactor technologies" at least through fy2008 and possibly through fy2009 . according to doe , these additional studies will "help inform a decision on the potential path forward for technologies and facilities associated with domestic implementation of gnep. can new fuel cycle technologies reduce the risk of nuclear weapons proliferation ? what is the appropriate time frame for the commercial deployment of new nuclear technology ? prominent among the policy issues currently before congress is the direction of the existing nuclear energy programs in the u.s. department of energy ( doe ) . doe administers programs to encourage near - term construction of new lwrs , such as the nuclear power 2010 program , which is paying half the cost of licensing and first - of - a - kind engineering for new u.s. lwr designs , and loan guarantees for new reactors now under consideration by u.s. utilities . doe's global nuclear energy partnership ( gnep ) is developing advanced fuel cycle technologies that are intended to allow greater worldwide use of nuclear power without increased weapons proliferation risks . advanced nuclear reactors that could increase efficiency and safety are being developed by doe's generation iv program , which is looking beyond today's "generation iii" light water reactors . the priority given to these options depends not only on the characteristics of existing and advanced nuclear technologies , but on the role that nuclear power is expected to play in addressing national energy and environmental goals . for example , if nuclear energy is seen as a key element in global climate change policy , because of its low carbon dioxide emissions , the deployment of advanced reactor and fuel cycle technologies could be considered to be more urgent than if nuclear power is expected to have a limited long - term role because of economic , non - proliferation , and safety concerns . as their name implies , light water reactors use ordinary water for cooling the reactor core and "moderating," or slowing , the neutrons in a nuclear chain reaction . the slower neutrons , called thermal neutrons , are highly efficient in causing fission ( splitting of nuclei ) in certain isotopes of heavy elements , such as uranium 235 and plutonium 239 ( pu - 239 ) . therefore , a smaller percentage of those isotopes is needed in nuclear fuel to sustain a nuclear chain reaction ( in which neutrons released by fissioned nuclei then induce fission in other nuclei , and so forth ) . the downside is that thermal neutrons cannot efficiently induce fission in more than a few specific isotopes .