companion bills h.r . about half of them — h.r . 3967 , s. 1776 , and s. 2418 — focus almost exclusively on the import issue . a number of the bills would require that importing establishments , and / or the foreign countries in which they are located , first receive formal certification from u.s. authorities that their food safety systems demonstrably provide at least the same level of safety assurances as the u.s. system . some would direct that certifications be denied or revoked if foreign safeguards are found to be insufficient , unsafe imports are discovered , and / or foodborne illnesses are linked to such products . gao has been among these critics . in its annual ( january 2007 ) report , gao designated food safety oversight as one of 29 "high risk" federal program areas . the report concluded that the current federal safety system is "fragmented," resulting in inconsistent oversight , ineffective coordination , and inefficient use of resources . gao has recommended that congress consider a fundamental reexamination of the system and other improvements to help ensure the rapid detection of and response to any accidental or deliberate contamination of food before public health and safety is compromised . opponents of major food safety system changes , including some in the food and agricultural industries , assert that the system already is scientifically based , that the statutes are adequate , and that food companies already produce and distribute safe food , making the u.s. system a model for food safety around the world . the senate - passed version of the omnibus farm bill ( h.r . 2419 ) would establish a congressional bipartisan food safety commission to recommend statutory changes to modernize the food safety system and ways to harmonize food safety requirements across agencies . the language provides extensive guidance on commission membership and on the programs to be examined , sets timelines for completion , and provides $3 million annually in funding . if the commission language is maintained in the final farm bill ( the house version lacks it ) , this initiative could sideline further action in this congress on companion bills ( h.r . 1148 / s. 654 ) to reorganize the federal agencies responsible for food safety , as well as to overhaul the safeguards themselves . these two comprehensive companion bills would consolidate federal food safety responsibilities under a new food safety administration ( fsa ) . the new fsa would be responsible for administering all the major food safety laws . agencies and their functions to be transferred include fsis and aphis from usda , as well as the department's food safety research activities ; the fda's center for food safety and applied nutrition ( cfsan ) and center for veterinary medicine ( cvm ) , as well as portions of other fda offices that support these centers ; resources of the epa that regulate pesticide residues in food ; nmfs seafood inspection ; and any other offices or services designated by the president . 1148 / s. 654 also would authorize a new food safety system to be based on a comprehensive analysis of food hazards .