imf . 2009 december 14 . abu dhabi has sprung to the rescue of its heavily indebted fellow emirate with a timely cash infusion of us$10 billion . this will enable dubai to pay off us$4.1 billion to nakheel bondholders as well as unpaid bills from suppliers and contractors . there are no obvious strings attached , but dubai has been obliged to bring forward legislation that would allow dubai world to be declared insolvent . dubai has striven over the past 15 months to sustain the fiction that it could deal with the debts of its government - related entities through a combination of refinancing and streamlining , until its november 25 th request for a standstill on us$26 billion of debts owed by dubai world and its two real estate affiliates , nakheel and limitless . "consumers simply have to retrench , save more , spend less," says david jones of dmj advisors . chinese exporters adjust their prices to match prevailing levels in their target markets — what's called pricing - to - market – to a similar degree as exporters from japan and the czech republic . august 17 . november 23 . dominique strauss - kahn , managing director , international monetary fund , said in a speech in london , "the global economy remains very much in a holding pattern — stable , and getting better , but still highly vulnerable . the major advanced country areas in particular remain fragile , still dependent on policy support . financial conditions have improved , but are far from normal . signs show confidence returning , but banking systems in many advanced economies remain undercapitalized , weighed down by leaden legacy assets and , increasingly , non - performing loans . on the household side , weak financial positions and high unemployment will damp down on consumption for some time . and large public deficits add to vulnerabilities . so then , if we are to have sustained global growth , somebody else needs to step into the breach . the leading candidates are the surplus countries . and we can see some shifts in the right direction . china and other emerging asian economies are shifting from exports toward domestic demand , aided by expansionary fiscal policy . each country was in the top six last year . indonesia is the top reformer of business regulations in the east asia and pacific region , but judicial reform is urgently needed to attract new investment . reuters / forbes and world bank crisis talk . september 8 . gold bullion surged as high as $1,009.70 in new york , within 3% of the record of $1,033.90 set in march 2008 . silver climbed to a 13-month high as a weaker dollar and concern that inflation may accelerate boosted the appeal of precious metals . gold is headed for a ninth annual gain . crude oil and all six industrial metals on the london metal exchange rallied as the u.s. dollar index fell as much as 1.2% to an 11-month low . raw materials typically rise when the greenback falls . equity indexes climbed from tokyo to london and new york .