there are 34 chapters in all . neither the eu nor turkey apparently or officially wants to derail the process . turkey is not expected to be eligible for membership before 2014 , at the earliest . turks are far less enthusiastic about the eu than they were several years ago , with support falling drastically . they are scornful of eu and european officials' repeated threats that the path to accession could be blocked if turkey does not recognize an armenian genocide that occurred in the early 20 th century , make concessions to the ( greek ) cypriots , or act on a variety of other matters . turkish military commanders are particularly dismissive of the eu . they charge that europeans aid the pkk even though the pkk is on the eu's list of terrorist groups , and that eu demands to improve the rights of kurds and religious minorities are a conspiracy to divide turkey . moreover , the eu insistence that turkey improve civilian control over the military threatens the military's prerogatives . turks know that their chances of obtaining eu membership have diminished markedly . a unanimous vote of eu member states is required for admittance to the union . europeans are increasingly opposed to turkey's accession . some eu leaders firmly oppose turkey's membership for cultural ( religious ) reasons . german chancellor angela merkel prefers granting turkey a "privileged partnership," but has not pushed the issue out of deference to her domestic coalition partner which supports turkey's membership . she also has not defined privileged partnership so as to distinguish it from turkey's existing customs union with the eu and to make it an attractive option . new french president nicholas sarkozy made his opposition to turkey's membership a campaign issue and is bound by a french parliament decision to allow a national referendum to decide the membership question . most observers expect the french people to vote against turkey's accession . sarkozy has proposed a mediterranean union of states of the mediterranean littoral , including turkey , but turkish officials reject the idea if it is a substitute for eu membership . sarkozy has agreed to allow the eu's negotiations with turkey to proceed if the union appoints a committee to define its future borders by the end of the year , but asserted that he has not changed his mind about turkey's eventual membership . germany and france are arguably the most powerful and influential members of the eu , but austria , denmark , and the netherlands also oppose turkey's membership . european opposition has fed reciprocal feelings in turkey . many in turkey ignored eu criticism even as eu officials commented repeatedly on the evolving election crisis . after the turkish military's april 27 statement , eu enlargement commissioner olli rehn said , "the military should be aware that it should not interfere in the democratic process in a country which desires to become an eu member. on april 30 , the european commission urged the turkish military to allow the constitutional court to act "in full independence from any undue influence.