strengthen support for families . the commissions were given different charges . the pccww was established by executive order 13426 in march 2007 , and was to focus on the needs of a specific population , namely , seriously injured servicemembers returning from combat theaters in support of operations enduring freedom and iraqi freedom ( oef / oif ) . further congressional and administrative actions are anticipated . as this report is limited to a comparison of the final recommendations of the pccww and the vdbc , it will not be updated . the commission was asked to look broadly at services and benefits provided by all relevant cabinet departments — principally the departments of defense ( dod ) and veterans affairs ( va ) — as well as the private sector , and at a broad slate of services and benefits , including health care , disability , traumatic injury , education , employment , and other benefits . the pccww was to study individuals' experiences as servicemembers and , for those who were retired or separated from military service , their transition from military to civilian and / or veteran status , problems in providing services and benefits across that transition , and subsequent experiences in civilian life . though the pccww's recommendations were to apply narrowly to seriously injured oef / oif servicemembers , it could prove difficult , politically and administratively , to implement the recommendations in this fashion . doing so could run counter to existing policies , such as compensating service - connected disabilities equally whether or not they are combat related , and prioritizing groups of veterans to receive va health care . the vdbc was established in title xv of the national defense authorization act of 2004 ( p.l . 108-136 ) to study benefits provided to veterans and their survivors to compensate for service - connected disabilities and deaths . the vdbc was to consider these benefits regardless of the time or manner in which a disability or death occurred , and whether it occurred during a conflict or during peace time . but the commissions differed in their priorities for implementing this revised system , reflecting their focus on different populations . when comparing pccww and vdbc recommendations , it must be borne in mind that unless otherwise stated , pccww recommendations would apply , at least initially , only to injured oef / oif servicemembers and veterans , while vdbc recommendations would apply to all servicemembers or veterans , including those from previous conflicts , who are otherwise eligible for the service or benefit being discussed . the following crs reports discuss the variety of dod and va programs and benefits that are addressed by the commissions and referred to in this report: crs report rl33991 , disability evaluation of military servicemembers , by [author name scrubbed] et al . while the vdbc examined certain transition issues for injured oef / oif servicemembers who were retired or separated from military service , this was not its principal focus .