under the leadership of z.a . bhutto , who had resigned his post as khan's foreign minister , the ppp won a majority of west pakistan's assembly seats in 1970 elections and held power from 1971 until 1977 , when bhutto's government was overthrown by his army chief , gen. zia . bhutto , who oversaw the establishment of a parliamentary system with the 1973 constitution and who launched pakistan's nuclear weapons program , was executed by the military government in 1979 . when gen. zia's ban on political parties was lifted in 1986 , bhutto's daughter , benazir , emerged as the new ppp leader and won the prime ministership in 1988 and again in 1993 . following musharraf's coup , she spent eight years in self - imposed exile in london and dubai under threat of imprisonment should she return . in an effort to skirt legal barriers to its electoral participation in 2002 national elections , the ppp formed a separate entity , the ppp parliamentarians ( pppp ) , that pledged to uphold bhutto's political philosophy . benazir bhutto was assassinated in december 2007 , just two months after her return to pakistan . in the view of the longtime leader of the ppp , the ruling , musharraf - allied pml - q party saw its fortunes rapidly declining and could expect to lose badly in any free election . thus , she asserted , its leaders chose to collude with allies in the intelligence agencies to have the polls postponed ( she called musharraf's electoral plans "a farce" ) . the ppp historically has done especially well in the southern sindh province , including in the cities of karachi and hyderabad . president musharraf and bhutto in 2007 had negotiations on a power - sharing arrangement that could have facilitated musharraf's continued national political role while allowing bhutto to return to pakistan from self - imposed exile , potentially to serve as prime minister for a third time . the bush administration encouraged such an arrangement as the best means of both sustaining musharraf's role and of strengthening moderate political forces in islamabad . some analysts took a cynical view of bhutto's motives in the negotiations , believing her central goal was personal power and removal of standing corruption cases against her . bhutto insisted that she engaged musharraf so as to facilitate "an effective and peaceful transition to democracy. when asked whether the united states still favored a musharraf - bhutto power - sharing agreement in the wake of the emergency decree and deteriorating relations between the president and former prime minister , u.s. officials only reiterated a belief that pakistan's moderate forces should work together to bring constitutional , democratic rule . yet reports continued to suggest that washington was pushing for such an accommodation even after bhutto's apparently full post - emergency embrace of the opposition and perhaps even after her assassination . in 2004 , asif zardari — then husband of benazir bhutto and a political figure in his own right who had been imprisoned for eight years without conviction — was released on bail after a supreme court ruling .