one possible response for congress is to take no action . given that the doc is monitoring trade flows , and has so far determined that there is insufficient evidence to initiate an anti - dumping investigation , it would appear that clothing imports from vietnam are generally in compliance with current u.s. laws and regulations . if congress were to consider taken some action on this issue , there are several aspects of the current status of u.s. - vietnamese trade relations for clothing that might be examined . first , the department of commerce has not publicly responded to requests from some members of congress , the vietnamese government , and some major u.s. clothing importers for the legal basis for establishing the monitoring program . the federal register announcement of the creation of the monitoring program did not include the usual federal law citation establishing the authority to create the program . congress could act to revisit the question of doc's legal authority for establishing the monitoring program . second , there was concern by several members of congress that the current u.s. trade policy towards vietnam's clothing imports may violate both the spirit and the letter of the u.s. commitments to other wto members . as such , congress might act to review the monitoring program to decide whether or not it violates existing wto agreements , exposing the united states to the risk of a formal complaint from vietnam . the doc also announced that a third six - month review was to be done in september 2008 . while there was no requirement that the doc take any action following the evaluations of the trade data , the program's continuation arguably will keep the monitoring program an issue of concern for the u.s. clothing manufacturers , the u.s. textile industry , major clothing importers , and large retail outlets in the united states . such an investigation might also include research into vietnam's labor market to ascertain if the vietnamese government is suppressing the wages of clothing and textile workers below fair market values . there are sharp differences of opinion regarding the current structure of vietnam's clothing industry . as was discussed above , some of the supporters of the monitoring program maintain that vietnam's clothing industry is dominated by state - owned and - operated enterprises that are heavily subsidized by the vietnamese government , gaining unfair advantage in the global market . among the possible administration actions that could have been taken were the self - initiation of an anti - dumping investigation on select clothing imports from vietnam , the opening of negotiations for a new bilateral textile agreement , and / or the termination of the monitoring program . vietnam's exports of clothing have experienced rapid growth over the last 12 years , but this expansion has largely been in line with the overall increase in vietnam's total exports . what has changed is the mix of vietnam's major markets for its clothing exports , with the rapid rise in the importance of the u.s. market over the last few years . over the last five years , there has been a marked increase in u.s. clothing imports from vietnam .