they are regularly relied on to provide coverage of environmental events . furthermore , the extreme resolution of their imagery may be superfluous for the tasks at hand . it nevertheless remains uncertain exactly how much "value added" satellites would offer for homeland security and law enforcement purposes . clearly , additional imagery sources could be useful in many situations , and sophisticated techniques for acquiring information about the presence of wmd materials would be highly valuable , albeit in extremely unlikely circumstances . what other uses would be important remain uncertain and cannot be determined on the basis of unclassified , public materials . the obama administration , taking office in january 2009 , undertook a review of the nao . on june 23 , 2009 , dhs secretary janet napolitano announced her decision to end the nao program maintaining that other programs "better meet the needs of law enforcement , protect the civil liberties and privacy of all americans , and make our country more secure. information from intelligence satellites supplements other sources of overhead imagery available to government agencies — from nasa satellites , commercial satellites , or from manned aircraft or unmanned aerial vehicles ( uavs ) . generally , satellite - derived intelligence is combined by the national geospatial - intelligence agency ( nga ) with information from airborne platforms , commercial imagery , and other information to meet the needs of military commanders and senior policy makers . the nga employs a wide range of techniques to prepare mapping and elevation data , scene visualization , and situation analysis . working through the cac , the nga has become a routine partner in disaster relief efforts such as those following the 2004 undersea earthquake and tsunami in the indian ocean and hurricane katrina in 2005 , when the nga provided graphics for "relief efforts that depicted the locations of major airports , police and fire stations , emergency operations centers , hazardous materials , highways and schools. nga argues that it "has a strong tradition of collaborating with colleagues across government , non - profit academia and industry arenas to exchange ideas , share best practices , display new geoint [geospatial intelligence] solutions and technologies and discuss potential tradecraft advances as they relate to geoint. thus , even though commercial data are available for procurement by any government agency , the nga and other intelligence agencies believe that their experience and expertise will enable them to provide "value - added" information support to agencies responsible for homeland security and law enforcement . satellites are also capable of supporting measurement and signature analysis ( masint ) , which is an important , but little known , intelligence discipline , involving information derived from the analysis of radar , laser , infrared , and other emanations . masint could be useful for domestic applications in some circumstances ; in particular , it might provide evidence of the existence and location of weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) materials or wmds themselves prepared or smuggled in by hostile individuals or groups . the capabilities that satellite - derived information might add to homeland security and law enforcement efforts are inevitably classified but could be investigated and assessed by congressional committees .