coal is particularly important for electricity supply . duration : how long is the price or regulation imposed on affected companies ? in general , the criteria suggest that regulation is the surest method of forcing the development of technology — price is not necessarily a direct consideration in decision - making . however , regulation is also the most limiting ; technologies more or less stringent than the standard would have a limited domestic market ( although foreign opportunities may be available ) , and development could be frozen if the standards are not reviewed and strengthened periodically . in contrast , allowance prices would provide the most equivocal signal , particularly if they are allocated free to participants . experience has shown allowance prices to be subject to volatility with swings both up and down . the experience with the so 2 cap - and - trade program suggests the incentive can be improved with "bonus" allowances ; however , the eligibility criteria used could be perceived as the government attempting to pick a winner . in contrast , carbon taxes and allowance auctions ( particularly 100% auctions with a reserve price ) provide strong market - based price signals . a carbon tax is the most stable price signal , providing a clear and transparent signal of the value of any method of greenhouse gas reductions . substantial auctioning of allowances also places a price on carbon emissions , a price that can be strengthened by incorporating a reserve price into the structure of the auction . however , each of these signals ultimately depends on the environmental goal envisioned and the specifics of the control program: ( 1 ) the stringency of the reduction requirement ; ( 2 ) the timing of desired reductions ; ( 3 ) the techniques allowed to achieve compliance . the interplay of these factors informs the technology community about the urgency of the need for carbon capture technology ; the price signal informs the community what cost - performance parameters are appropriate for the emerging carbon market . the nature of that price signal ( regulatory , market , stability ) informs the community of the confidence it can have that it is not wasting capital on a "white elephant" or on a project that the market does not want or need . the issues for technology - push mechanisms are broader , and include not only the specifics of any reduction program and resulting price signal , but also international considerations and the interplay between carbon capture technology , storage , and the potential need for co 2 transport . groups as diverse as the pew center , the electric power research institute , doe , and mit have suggested "roadmaps" and other schemes for preparing carbon capture technology for a pending greenhouse gas reduction program . generally , all of these approaches agree on the need for demonstration - size ( 200-300 mw ) projects to sort out technical performance and cost effectiveness , and identify potential environmental and safety concerns . the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .