appendix a . funding for the john h. chafee foster care ( chafee ) program for successful transition to adulthood and education and training voucher ( etv ) program appendix b . other federal support for older current and former foster youth in addition to the child welfare programs under title iv - e of the social security act , other federal programs provide assistance to older current and former foster youth . this appendix describes medicaid pathways for foster youth who emancipated ; educational , workforce , and housing supports ; and a grant to fund training for child welfare practitioners working with older foster youth and youth emancipating from care . medicaid the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) at hhs administers medicaid , a federal - state health program jointly financed by hhs and the states . medicaid law provides for mandatory and optional pathways for youth who have aged out of foster care . mandatory pathway as of january 1 , 2014 , certain former foster youth are eligible for medicaid under a mandatory pathway created for this population in the affordable care act ( aca , p.l . former foster youth are eligible if they were "in foster care under the responsibility of the state" upon reaching age 18 ( or up to age 21 if the state extends federal foster care to that age ) ; were enrolled in medicaid while in foster care ; and are not eligible or enrolled in other mandatory medicaid coverage groups . the aca specifies that income and assets are not considered when determining eligibility for this group . nonetheless , foster youth with annual incomes above a certain level may be required to share in the costs of their health care . in addition to the law , cms has provided additional parameters on the new pathway via a final rule promulgated in november 2016 and policy guidance . the final rule specifies that former foster youth are eligible regardless of whether title iv - e foster care payments were made on their behalf . states may not provide medicaid to individuals who left foster care before reaching age 18 via this pathway . further , states may not provide medicaid coverage to former foster youth who move from another state ; however , states could apply to hhs under a waiver to provide such coverage via the research and demonstration waiver authority for the medicaid program . the substance use - disorder prevention that promotes opioid recovery and treatment for patients and communities act ( p.l . 115-271 ) amended the medicaid statute on the former foster youth pathway . it will permit states , as of january 2023 , to use state plan authority for providing coverage to former foster youth who move across state lines . the law directs hhs , within one year of the its enactment , to issue guidance to states on best practices for removing barriers and ensuring timely coverage under this pathway , and on conducting related outreach and raising awareness among eligible youth .