no further action was taken on h.r . 6200 during the 112 th congress . s. 190 would seek to improve seafood safety by requiring equivalent standards in exporting countries , increasing inspections of exporting facilities , and inspecting and testing at least 20% of seafood imports . 3282 would seek to improve seafood safety and prevent seafood fraud by requiring coordination of inspection activities through the national sea grant program , developing a list of exporters that violate u.s. seafood safety laws , and including seafood fraud detection and prevention during seafood safety inspections . 3282 also would add new seafood traceability requirements . to date , no action has been taken on any of these bills . seafood fraud - related issues that may receive further attention during the 114 th congress include whether federal agencies are collaborating effectively ; greater authority is needed to improve traceability of seafood through the supply chain ; penalties for seafood fraud offenses are a deterrent ; and resources for federal agency detection and enforcement are sufficient . during the last several decades , international seafood trade and movement of seafood throughout the united states have increased . most seafood is no longer obtained from local sources ; more than 90% of seafood consumed in the united states is imported . this shift has led to greater industry and consumer interest in tracing seafood throughout the supply chain from fishing vessel or aquaculture operation to the final consumer . the bioterrorism act of 2002 ( p.l . 107-188 ) requires producers , distributers , importers , transporters , and packers to maintain records of the sources and recipients of its products , or one step forward and one step back in the supply chain . the law also requires businesses to make these records available to fda when there is a reasonable belief that adulterated food presents a threat of serious adverse health consequences or death to humans or animals . seafood traceability can be used to identify , locate , and withdraw harmful products from stores and restaurants . traceability of products also can identify where fraud occurs in the supply chain or detect seafood products obtained from iuu activities . consumers are becoming more concerned with product quality , identity , and sustainability . some believe that fda requires additional funding to systematically monitor for economic fraud and mislabeling , determine the scope and scale of these types of problems , and develop new programs to address these concerns . they also insist that fda needs new authorities to facilitate seafood traceability and improve compliance . it remains an open question whether fda can address seafood fraud using existing authorities and resources or whether new legislation and funding increases will be necessary . in the 114 th congress , two food safety bills ( h.r . 609 and s. 287 ) and two bills that focus on seafood ( s. 190 and h.r . 3282 ) have been introduced . 609 and s. 287 are similar comprehensive food safety bills that would modify the federal food safety system . currently , most seafood businesses do not provide information such as where , how , and when a specific seafood item was caught .