as noted above , p.l . 113-6 provides whatever level of funding necessary to meet the federal share of costs under the title iv - e program . as noted at the beginning of this report , by far the largest share of federal support for child welfare programs is provided under the title iv - e foster care , kinship guardianship , and adoption assistance program . the title iv - e program is an annually appropriated entitlement and congress typically provides the amount of funding that is estimated by the administration as necessary under current law . this section of the report describes the meaning of an annually appropriated entitlement , before discussing some of the trends and assumptions behind the title iv - e funding request . table 1 lists the federal funding streams dedicated to child welfare purposes that were included in this analysis . it also briefly describes those purposes and shows final funding levels for fy2010-fy2013 . title iv - e program funding shown for foster care , adoption assistance , and guardianship assistance reflects final definite budget authority provided for each of those components . finally , while this was not true for the title iv - e program , most federal child welfare programs were subject to sequestration . the final fy2013 funding levels shown here reflect the march 1 sequestration order as implemented in administration operating plans for fy2013 . this report does not discuss the president's fy2014 budget request for child welfare . by far , the largest share of dedicated federal child welfare funding ( roughly 88% in recent years ) is provided to states to assist them in supporting , or otherwise administering aid to , children who have been removed from their birth families primarily due to abuse or neglect . this report begins with an overview of the purposes for which federal child welfare funds are appropriated . it discusses fy2013 appropriations for those programs , including the effect of the automatic spending cuts , known as sequestration . hhs estimated funding of between $12 million and $15 million for the grants based on the amount of this pre - appropriated money that has not been claimed by states in past years . neither of these proposals was included in the final fy2013 funding measure ( p.l . on the discretionary side of the budget , the administration sought an increase of funds for research to support new competitive grants related to preventing and addressing commercial sexual exploitation of children ( $5 million ) . this funding was not provided in the final fy2013 funding measure ( p.l . finally , the president's fy2013 budget sought to eliminate funding for three child welfare programs administered by the department of justice and included in the victims of child abuse act ( children's advocacy centers , court appointed special advocates , and child abuse training for judicial personnel and practitioners ) . these programs received combined funding of $24 million in fy2012 and the final fy2013 funding measure ( p.l . 113-6 ) includes support for them .