office of the u.s . intellectual property enforcement coordinator ( ipec ) the ipec , located in the office of management and budget ( omb ) of the executive office of the president , provides executive direction and coordination of federal agencies involved in ipr enforcement . the position of the u.s . intellectual property enforcement coordinator , subject to senate confirmation , was statutorily established in october 2008 , through the prioritizing resources and organization for intellectual property act of 2008 ( p.l . among its key responsibilities are to develop and implement a "joint strategic plan on intellectual property enforcement" for combating counterfeiting and piracy ; provide assistance to the ustr in conducting trade negotiations relating to ipr enforcement abroad ; and chair an advisory committee composed of representatives from the omb ; departments of justice , commerce , state , homeland security , agriculture ; fda ; aid ; and the register of copyrights . national intellectual property rights coordination center ( ipr center ) the department of homeland security houses the ipr center , an interagency task force whose mission is "to ensure national security by protecting the public's health and safety , the u.s. economy , and our war fighters , and to stop predatory and unfair trade practices that threaten the global economy. established by ice in 2002 , the ipr center's role is to improve and coordinate federal intellectual property functions to more effectively combat ipr - infringing products . it is led by the ice homeland security investigations ( hsi ) director , with deputy directors from hsi and cbp . according to ustr , the ipr center can be distinguished from itec ( discussed below ) because of the former's focus on the law enforcement response to ipr theft ( primarily coordinating investigation and prosecution of ipr infringers under u.s. criminal laws ) and the latter's focus on enforcement of u.s. rights under trade agreements across a range of issues , one of which is ipr . interagency trade enforcement center ( itec ) the itec is an interagency coordinating body established in february 28 , 2012 , by executive order . its aim is to strengthen and coordinate enforcement of u.s. rights under international free trade agreements and of u.s. trade laws through a "whole - of - government" approach . the itec is housed within the ustr with a designated director from the ustr ; a designated deputy director from the department of commerce ; and support from the departments of state , the treasury , justice , agriculture , commerce , and homeland security , as well as the director of national intelligence . the administration has emphasized the need for creating the itec in order to better combat unfair trade practices by countries such as china . private sector advisory committee system the ustr manages a private sector advisory committee system for trade policy , intended to provide information and advisory on u.s. negotiating objectives and bargaining positions before the united states enters into trade agreements , the operation of existing u.s. trade agreements , and other u.s. trade policy matters . statutorily established under section 135 of the trade act of 1974 ( p.l .