the senate committee report ( s.rept . 110-415 ) noted that the increased funding would not be sufficient to fund all contracts for 12 months , but would "restore some stability to the program by allowing the department to enter into longer - term contracts with owners. for an expanded discussion of this issue , see crs report rl34504 , the department of housing and urban development: fy2009 appropriations . each year since fy2003 , the president has requested no new funding for the hope vi public housing revitalization program . in response , each year , congress has continued to fund the program . up until fy2003 , the program was generally funded at just under $600 million , although in recent years its funding level has generally been around $100 million . hud's congressional budget justifications criticize the program for a slow expenditure of grant funds and also note that phas are able to use their capital fund grants to leverage resources in much the same way hope vi grants are used to leverage additional resources , making hope vi less necessary . proponents of hope vi cite the program's transformative effects on severely distressed communities . s. 3261 , as reported by the senate appropriations committee , rejects the president's proposal to eliminate funding and would provide $100 million for hope vi in fy2009 . the bill would also extend the statutory authorization for the program through the end of fy2009 ; it is currently slated to sunset at the end of fy2008 . portions of the interstate highway system are reaching the end of their projected 50-year lifespan . these factors , combined with concern over growing levels of traffic congestion , have led to calls for significant increases in spending on transportation infrastructure . the national surface transportation policy and revenue study commission has recommended that the federal surface transportation program be extensively restructured , and that surface transportation investment from all sources be more than doubled from its present level to $225 billion annually . while some in congress are calling for greater levels of federal spending on transportation infrastructure , the primary source of federal highway funding , the highway account of the highway trust fund , is projected to run short of money before the end of fy2009 . this was foreseen in safetea - lu , which called for a multi - billion dollar rescission of contract authority at the end of september 2009 to balance the account . but rising gas prices have led consumers to reduce their consumption of fuel , which is reducing the revenues coming in to the highway account . congress is considering legislation that would provide money from the general fund to the highway account in order to forestall the highway account deficit in fy2009 . most of the funding for the activities of the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) comes from discretionary appropriations provided each year in the annual appropriations acts enacted by congress . hud's programs are primarily designed to address housing problems faced by households with very low incomes or other special housing needs . these include several programs of rental assistance for the poor , elderly , and / or disabled .