such concerns are not new . an fda import inspector was quoted in 1991: "some countries we almost never have problems with... . but others , such as india , thailand , china , korea , and many countries in africa , require constant vigilance. a number of analysts has examined the food safety challenges china faces as it becomes a major agricultural exporter . usda economists wrote in 2006: china emerged in the 1990s as a low - cost exporter of food products such as vegetables , apples , seafood , and poultry . but in recent years , china's exports slowed when shipments of vegetables , poultry and shrimp were rejected for failing to meet stringent standards in japan , europe , and other countries , revealing a gap between chinese and international food safety standards . some analysts contend that china's problems in complying with other — usually more developed — countries' safety requirements are typical of those faced by most developing countries . they point to a number of specific obstacles the chinese have encountered in upgrading their safeguards , including: the difficulty of standardizing and monitoring production practices at the farm production level , to which many safety problems can be traced due to widespread noncompliance with existing regulations such as environmental rules , and which is composed of 200 million households typically farming on plots of one to two noncontiguous acres ; heavy use of fertilizers and pesticides to counteract intensively cultivated soils and large pest pressures ; wide use of antibiotics to control diseases in intensive livestock , poultry , and aquaculture systems ; industrialization , lax environmental controls , and untreated human and animal waste in fields and waters , which raise concerns about toxic , metal , and microbial contaminants in food ; a fragmented marketing system dominated by millions of small firms handling small volumes , often on a cash basis with no documentation or ability to trace products ; a fragmented regulatory and oversight structure involving 10 national government ministries and little coordination with lower levels of government , which often have their own , differing standards for food products ; and for many commodities and industries , outdated or nonexistent standards , or standards that are inconsistent with internationally accepted ones . responsibility for domestic food safety is shared among a number of chinese agencies at the national , provincial , and local levels , including the national ministry of agriculture , which supervises the quality of primary agricultural products ; and the ministry of health and the state food and drug administration ( sfda ) , both with responsibilities in regulating processed foods . quality assurance for both imports and exports is under the purview of the general administration for quality supervision , inspection and quarantine ( aqsiq ) , which also has oversight over all exports ( including food and toys ) . however , the ministry of health and the sfda have had "minimal" roles in regulating exports . at one 2007 hearing , an fda official observed that china has some 400,000 food or feed manufacturers .