we will discuss each attempt in turn . in 1968 , the port authority of new york and new jersey , which operates four airports in and around new york city ( laguardia ( lga ) , john f. kennedy international ( jfk ) , newark liberty international ( ewr ) , and teterboro ( teb ) ) , sought — "for the purpose of relieving congestion and achieving the maximum efficient operation at the airports" — to impose a $25 minimum charge for landing during peak hours . the fee applied to any aircraft that took off or landed during the peak hours and had a seating configuration of less than 25 passengers . the fee applies at the three major port authority air - carrier airports , laguardia , jfk , and newark , but not at teterboro airport . a lawsuit was brought on the grounds that the so - called "take - off"fees impermissibly discriminated in favor of commercial airlines and against general aviation interests . plaintiffs argued , inter alia , that the faa is vested with the sole authority to regulate and control the national airspace and , therefore , the port authority violated federal law in imposing the $25 "take - off" fee . in addition to the preemption argument , plaintiffs argued first that the faa is required by law to expressly approve of the port authority's regulations , or at a minimum is required to conform their compatibility with grant and other aid agreements . second , according to the plaintiffs , "teterboro is not a reasonably convenient nor adequate facility as an alternate to the three major new york airports" and , therefore , the diversion of general aviation to teterboro would result in a practical exclusion from the new york area airports . finally , the plaintiffs asserted a variety of non - legal or policy arguments against the proposal . these arguments included that it would be ineffective to remedy the airport situation , which was due to over - scheduling by commercial airlines and not general aviation , that diversion would not resolve the disparity between airport capacity and demand , and that the record indicated that the commercial airlines were intimately involved in the proposal and even offered to subsidize ground transportation from teterboro to provide further incentive for moving general aviation away from the other airports . in response to the preemption argument , the court first noted that there exists room "for the operation of port authority regulations which have the effect of curtailing activities not forbidden by federal regulation. as a result , according to the court , nothing in the proposed port authority regulations "runs counter to the faa regulation in the sense that it seeks to authorize conduct which the federal regulation prohibits or requires the cessation of a practice required by federal regulation. in response to the argument that the faa was required to approve the port authority regulations , the court held that there was enough evidence on the record to indicate that there was no "inherent incompatibility" with federal law . next , the court addressed the argument that teterboro is not "reasonably convenient" to new york city .