this section summarizes and examines some of these proposals . there have also been proposals to create specialized units to deal exclusively with stabilization , security , and reconstruction operations , as well as peace keeping operations . another is that to fill these depleted officer ranks , the army is sending more ncos and junior soldiers with nco potential to officer candidate school , thereby depriving the nco corps—already several thousand ncos short—of much needed high - potential , high - performance ncos . these circumstances may preclude the army from achieving and maintaining a full - spectrum capability and further stress soldiers and bcts by requiring them to perform at a level currently beyond their abilities . section 941 of the conference report for h.r . 1585 , the fiscal year 2008 national defense authorization act , establishes a requirement for dod to conduct a quadrennial review of its roles and missions beginning in 2008 . the following two proposals cover a range of possibilities for the creation of specialized stabilization units . at present , the army continues to create and train its training and advisory teams on an ad hoc basis . the marines , however , have recently established a marine corps training and advisory group ( mctag ) at ft. story , virginia . the purpose of the mctag is to "coordinate , form , train , and equip marine corps advisor and training teams for current and projected operations. it is not known if this will form the basis of a specialized marine corps training and advisory unit , but it is likely that marines will be assigned training and advisory duties on a temporary basis , much as is the current case with the army . the army's insistence that specialized units are not needed and that full - spectrum units can meet the operational challenges of counterinsurgency , stabilization , and training / advising appears to be "more of the same" or "the path of least resistance" to some , but the army cites its experiences in iraq as validation of its position . the army maintains that its bcts , particularly in iraq , have been required to rapidly transition between counterinsurgency , stabilization , and training / advisory missions on a frequent and unpredictable basis . because there is not a predictable linear progression from one type of an operation to another , it would become both difficult and risky to replace a bct with a specialized stabilization unit , particularly when the tactical situation could rapidly and unexpectedly deteriorate into open conflict . the army also suggests that relationships with both the indigenous population and security forces are a crucial factor in any sort of operation and that it might be more effective to leave a bct in place over a period of time to conduct all missions as opposed to transitioning to specialized units and advisory teams which would require re - establishing these crucial relationships with indigenous personnel . if dod and the army decide to elevate the training and advisory mission to a "core mission," army units would then be equally responsible for conventional combat , counterinsurgency , stabilization and reconstruction , and training / advisory missions—the full spectrum of military operations .