all other events can typically be issued permits by the u.s. capitol police . upon the completion and opening of the capitol visitor center ( cvc ) during the 110 th congress , emancipation hall of the cvc became available for use in the same manner as the rotunda and capitol grounds . use of emancipation hall requires the passage of a resolution agreed to by both houses of congress authorizing its use . additionally , congress has provided an ongoing authorization for holiday concerts on capitol grounds . held on memorial day , the fourth of july , and labor day , these concerts feature the national symphony orchestra and are free and open to the public . upon the completion and opening of the capitol visitor center ( cvc ) during the 110 th congress , emancipation hall of the cvc became available for use in the same manner as the rotunda and capitol grounds . use of emancipation hall requires the passage of a resolution agreed to by both houses of congress authorizing its use . the first concurrent resolution authorizing the use of emancipation hall was agreed to during the 110 th congress . it provided for the use of the hall in connection with "ceremonies and activities held in connection with the opening of the capitol visitor center to the public. consistent with previous resolutions authorizing the use of the rotunda , the concurrent resolution for the use of emancipation hall directed that physical preparations be carried out "in accordance with such conditions as the architect of the capitol may provide. a database search was conducted using congress.gov for the 110 th through the 115 th congresses ( 2007-2017 ) . the search was conducted by running a query using the subject term "emancipation hall. the uses of emancipation hall identified here are restricted to those authorized by concurrent resolution of the house and senate . the search identified a total 43 concurrent resolutions that were agreed to by the house and senate . between the 110 th congress and the 115 th congress , the house and senate agreed to between 1 and 15 concurrent resolutions per congress that authorized the use of emancipation hall . table 5 reports the total number of resolutions agreed to in each congress . appendix c , which lists the results of the database search , provides the following information for each concurrent resolution: the congress in which the resolution was introduced , the resolution number , and the subject of the resolution . concurrent resolutions authorizing the use of emancipation hall can be divided into one of four categories: ( 1 ) commemoration ceremonies , ( 2 ) congressional gold medal ceremonies , ( 3 ) artwork unveilings , and ( 4 ) presidential inauguration activities . the following sections provide a brief explanation of each category with examples of the types of activities concurrent resolutions provided for on emancipation hall . table 6 contains the number of concurrent resolution agreed to by congress since 2007 by category . the largest percentage of concurrent resolutions agreed to ( 46.5% ) authorized the use of emancipation hall for commemoration ceremonies .