rule i . the speaker clause 1 ( excerpt ) approval of the journal ...having examined and approved the journal of the last day's proceedings , the speaker shall announce to the house his approval thereof . the speaker's approval of the journal shall be deemed agreed to unless a member , delegate , or resident commissioner demands a vote thereon . if such a vote is decided in the affirmative , it shall not be subject to a motion to reconsider . is this location the appropriate place for the well cards ? would another location be better for members and for a clearer view by the presiding officer ? the sentence on reversing the outcome of a vote in house rule xx , cl . 2 ( a ) was new in the 110 th congress , although its intent stemmed from concerns that had existed for some time . although points of order and parliamentary inquiries have been raised regarding the enforcement of the rule ( see appendices c and d , respectively ) , there have been questions about its use and its inherent ambiguity . the rule could be repealed , or it could be clarified as to the form of a collateral determination of whether the rule had been violated . alternatively , a house rule could be drafted to provide a potential point of order when a presiding officer has allowed voting to continue after voting time has expired , or a potential point of order when a member has not been allowed to vote if the member is in the well or , alternately , in the chamber . house rules , or democratic caucus or republican conference rules , could authorize the speaker's announcements related to voting procedures . such a provision could formalize a requirement that the speaker's announcement include information on voting by electronic device and a clarification of what is the well as opposed to what is the chamber and not the well , and could provide guidance to the speaker on the content of an announcement . the house could clarify the relationship between house rules and the speaker's policies over what is official policy . a point of order can be made against a violation of house rules , but there is no effective way to remedy violations of policies enunciated by the speaker . should there be a way , and if so , what might it be ? a meeting of the select committee to investigate the voting irregularities of august 2 , 2007 was held on the house floor to allow the clerk of the house to explain the electronic voting system . members of the committee commented that most members were not aware of all that went into the conduct of a vote . one response to this observation could be to require members to learn about voting procedures in the chamber generally and the operation of the electronic voting system specifically . the clerk and the parliamentarian , who participated in the select committee's walk - through , could design a training session on the voting system for new members , and a re - introduction session for returning members .