, cohabiting ) . others may be raised by a mother who is living with a male partner . still others may be living with a mother who is divorced from someone other than their father . additionally , some may be living with a mother whose husband died ( i.e. , the mother is a widow but the child was not fathered by the deceased husband ) . although most children who grow up in mother - only families , father - only families , step - parent families , or families in which the mother is cohabiting with a male partner become well - adjusted , productive adults , a large body of research indicates that children who grow up with only one biological parent in the home are more likely to be financially worse off and have worse socioeconomic outcomes ( even after income differences are taken into account ) compared to children who grow up with both biological parents in the home . as a result , many men have become less willing to marry the women they impregnate . there are myriad reasons why so many children live in homes without their fathers . some reasons are related to choices people make about fertility , marriage , and cohabitation . but others are the result of unexpected events , such as illness , or incarceration . some noncustodial fathers are active in the lives of their children , whereas others are either unable or unwilling to be involved in their children's lives . whatever the reason , a father's absence from the home results in social , psychological , emotional , and financial costs to children and economic costs to the nation . a 2008 report maintains that the federal government spends about $99.8 billion per year in providing financial and other support ( via fourteen federal social welfare programs ) to father - absent families . this section of the report discusses the race and ethnicity of fathers to children born outside of marriage , age of fathers , and the importance of establishing paternity for children born outside of marriage . one of the prominent , but perhaps not unexpected , findings related to fathers and nonmarital births is that when older men have sexual relationships with young women it often results in nonmarital births . declining marriage rates , increased childbearing among unmarried women , increased number of unmarried women in the childbearing ages ( i.e. , 15-44 ) , and decreased childbearing among married women have contributed to the rising share of children being born to unwed women . many social science analysts attribute the increase in nonmarital births to the decades - long decline of "shotgun marriages," rather than to an increased incidence of nonmarital conceptions . they contend that when the social pressure to get married once pregnancy became obvious ended , the likelihood that women would marry between conception and birth decreased substantially . the entry of more and more women into the paid labor force also made childbearing outside of marriage more economically feasible . through the 1960s , most americans believed that parents should stay in an unhappy marriage for the sake of the children . by the 1970s , this view was not as prominent .