revenue offsets . the cost of incentives are offset by a freeze in certain oil and natural gas deductions , a reduced foreign tax credit for certain foreign oil and gas income , reduced deductions for certain securities transactions , a change in the federal unemployment tax act ( futa ) surtax , and an increase of the oil spill liability trust fund tax . in the 110 th congress , more than 460 bills with provisions for energy efficiency or renewable energy were introduced . a general description of the renewable energy provisions in those bills , including those enacted into law , is available in crs report rl33831 , energy efficiency and renewable energy legislation in the 110 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] . the report also groups the bills by policy and issue areas , provides a table that identifies recent action on the bills , and discusses recent action . appliance and lighting standards . title iii legislates new standards for broad categories of incandescent lamps ( light bulbs ) , incandescent reflector lamps , and fluorescent lamps . further , a required target is set for lighting efficiency , and energy efficiency labeling is required for consumer electronic products . efficiency standards are set by law for external power supplies , residential clothes washers , dishwashers , dehumidifiers , refrigerators , refrigerator freezers , freezers , electric motors , residential boilers , commercial walk - in coolers , and commercial walk - in freezers . further , doe is directed to set standards by rulemaking for furnace fans and battery chargers . ( for more details about the provisions in p.l . 110-140 , see crs report rl34294 , energy independence and security act of 2007: a summary of major provisions , by [author name scrubbed] ) . the enacted version of the farm bill ( h.r . 6124 ; "food , conservation , and energy act of 2008" ) became law on june 18 , 2008 . the law contains provisions that extend and / or expand upon renewable energy ( and energy efficiency ) provisions of the farm security act of 2002 ( p.l . several programs for grants , loans , and tax incentives were put in place to support renewable energy ( and / or energy efficiency ) . ( for more details , see crs report rl34130 , renewable energy policy in the 2008 farm bill , by tom capehart. ) as table 4 shows , doe's fy2009 budget request sought $1.255 billion for doe's energy efficiency and renewable energy ( eere ) programs . 2638 ) provides continuing appropriations through march 6 , 2009 , at the fy2008 level . the law provides an additional $250 million to the doe weatherization assistance program and provides $7.5 billion for a $25 billion loan to help u.s. automakers retool facilities to produce advanced technology energy - efficient vehicles . the law covers appropriations through march 6 , 2009 . division b of the emergency economic stabilization act ( p.l . 110-343 ) contains the text of the senate - passed version of h.r . 6049 , which provides several tax incentives for efficiency and renewables .