denote the estimate of as . since is an estimate , it is a random variable drawn from a probability or sampling distribution with an expected value ( mean ) and variance . this estimator will have the following desirable properties: unbiased: the expected value of is ; efficient: the variance of is smaller than the variance of all other unbiased estimators ; and consistent: the probability distribution of collapses on as the number of observations gets arbitrarily large . estimation problems often arise with panel data because one or more of the conditions listed above are not met . the result is the ols estimator will be biased and inconsistent . problems arise with panel data , as is demonstrated when equation ( b1 ) is rewritten as: ( b2 ) the term is an effect ( unobserved heterogeneity ) specific to a particular country capturing differences among countries in ( 1 ) the measurement of economic data , ( 2 ) economic institutions , ( 3 ) laws and regulations applying to business , and ( 4 ) attitudes toward business , among other things . the term is a time specific effect capturing such things as the international business cycle . since the corporate tax rate is a reflection of the attitudes toward business in a country , and will be correlated . ignoring the country - specific unobserved heterogeneity means that the ols estimate of is biased and inconsistent because the error term in equation ( b1 ) is correlated with the explanatory variable — one of the conditions listed above is violated . appendix b . data and estimation methods the data used in the hassett and mathur study and the clausing study were obtained . the data used to replicate the brill and hassett study were obtained from the original sources cited in the study . the results reported for all studies were replicated . the data are for several countries for a period of several years , and are known as panel data . the model of the relationship between the corporate tax rate ( the independent variable ) and the various dependent variables takes a linear form: ( b1 ) where is the dependent variable , is the independent variable ( the corporate tax rate in our case ) , and are the regression parameters to be estimated , and is a random error term . the subscripts , i and t , indicate that information for a particular observation comes from country i for year t ( for example , information for australia for 1992 ) . the random error term , , is a random variable and captures omitted and unobservable factors or variables that affect the dependent variable . table b - 1 displays the results for the data from the three studies reanalyzed . the first row displays the relevant explanatory corporate tax rate variable used in the study . the second row reports of mean of the variable . the third row reports the standard deviation ( a measure of variation of a variable ) of the corporate tax rate variable . the error term will be discussed in further detail below .