appendix a . historical background on the forest service and the bureau of land management the usda forest service and doi bureau of land management have similar management responsibilities and often intermingled or neighboring lands . however , each agency also has unique emphases and functions , often reflecting their different creations and evolutions . this appendix provides historical background to help explain differences between the agencies . forest service the fs is an agency in the u.s. department of agriculture . the first federal funding for forestry — an 1876 study of western forest conditions — was attached to an agriculture appropriations bill , because a bill authorizing such a study had stalled in the house public lands committee . would the merged agency be in doi or in usda , or would it be in a new cabinet department , possibly with energy and / or environmental agencies ? the division initially focused on providing information to congress and the public about the condition of u.s. forests . the mission evolved over the succeeding decades to providing forestry assistance to states and private forestland owners . the division grew slowly , and was upgraded to the bureau of forestry in 1901 . forest reserves in 1891 , congress granted the president the authority to establish forest reserves from the existing public domain lands under doi jurisdiction . initially , the forest reserves were administered by a division of forestry in the doi general land office , because the office ( one predecessor of the blm ) was responsible for the public domain from which the reserves were created . this office administered the forest reserves for 14 years , during which time the reserves were increased to 56 million acres and the first federal commercial timber sales were made . in 1898 , gifford pinchot became chief of the usda division of forestry . he argued that usda's forestry expertise warranted control over the forest reserves , but instead was directed to consult with the doi division of forestry . however , pinchot's influence on federal forestry increased when his close personal friend , theodore roosevelt , became the u.s. president in 1901 . it took pinchot and roosevelt nearly four years to convince congress of the wisdom of transferring the forest reserves to usda . interestingly , doi secretary ethan allen hitchcock and land commissioner w. a. richards supported the transfer of the lands to usda . in 1905 , congress enacted the transfer act to shift the responsibility for administering the reserves to usda and to merge doi's division of forestry with the larger usda bureau of forestry . the new entity was named the forest service , with pinchot as the first chief . president roosevelt more than doubled the forest reserve acreage in the two years following the merger , to a total of 151 million acres by 1907 . congress responded by limiting the president's authority to proclaim additional forest reserves , and renamed the reserves the national forests . in 1911 , in the weeks law , congress authorized additions to the national forest system through the purchase of private lands in need of rehabilitation .