the senate language was approved as section 11067 . house - senate conferees generally adopted the senate language , as section 11015 of the final bill . unlike the provisions in the house bill , the conference - adopted senate language would not replace title iii ( federal - state cooperation ) in the current fmia . rather , it would create a new title v — inspections by federal and state agencies . under the new farm bill , for the first time in 40 years , meat and poultry that is not federally inspected could be shipped across state lines . these and other pending changes raised a series of issues that were debated by proponents and opponents of the legislation . as noted , the new farm bill would amend the fmia and ppia in order to modify a key element of federal food safety policy that has been in place for 40 years . at the heart of the debate has been a seemingly simple question: do , or can , state programs provide the same assurance of product safety as the federal program ? section 11103 of the house version of h.r . 2419 would have rewritten rather than merely amended title iii of the fmia . 661 ) were added by the wholesome meat act of 1967 ( p.l . congressional quarterly ( cq ) at the time of the 1967 legislation observed that the state cooperation provision was "[t]he farthest - reaching portion [of the measure] ... aimed at helping — or , if necessary , forcing — states to strengthen their own meat inspection systems. all plants providing meat for interstate and foreign commerce had been subject to federal inspection regulations basically since passage of the meat inspection act of 1907 . however , plants that limited their product sales within a state were covered by what critics described as a patchwork of varying , often inadequate laws and regulations ; seven of them had no inspection at all , according to cq . "revelations in the press and during committee hearings about slaughter and packing practices at some state plants made meat inspection the most emotional consumer issue of 1967. . currently , the secretary of agriculture ( hereafter , usda or fsis ) is authorized to approve a cooperative program in any state if it has enacted a "law that imposes mandatory ante mortem and post mortem inspection , reinspection and sanitation requirements that are at least equal to those under title i of [the fmia] , with respect to all or certain classes of persons engaged in the state in slaughtering amenable species [i.e. , cattle , sheep , swine , goats , equines] , or preparing the carcasses , parts thereof , meat or meat food products , of any animals for use as human food solely for distribution within such state" ( 21 u.s.c . pursuant to the fmia as amended by the wholesome meat act , usda - fsis must receive a formal request for a program from the governor , and review the state's laws , regulations , and performance plan ( including funding , staffing , training , labels and standards , enforcement , laboratory and testing procedures , and other aspects ) .