cannot legally be interdicted . thus , the missile shipments picked up by a pakistani c - 130 in the summer of 2002 in north korea , reported by the new york times in november 2002 , could not have been intercepted under psi . the october 2003 interdiction of a shipment of uranium centrifuge enrichment parts from malaysia to libya illustrated the need for multilateral cooperation . the malaysian - produced equipment was transported on a german - owned ship , the bbc china , leaving dubai , passing through the suez canal . the united states reportedly asked the german shipping company to divert the ship into the italian port of taranto , where it was searched . passage through the highly regulated suez canal may give authorities an opportunity to delay ships and find a reason to board them . the department of defense does include a breakdown of expense exclusively dedicated to psi in its annual report to congress . however , other dod programs also contribute to psi efforts — for example , the u.s. strategic command budgets for combatant commanders' participation in wmd interdiction exercises , but these tasks are not necessarily under the psi umbrella . dod psi - related activities have most recently been funded through the cooperative threat reduction ( ctr ) program . the fy2017 national defense authorization act ( ndaa , p.l . 114-328 ) said that $4 million may be obligated for the psi out of ctr program funds . the state department's nonproliferation , antiterrorism , demining , and related programs ( nadr ) account funds psi - related activities . fy2012 and fy2013 congressional budget justifications stated that the nonproliferation and disarmament fund ( ndf ) can be used to support multinational exercises under the proliferation security initiative , and staff travel to psi meetings is drawn from state's general operating accounts . participation by the fbi and dhs's customs and border patrol appears to be funded on an ad hoc basis through operating funds . the department of energy's budget justification includes funds for national laboratory research on wmd interdiction technologies , which would contribute to psi efforts . early on , some members of congress showed support for psi through legislation . in the 111 th congress , house foreign affairs committee ranking member ileana ros - lehtinen introduced h.res . 604 , which recognized "the vital role of the proliferation security initiative in preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruction. another bill sponsored by representative ros - lehtinen , the western hemisphere counterterrorism and nonproliferation act of 2009 ( h.r . 375 ) , included a sense of congress that psi has "repeatedly demonstrated its effectiveness in preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction," and that the secretary of state should seek to secure the "formal or informal cooperation by western hemisphere countries" for psi . the foreign relations authorization act for fiscal years 2010 and 2011 ( h.r . 2410 ) called for "the expansion and greater development of the proliferation security initiative ( psi ) " . the associated h.rept . 111-136 , in its section on minority views , praises psi thus: "the proliferation security initiative is an outstanding example of u.s. leadership in the area of nonproliferation .