1041 to the house . the resolution passed the house two days later . pursuant to the resolution , the house considered and agreed to a house amendment to the senate amendment to h.r . 3773 , also entitled the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978 amendments act of 2008 or the fisa amendments act of 2008 , by a vote of 213-197 , with one voting present ( roll no . the house and senate have not gone to conference on fisa legislation . instead , negotiations are ongoing to find a means of resolving their differences . both the senate amendment to h.r . 3773 and the house amendment to the senate amendment to h.r . 3773 include amendments to the foreign intelligence surveillance act . the house amendment differs in a number of ways from the senate - passed version of the bill . for example , the senate amendment to h.r . 3773 provides , in new section 701 of fisa , that nothing in the definition of "electronic surveillance" under subsection 101 ( f ) of fisa , 50 u.s.c . ยง 1801 ( f ) , shall be construed to encompass surveillance that is targeted in accordance with proposed title vii of the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) at a person reasonably believed to be located outside the united states . the house has no parallel provision in its bill . the two bills differ in their treatment of the role of the foreign intelligence surveillance court ( fisc ) with respect to procedures for acquisitions for the purpose of gathering foreign intelligence information of the contents of communications of u.s. persons and non - u.s. persons located outside the united states . in the absence of an emergency authorization , the house amendment requires prior approval by the fisc of the applicable targeting procedures , minimization procedures , and certification before the attorney general and the director of national intelligence ( dni ) may authorize acquisition of the contents of communications of non - u.s. persons reasonably believed to be located outside the united states . the fisc would have 30 days after a certification is submitted to review the certification and the targeting and minimization procedures and to approve or deny an order regarding such an acquisition . the house bill also requires the attorney general , in consultation with the dni , to adopt guidelines to ensure compliance with limitations imposed by the bill on such acquisitions and to ensure that an application is filed under section 104 or 303 of fisa , if required by that act . the guidelines are to be submitted to the fisc , the congressional intelligence committees , and the house and senate judiciary committees . under the house bill , if the fisc finds that the certification satisfies statutory requirements and targeting and minimization procedures are consistent with statutory standards and constitutional requirements under the fourth amendment , the fisc is to approve the certification and use of the procedures for the acquisition .