this report initially discusses the background of the ffata . by january 1 , 2008 , the new website was required to provide access to information on entities that were awarded funds directly from the federal government . entities covered in the first phase of implementation include corporations , associations , partnerships , sole proprietorships , limited liability companies , limited liability partnerships , states , and localities . by january 1 , 2009 , the website was required to include access to information on subgrantees and subcontractors that receive federal funds through a primary award recipient . the act excluded individual recipients of federal assistance , and organizations with less than $300,000 in total income were not required to report on subawards . consistent with the objective of providing to the public comprehensive information on federal financial assistance , virtually all categories of awards are ultimately to be covered by the database , including grants , contracts , subgrants , subcontracts , and loans . two special provisions addressed particular types of transactions: individual transactions of less than $25,000 are exempt , and credit card transactions were excluded until october 1 , 2008 . to achieve greater transparency , the act required the website to provide the following information about each federal award: name of entity receiving award amount of award type of award ( eg , grant , loan , contract ) agency funding award a north american industry classification system ( naics ) code for contracts or a catalog of federal domestic assistance ( cfda ) number for grants and loans program source award title that describes the purpose of the funding location of recipient city , state , congressional district , and country in which award performance primarily takes place unique identifier for entity receiving award and of the parent entity of recipient , if one exists any other information specified by omb the act required that the website permit users to ( 1 ) conduct a search of federal funding by any of the data elements listed above , and ( 2 ) determine the total amount of federal funding awarded to an entity by fiscal year . in addition , the act stipulated that the website must provide information in a downloadable format , and that agencies must post new information to the website within 30 days of making an award . three major financial assistance databases were identified in the act as likely sources of information for the new website — the federal procurement data system - next generation ( fpds - ng ) , the federal assistance award data system ( faads ) , and grants.gov . according to the act , a user must be able to access information from these databases directly through the website . the act was explicit on this point: it was not acceptable merely to provide links to these or other databases , because that would force users to search for information at different websites . as previously noted , the act did not require information on subcontractors and subgrantees to be included in the database until january 1 , 2009 . the delay reflected the fact that information on subrecipients was not collected consistently across federal agencies and programs .