rules of origin are central components of trade policy . some observers assert that roo interpretation is complex and subjective . other experts maintain that , in a global manufacturing environment , there should be other means of determining country of origin . finally , some experts wonder if roo definitions could produce results that could be counter to certain policy objectives . preferential rules of origin are especially important for ensuring that only goods qualified to receive benefits under an fta or preference receive those benefits . roo may also be constructed to ensure that import - competing u.s. producers are not adversely affected by an fta , thus possibly assuring a degree of public support for the measure . non - preferential rules are essential for making sure that goods coming from countries that enjoy mfn status with the united states are assessed the proper tariffs , and are also key to supporting other u.s. trade laws , such as country of origin labeling . at present , cbp makes non - preferential country of origin determinations primarily based on an established body of regulatory and legal precedents . for many imports , determining origin is relatively straightforward . 103-182 ) actually shifted much of the responsibility for complying with customs laws and regulations from cbp to the importer of record . this means that the importer must understand customs procedures ( including , for example , the applicability of a preferential roo scheme to his or her product and country of origin ) , and apply "reasonable care" to enter , properly classify , and determine the value of merchandise so cbp can properly assess duties , collect accurate statistics , and determine whether all other applicable legal requirements have been met . in cases where the country of origin is unclear , importers may seek advance roo rulings from cbp in an effort to accelerate the import process . due to their obscure and technical nature , rules of origin frameworks are generally not in the forefront of the continuing debates on trade liberalization or globalization . nevertheless , the role of roos ( both preferential and non - preferential ) is central to the international trading system and trade negotiations . preferential rules of origin are arguably essential to ensure that the benefits of an fta are provided to those countries that have negotiated and entered into the agreement . without preferential roo , it would be possible for imports from non - fta countries to enter the fta partner with the lowest external tariff , and then sell the good throughout the region under the fta rate . this could force a convergence of external tariffs and possibly a competitive devaluation of external tariffs in the region . for similar reasons , roo are also important when providing unilateral trade preferences to ensure that only goods from eligible countries receive the benefits . some policy observers , however , assert that the worldwide proliferation of trade agreements creates inefficiencies in the trading system because there are so many complex roo frameworks . others express concern that current u.s. systems for determining country of origin may run counter to overall u.s. trade policy .