the u.s. dept . of agriculture ( usda ) forecasts that u.s. agricultural exports for fy2008 will reach a record high of $91 billion , and forecasts that imports will reach $75.5 billion , also a record ( figure 1 ) . if these forecasts hold , the u.s. agricultural trade balance in fy2008 would be $15.5 billion . since fy1991 , high value exports ( intermediate products such as wheat flour , feedstuffs , and vegetable oils or consumer - ready products such as fruits , nuts , meats , and processed foods ) have outpaced such bulk commodity exports as grains , oilseeds , and cotton . in fy2008 , high value agricultural exports are forecast to account for 60% of the value of total agricultural exports . much of the growth in u.s. agricultural exports in 2007 and 2008 is expected to come from strong demand for bulk commodities such as wheat , feed grains , oilseeds , and cotton . agricultural exports are important both to farmers and to the u.s. economy . production from almost a third of u.s. cropland moves into export channels , according to usda . usda estimates that from 21% to 23% of u.s. agricultural production ( crops and livestock ) is exported . exports account for almost half of wheat production , more than one - third of soybeans , and a fifth of corn . the share of exports of specialty crops such as almonds is 70% , while for other specialty crops such as walnuts or grapefruit , the export share is as high as 40% . export share of livestock products is lower than for crops , as most meat and dairy products are consumed domestically . u.s. agricultural exports generate employment , income , and purchasing power in both the farm and nonfarm sectors . according to usda , each $1 received from agricultural exports stimulates another $1.64 in supporting activities to produce those exports . recent data show that agricultural exports generate an estimated 806,000 full - time civilian jobs , including 455,000 jobs in the non - farm sector . many variables interact to determine the level of u.s. agricultural exports: income , population growth , and tastes and preferences in foreign markets ; u.s. and foreign supply and prices ; and foreign import barriers and exchange rates . u.s. domestic farm policies that affect price and supply , and trade agreements with other countries , also influence the level of u.s. agricultural exports . while many of these factors are beyond the scope of congressional action , farm bills have typically included a trade title ( title iii in the 2002 farm bill , the farm security and rural investment act of 2002 ) that authorizes programs that guarantee the private financing of u.s. agricultural exports , subsidize agricultural exports , promote u.s. farm products in overseas markets , or address foreign trade barriers . all of the agricultural export programs authorized in the farm bill are administered by the foreign agricultural service ( fas ) of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) . title iii of the house - passed ( h.r .