it has been going on for hundreds of years . the current wave of globalization , which may be unprecedented in terms of its scale and pace , is supported by three broad trends . the first is technology , which has sharply reduced the cost of communication and transportation that previously divided markets . the second is a dramatic increase in the world supply of labor engaged in international trade . first , the report maintains that better job - related training and education for the low - skilled via on - the - job training would help to boost their productivity and future earnings . the second strand relates to access to formal education throughout working life in order to acquire the skills needed in a dynamic economy . nevertheless , given the increasing globalization of labor markets , the question also arises as to what kind of skills to promote . those at the top end of today's income distribution have skills that enable them to perform non - routine kinds of problem solving , often within the context of large , complex , global operations . in contrast , an increasing share of domestic workers in the middle of the wage spectrum have experienced lower demand because companies can now look all over the world for workers able to perform computer programming tasks , communications tasks , and similar jobs whose tasks can be routine zed but do not require face - to - face contact with others . in this context , it is not self - evident what kind of education or training will foster labor skills that will be immune to outsourcing and global competitive pressures in the future , other than that they require face - to - face contact for work that does not involve codifiable information . another consideration in evaluating education as a policy approach for dealing with worker insecurity about globalization may be the amount of time for educational changes to achieve the objective . one analyst maintains that education as a policy approach to worker insecurity could take more than a generation to make a difference . for example , it took 60 years to boost the share of college graduates in the work force from 6% at the end of wwii to 33% today , and that required major government programs , such as the gi bill . calls for a more progressive form of taxation is one of the more recent policy approaches for lessening resistance to globalization . based on a view that the current pattern in u.s. income distribution is the most pressing issue to address , a report funded by the country's top financial firms argues that some direct form of income redistribution is necessary for ensuring that globalization's benefits are shared more widely . accordingly , the report calls for making the federal insurance contribution ( fica ) social security tax more progressive , either by integrating it into the income tax or by adding progressivity into fica itself . a number of tax policies such as the earned income tax credit , which supplements the earnings of low - income workers , are already in place to diminish economic inequality .