further activity on h.r . 6304 is anticipated after the senate returns from the july 4 th recess . the current legislative and oversight activity with respect to electronic surveillance under fisa has drawn national attention to several overarching issues . this report briefly outlines three such issues and touches upon some of the perspectives reflected in the ongoing debate . these issues include the inherent and often dynamic tension between national security and civil liberties , particularly rights of privacy and free speech ; the need identified by the director of national intelligence ( dni ) , admiral mike mcconnell , for the intelligence community to be able to efficiently and effectively collect foreign intelligence information from the communications of foreign persons located outside the united states in a changing , fast - paced , and technologically sophisticated international environment , and the differing approaches suggested to meet this need ; and limitations of liability for those electronic communication service providers who furnish aid to the federal government in its foreign intelligence collection . this report briefly examines these issues and sets them in context . § 2511 ( 2 ) ( a ) bars suit in any court against any provider of wire or electronic communication service , its officers , employees , or agents , landlord , custodian , or other specified person for providing information , facilities , or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order , statutory authorization , or a certification in writing by the attorney general or a person specified under 18 u.s.c . § 2518 ( 7 ) that no warrant or court order is required by law , that all statutory requirements have been met , and that the specified assistance is required . prospective relief from liability for those furnishing aid to the government pursuant to a court order or certification or a directive pursuant to statute requiring compliance with government demands for assistance is contemplated in a number of bills , including h.r . 3773 as originally passed , the senate amendment to h.r . 3773 , the house amendment to the senate amendment to h.r . all three versions of h.r . 6304 authorize the fisc to compel compliance through the contempt power , as did p.l . 110-55 while it was in force . retroactive immunity presents more difficult issues . there are currently pending a substantial number of law suits against the telecommunications providers who are alleged to have furnished aid to the government in connection with its warrantless surveillance programs since september 11 , 2001 , and other programs . approximately 40 of these suits are currently pending in the northern district of california under an order of the judicial panel on multidistrict litigation . on august 9 , 2006 , pursuant to 28 u.s.c . § 1407 , the judicial panel on multidistrict litigation transferred 17 civil actions that were pending throughout the country to the northern district of california , and assigned them to judge vaughn walker for coordinated or consolidated pretrial proceedings in in re: national security agency telecommunications records litigation , mdl - 1791 . another 26 cases were treated as potential tag - along actions under the multidistrict litigation rules .