on appeal , the d.c . circuit ( d.c . circuit ) with exclusive jurisdiction to review detainee status determinations made by csrts or military commissions . in the 2006 case of hamdan v. rumsfeld , the court interpreted these provisions as being inapplicable to habeas cases pending at the time the dta was enacted . in response , congress passed the mca, which amended the federal habeas statute to expressly eliminate court jurisdiction over all pending and future causes of action , other than pursuant to the limited review permitted under the dta . the petitioners in boumediene are aliens detained at guantanamo who sought habeas review of their continued detention and designation as enemy combatants by csrts in district court . circuit held that the mca stripped it and all other federal courts of jurisdiction to consider petitioners' habeas applications . relying upon its earlier opinion in al odah v. united states and the 1950 supreme court case johnson v. eisentrager , in which the supreme court found that the constitutional writ of habeas did not apply to enemy aliens detained in post - wwii germany , the d.c . circuit held that the mca's "court - stripping" provision did not operate as an unconstitutional suspension of the writ , because aliens held by the u.s. in foreign territory do not have a constitutional right to habeas . although the supreme court initially denied the petitioners' request for review , it subsequently reversed itself and granted certiorari in june 2007 to consider the consolidated cases of boumediene and al odah . in an opinion by justice kennedy that was joined by justices breyer , ginsburg , souter , and stevens , the court reversed the d.c . circuit and held that petitioners had a constitutional right to habeas that was withdrawn by the mca in violation of the constitution's suspension clause . chief justice roberts and justice scalia wrote separate dissenting opinions , which were joined by the other and justices alito and thomas . justice souter also wrote a brief concurring opinion , joined by justices breyer and ginsburg , briefly disputing the dissenting opinions' purported characterization of the majority's decision . before assessing petitioners' constitutional claims , the court briefly addressed petitioners' argument that mca § 7 did not deny federal courts jurisdiction to consider habeas actions like those of petitioners , which were pending at the time that the mca was enacted . the court rejected this argument , finding that the structure of mca § 7 and the act's legislative history demonstrated that the mca was intended to deprive federal courts of jurisdiction to consider habeas cases pending at the time of enactment . the court next turned to the question of whether petitioners possess a constitutional privilege to seek the writ of habeas corpus . petitioners argued that they possess a constitutional right to habeas , and that the mca deprived them of this right in contravention of the suspension clause , which prohibits the suspension of the writ of habeas except "when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it. the mca did not expressly purport to be a formal suspension of the writ of habeas , and the government did not make such a claim to the court .