these bills are h.r . 2147 ( healthy kids act of 2007 ) , h.r . 3395 ( responsible fatherhood and healthy families act of 2007 ) , h.r . 5720 ( housing assistance tax act of 2008 ) , s. 1111 ( fair flat tax act of 2007 ) , s. 1626 ( responsible fatherhood and healthy families act of 2007 ) , s. 2362 ( property tax fairness act of 2007 ) , s. 3335 ( the jobs , energy , families , and disaster relief act of 2008 ) , and h.r . 1424 ( emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ) . on october 3 , 2008 , president george w. bush signed h.r . 1424 , emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 , into law ( p.l . this act included section 403 , "broker reporting of customer's basis in securities transactions," which required brokers to report to the irs customers' adjusted gross basis and whether any capital gain or loss is long - term or short - term for customers' sales of stock , debt , commodities , derivatives , and any other assets specified by the treasury . the joint committee on taxation estimated that this reporting provision would raise $6.67 billion in revenue through september 30 , 2018 . january 1 , 2011 , is the initial applicable date of the reporting provision to customers' sales of corporate stock . witnesses at the senate finance committee's hearing on june 28 , 2007 , included representatives from five financial associations . the written comments of these witnesses provide useful insights . the reader may want to refer to the actual written testimony for details . numerous implications for drafting legislation to report basis may be derived from their testimony . investment company institute the investment company institute ( ici ) emphasized three points concerning reporting of basis: first , a mandatory basis - reporting regime will be costly , and the cost ultimately will be borne by fund investors . second , sufficient time must be provided to ensure that necessary programming and systems challenges are addressed effectively . finally , the flexibility the current law provides to mutual funds and their shareholders to compute cost basis under any available method ( first - in , first - out ( "fifo" ) , specific identification , and average cost , in the case of fund shareholders ) must be maintained . we recognize that allowing this flexibility will limit the use of cost basis information for internal revenue service ( "irs" ) matching purposes . the ici indicated that many mutual funds currently provide average cost basis information to a substantial portion of their shareholders , but some funds ( particularly smaller funds ) do not provide any cost basis information . no mutual fund provides cost basis information to all of its shareholders because the fund managers do not have or cannot have access to the necessary information or are not confident that the information is accurate . the ici maintains that mutual funds would "need sufficient lead time to program their systems to provide cost basis information to all of their shareholders in all circumstances.