mas selamat was accused of plotting the embassy bombing . a large scale manhunt failed to find him in the ensuing months , but he was apprehended in april 2009 in malaysia , where he remains in detention under malaysia's internal security act . a singapore government report issued two months after the escape concluded that there had been no inside cooperation in mas selamat's escape from the tightly - guarded whitley detention center . the joint counter terrorism center ( jctc ) coordinates the multiple agencies and departments of the singaporean government that deal with terrorism , including the intelligence agencies . since 9 / 11 , singapore has increased intelligence cooperation with regional countries and the united states . singaporean authorities have shared information gathered from suspected militants held under the internal security act with u.s. officials , reportedly providing detailed insights into ji and al qaeda's structure , methods , and recruiting strategies . singapore was a founding member of the proliferation security initiative ( psi ) , a program that aims to interdict shipments of weapons of mass destruction - related materials , and was the first asian country to join the container security initiative ( csi ) , a series of bilateral , reciprocal agreements that allow u.s. customs and border patrol officials to pre - screen u.s. - bound containers . others are reportedly working with abu sayyaf in jolo . in october 2002 , the united states designated ji as a foreign terrorist organization . thereafter , the united nations security council added the network to its own list of terrorist groups , a move requiring all u.n. members to freeze the organization's assets , deny it access to funding , and prevent its members from entering or traveling through their territories . since december 2001 , over 250 suspected and admitted ji members , including a number of key leaders , have been arrested . the government intends to psychologically prepare its public for an attack by framing the question of a terrorist attack as "when , not if. a large - scale anti - terrorism exercise in june 2005 involved over 1,000 citizens and public officials and singapore's public transit systems . the regulation of people and goods across singapore's borders has been intensified through the merging of the border control functions of the customs and immigration services . many of these arrests are credited to more extensive intelligence sharing among national police forces . the philippines condemned the september 11 , 2001 attacks and offered ports and airports for use by u.s. naval vessels and military aircraft for refueling stops . philippine president gloria macapagal - arroyo and president bush agreed on the deployment of u.s. military personnel to the southern philippines to train and assist the philippine military against the terrorist abu sayyaf group , making the philippines one of the most extensive examples of u.s. counterterrorism cooperation in southeast asia . this agreement was reached under a visiting force agreement that the philippines and the united states signed in 1999 that provided for the dispatch of u.s. military forces to the philippines to provide training and other assistance to the philippine armed forces ( afp ) .