ever. if so , congress might wish to ensure the implementation of arpa - e meets the goals and principles provided in the america competes act . several management design elements to monitor include the timely appointment of a director for arpa - e , recruitment of highly qualified technical program managers familiar with the darpa process , maintenance of autonomy from doe's current activities , and sufficient funding and organizational flexibility . in terms of the research funded , key aspects to monitor are the focus on high - risk , high - payoff , possibly transformational research that has clearly defined and measurable 3-5 year end - goals rather than incremental research or that focused on "quick wins ; " full and open competition , so that the best projects are selected ; and perhaps most challenging of all , customer involvement so that the outcomes from arpa - e's projects have a transition strategy to an end user . besides the fy2009 appropriations activity described earlier and the likelihood that funding for the arpa - e in fy2010 will be discussed by congress , members of congress have introduced a number of bills that would impact arpa - e: title iv , entitled energy innovation and workforce development , of a draft senate committee on energy and natural resources bill entitled america clean energy leadership act of 2009 , would amend the america competes act to give contracting authority to arpa - e separate from the department , make technical corrections to reporting requirements , and authorize arpa - e through 2020 . this bill was approved by the senate energy and natural resources committee on june 17 , 2009 . the american clean energy and security act of 2009 ( h.r . 2454 ) ,as passed by the house , would provide 1.05% of the cap and trade allowances from 2012 to 2050 to fund arpa - e . in addition , it would require that the secretary of energy coordinate the innovation activities of clean energy innovation centers , created by that proposed act , with arpa - e , national laboratories , and efrcs , and within industry , and to avoid duplication of research , by annually issuing guidance regarding national energy research and development priorities and strategic objectives ; and convening a conference of doe staff and others to share research results , program plans , and opportunities for collaboration . the american conservation and clean energy independence act ( h.r . 2227 ) would modify the strategic petroleum reserve and use funds generated as a result of this action to fund arpa - e and a number of other energy - related activities . besides overseeing the establishment of arpa - e and its funding , an issue for congress is how arpa - e will differ from existing doe office of science activities , including the new energy frontier research centers , the doe energy technology offices , and the energy innovation hubs proposed in the fy2010 budget . in addition , several bills introduced in congress would either provide arpa - e with additional authority or a source of funds , or require the secretary of energy to monitor its interaction with other proposed doe research and development organizations .