circuit ( d.c . circuit ) stated , "the 1994 act identified a portion of the government's specific obligations and created additional means to ensure that the obligations would be carried out. the cobell litigation began in 1996 , and its docket enumerated over 3,600 documents and over 20 federal district court and court of appeals opinions . monies from this account will also be made available for the "funds for indian education scholarships. the cra excludes amounts received by individual indians pursuant to the settlement from inclusion as gross income for federal tax purposes . the settlement and cra also left for the district court's consideration the amount of attorneys' fees and the amount of the incentive award for the named plaintiffs of the class . the district court approved the settlement on july 27 , 2012 . a few members of the class appealed the settlement to the u.s. court of appeals for the d.c . circuit , which upheld the fairness of the settlement . after the supreme court denied a petition for certiorari and the appeal period expired , the settlement became final on november 24 , 2012 . the following attempts to distill the history of this litigation so that it focuses on the substantive issues regarding the iim accounts . in 1996 , a group of iim account holders filed a class action suit to compel performance of trust obligations , alleging that the secretaries of the interior and the treasury — as delegatees of the federal government's trust responsibilities — had breached the fiduciary duties owed to plaintiffs by mismanaging the iim accounts . two years later , the district court judge bifurcated the trial into two phases , with phase 1 to focus on reforming the management and accounting of the iim trust funds , and phase 2 to address the historical accounting of those accounts . in 1999 , united states district judge royce c. lamberth issued a ruling as to phase 1 , holding that the treasury and interior secretaries had breached their fiduciary duties to the iim account holders . the transition to phase 2 proved difficult because the defendants were unable to submit — in forms acceptable to the court — plans for reforming the account - management system and for providing a historical accounting . two specific issues made it particularly difficult for doi to provide an accounting in the cobell litigation . the first of these issues was the fractionation of interests in many of the allotment lands . these interests have been fractionated over the years as they have been divided among the heirs of the original allottees , increasing exponentially with each generation and leading to incredibly small interests that are difficult to track . doi estimates that there are currently over 1.4 million fractional interests subdividing 58,000 tracts of land . while doi has stated that it can perform a transaction - by - transaction accounting of the judgment and per capita accounts and the sdas , the problems presented by the land - based accounts have proven very difficult to resolve . doi has argued that it should be able to use statistical sampling with respect to some of these accounts . when another similar bill was introduced to replace h.r .