evacuations can also be hazardous . according to some reports , more people died during the hurricane rita evacuation than from the actual hurricane . officials also need to take into account individuals who lack adequate transportation or have special needs because these individuals generally require more time to prepare to evacuate and travel out of the area . first is the departure of people from a stricken or threatened area . second are the temporary resettlement of evacuees , and the provision of shelter and resources to them . third is the final return of evacuees to either their predisaster residences or alternative locations . moving a population out of harm's way through evacuation can save lives and substantially reduce exposure to hazards . evacuations , however , can create complex challenges for officials and emergency managers . for instance , officials need to time the evacuation accurately to ensure the impending disaster does not occur while people are evacuating . in such cases , it may be safer to have the special - needs population remain in the area and "shelter in place. over the years , congressional concern regarding the equity , timing , and execution of evacuations has increased . much of this concern is attributable to the new orleans evacuation during the 2005 hurricane season , which has spurred numerous changes in federal evacuation policy . in general , federal policy defers to the states to enact laws pertinent to evacuation . using authority from state laws and local ordinances , state and local officials may suggest or require the evacuation of residents from homes and communities before certain catastrophes occur . rather than taking the lead in evacuations , the federal government facilitates the evacuation process through federal statutes that authorize agency heads to use federal resources to assist in the evacuation of civilians . brief descriptions of four federal authorities follow . during a review of issues related to evacuation , displacement , and sheltering policies , congress might move to consider options for better integrating federal , state , and local efforts during evacuation . congress might also review options that address issues of inequity or reform evacuation policy to make the decision to evacuate more precise , or take no action . prior to hurricane katrina , evacuations were primarily a state and local responsibility . because of lessons learned from hurricane katrina , federal policy now establishes national standards . federal legislation authorizing the return or relocation of evacuees was enacted after hurricane katrina . also , congress amended the stafford act to ensure that transportation - dependent groups are included in state and local evacuation plans . president obama's platform of addressing the requirements of special - needs populations in evacuation policy may also deepen federal involvement . as the federal government becomes more involved in evacuations , there may be a fundamental shift in the roles and responsibilities of the various actors involved in evacuations . federal assumption of more responsibility in evacuations creates standards and guidelines for states and localities to follow . while some may contend that this shift will save lives , others may argue that an increased federal role will intrude on state sovereignty , or result in an unfunded mandate .