these participants and possible impacts are discussed below . the future of the individual bond insurers revolve around the actual extent of their losses on asset - backed securities and whether or not they are able to retain their aaa ratings . while the answer to these questions are largely unknowable at the moment , the situation does seem to raise three significant policy questions: is an immediate federal government response necessary to address the situation and avert possible widespread losses and systemic risk ? was a regulatory failure at least partially responsible for allowing conditions for a potential crisis situation to exist ? what regulatory changes , in particular those addressing the use of derivatives , may prevent future financial instability ? even if the overall losses would be huge , for each individual bank or insurer affected , the most logical course of action may be to sit back and let somebody else put their money up to solve the problem . in such a case , government coordination , even if no government money is directly involved , might avert the larger loss . this was essentially the solution to the 1998 long term capital management ( ltcm ) failure that was brokered by the federal reserve . the bond insurer situation , however , is much more complicated than ltcm was . there are several bond insurers in difficulty and hundreds or thousands of institutions that could be affected if the insurers fail . to this point , the direct government intervention has been much less , than in the ltcm rescue . the primary government official pushing for some sort of solution right now is superintendent dinallo , who is the insurance regulator of the state where most bond insurers are based , but who does not have the same overall status that the leadership of the federal reserve did in the ltcm crisis . the current absence of federal involvement at the micro level points to the more macro questions about regulatory failure . the bond insurers , like all insurers , are state regulated entities . while most are domiciled in new york , the largest , ambac is domiciled in wisconsin , and the insurer most negatively affected by the current crisis , aca , is domiciled in maryland . questions by members of congress about whether state insurance regulators have the ability to ensure the solvency of insurers were raised in earnest in the late 1980s after several large insolvencies and have continued as the financial services marketplace has become increasingly complex since then . the current bond insurer difficulties will likely cause such questions to be raised again due to the central role played by the relatively new and sophisticated financial instruments , such as credit derivatives and collateralized debt obligations . in addition to the question of how insurers should be regulated , the crisis also may raise questions about whether and how financial derivatives , such as the credit default swaps offered by the bond insurers , should be regulated . currently , some derivatives trading is regulated by the commodity futures trading commission under the commodity exchange act .