some of these programs may no longer be receiving funding ; these programs are identified below . over 95% of the prison population today will be released at some point in the future . between 1990 and 2014 an average of 594,600 inmates were released annually from state and federal prisons . the department of justice's ( doj's ) bureau of justice statistics ( bjs ) has estimated that nearly three - quarters of all released prisoners will be rearrested within five years of their release and about 6 in 10 will be reconvicted . many studies have indicated that reentry initiatives that combine work training and placement with counseling and housing assistance can reduce recidivism rates . offender reentry includes all the activities and programming conducted to prepare ex - convicts to return safely to the community and to live as law - abiding citizens . reentry programs are typically divided into three phases: programs that prepare offenders to reenter society while they are in prison , programs that connect ex - offenders with services immediately after they are released from prison , and programs that provide long - term support and supervision for ex - offenders as they settle into communities permanently . offender reentry programs vary widely in range , scope , and methodology . the best - designed programs , according to the research in the field , are those that span all three phases . to understand the issue of offender reentry , one must first understand the ways in which ex - offenders are released into the community . it is also worthwhile to analyze the population of individuals serving sentences in correctional facilities , because the number of offenders re - entering the community is necessarily related to the number and type of offenders serving prison sentences . this section analyzes national data on the nation's correctional system . the vast majority of prisoners currently being detained in secure facilities will , someday , be released into the community , and more offenders are transitioning into the community today than ever before . offender reentry is a complex issue that touches on a wide range of social and governmental networks and programs . offender reentry policies can vary significantly from state to state , and from community to community within particular states . the policies affecting prisoners and the kinds of programs available to them both in and out of prison depend on a variety of factors , including the availability of funding for social programs within states and communities and the number of private nonprofit and religious organizations operating in a given community . the federal government plays a supporting role through the numerous grant funding opportunities ( discussed below ) . complicating factors affecting how offender reentry works in a given community can include the varying types of sentences handed down , the different kinds of release mechanisms available to judges , the types of programs provided in prisons by correctional systems , the intensity of supervision provided or required by the parole or releasing agency , the family and community support available to the offender , the kinds of social services available in the offender's community , and the status of the local economy and the offender's ability to obtain employment .