such cases also are invariably quite sensitive . doe might try to restrict such briefings to committee leadership . as a result , committee leadership could find themselves assuming a significant oversight responsibility . a second approach would be for congress to commission an assessment of any benefits that have been derived from the doe fi / ci consolidation . such an assessment could enable congress to better evaluate whether the consolidation has indeed improved communication between the two disciplines , as doe has suggested . as part of such an assessment , the department's senior intelligence officer could be requested to demonstrate with concrete examples how the department's fi / ci consolidated program has led to certain program synergies which could not have otherwise been achieved through greater management resourcefulness . other than the cost that may be associated with conducting such an assessment , there is no apparent disadvantage to such approach . another approach congress could pursue is to ensure that doe complied with the law when it consolidated the office of intelligence and counterintelligence under the new office of intelligence and counterintelligence . some have questioned whether the consolidation is consistent with current law , suggesting that consolidation amounted to a "transfer of function" from the office of counterintelligence or the office of intelligence to a new layer of bureaucracy within the office of intelligence and counterintelligence . first , should the 2010 sunset provision currently in law be retained and nnsa's ci office be reestablished in 2010 ? second , should doe's fi / ci consolidated program be retained , or should congress direct doe to reestablish independent fi and ci offices within doe ? within the context of these two overarching questions , the range of possible options include ( 1 ) eliminate the 2010 sunset provision contained in p.l . 109 - 364 and not reestablish nnsa's ci office in 2010 ; retain doe's fi / ci consolidated program ; ( 2 ) maintain the 2010 sunset provision and reestablish nnsa's ci office , but as an office independent of doe , dropping the previously existing bifurcated ci structure ; retain doe's fi / ci consolidated program ; ( 3 ) eliminate both the 2010 sunset provision and doe's fi / ci consolidated program , reestablishing independent fi and ci offices within doe ; ( 4 ) maintain the 2010 sunset provision and reestablish nnsa's ci office , but consolidate within that office doe's ci directorate ; retain doe's fi / ci consolidated program ; ( 5 ) maintain the 2010 sunset provision and reestablish nnsa's ci on a bifurcated basis under which nnsa and doe would share certain ci resources ; eliminate doe's fi / ci consolidated program and reestablish independent fi and ci offices within doe ; and ( 6 ) place the fbi in charge of doe ci . the congress also could consider adopting one or more of several oversight alternatives . the range of alternatives includes ( 1 ) instituting classified ci briefings ; ( 2 ) commissioning a formal assessment of the benefits derived from doe's fi / ci consolidation ; ( 3 ) ensuring doe compliance with current law ; and ( 4 ) codifying portions of pdd - 61 .