three smaller parties won the remaining seats . during the campaign , duarte portrayed himself as a strong leader , and he promised to implement widespread institutional reforms , prioritize the fight against corruption and establish a transparent government . as discussed below , president duarte has enacted reforms that tackle tax evasion and corruption . since his election , however , the president's popularity has declined because of public concerns about rising crime and unemployment . as a result , he has resorted to more populist rhetoric as a means of retaining support for the colorado party . the paraguayan economy , which remains heavily dependent upon its traditional agricultural exports of soybeans , cotton , and meat , grew by 4.3% in 2006 , and 6.4% in 2007 , fueled by soybean production . paraguay lacks significant mineral and petroleum resources , but possesses vast hydroelectric resources , including the world's largest hydroelectric generation facility , the itaipú dam , built and operated jointly with brazil . remittances from paraguayans living abroad have significantly contributed to sustained economic growth . according to the inter - american development bank , remittances totaled some $700 million in 2007 . paraguay experienced an economic recession for several years in the aftermath of a succession of bank failures from 1996-1998 that wiped out half of paraguay's locally owned banks . when elected in 2003 , president duarte inherited a government that had defaulted on $138 million in debt , primarily as a result of low tax revenue . under president duarte , the economy rebounded , due in part to the implementation of reforms that include anti - corruption initiatives , which have increased revenue , strengthened institutions , and created a more favorable environment for foreign investment . paraguay is heavily influenced by the economic conditions of its larger neighbors , argentina and brazil , which are fellow members of the common market of the south ( mercosur ) . as one of the smaller countries of mercosur , paraguay has complained that its exports face significant restrictions entering argentina and brazil . paraguay's industrial sector is still largely underdeveloped , with much of the population still employed in subsistence agriculture . economic growth tends to be limited by paraguay's imports of manufactured goods , as well capital goods that are necessary to supply the industrial and investment requirements of the economy . paraguay's informal sector is very large , estimated at about half of the country's gross domestic product , and is estimated to employ over 40% of wage - earning workers . a significant part of the country's commercial sector consists of importing goods from the united states and asia for re - export into neighboring countries . most of these imported goods are not declared at customs , preventing the government from obtaining substantial tax revenue . counterfeit trade and smuggling are prevalent in the country's border regions . paraguay and the united states have good relations , cooperating extensively on counternarcotics and counterterrorism efforts . the united states strongly supports the consolidation of paraguay's democracy and continued economic reforms . president duarte is viewed by many observers as very pro - u.s. and became the first paraguayan head of state to be received at the oval office .