the fws does not have general authority to dispose of its lands . with certain exceptions , wildlife refuge lands administered by the fws can be disposed only by an act of congress ( 16 u.s.c . they include ( 1 ) exchanges and sales under flpma , ( 2 ) sales or exchanges under the fltfa , ( 3 ) transfers to other governmental units or nonprofit entities for public purposes , ( 4 ) patents under the general mining law of 1872 , and ( 5 ) geographically limited sale authorities . §§2301 et seq .

 ) the exchange authorities for the nps and the fws are relatively narrow . the federal land policy and management act of 1976 ( flpma ; 43 u.s.c . this report describes the primary authorities of the four agencies . the extent to which each of the agencies has authority to acquire and dispose of land , and the nature of the authorities , varies considerably . some of the agencies have relatively broad authority to acquire and / or dispose of land . most notably , the blm has relatively broad authority for both acquisitions and disposals . by contrast , the nps has no general authority to acquire land to create new park units or to dispose of park lands . the extent of the acquisition and disposal authorities for the fs and the fws are not nearly as broad as the blm's but not nearly as restrictive as the nps's . the fs authority to acquire lands is mostly limited to lands within or contiguous to the boundaries of a national forest . the agency has various authorities to dispose of land , but they are relatively constrained and infrequently used . the fws has various authorities to acquire lands but no general authority to dispose of its lands . the acquisition authorities differ as to the circumstances in which they apply , and the disposal authorities likewise differ as to their purposes . thus , where a specific acquisition or disposal by an agency is contemplated , the particular authority at issue should be consulted . in general , the acquisition authorities are designed to allow federal agencies to acquire lands that could be viewed as benefitting from federal management . among other circumstances , acquisition might be authorized to bring inholdings or lands adjacent to federal lands into federal ownership to improve or simplify management of federal lands . acquisitions also might be authorized to conserve species , protect natural and cultural resources , and increase opportunities for recreation . the disposal authorities generally are designed to allow federal agencies to dispose of land that is no longer required for a federal purpose , might be inefficient to manage , or might be chiefly valuable for another purpose . for instance , disposal might be authorized to allow lands to be used for agriculture , community development , mineral extraction , or educational purposes . agencies also acquire and dispose of federal land in exchanges . exchanges are not discussed separately in this report , as often the authorities to acquire and dispose of lands also apply to land exchange . however , there are provisions of law particularly applicable to exchanges .