like h.r . 1962 , s. 987 defines a "federal entity" as "an entity or employee of the judicial or executive branch or an administrative agency of the federal government with the power to issue a subpoena or issue other compulsory process," but does not include the legislative branch . the privilege provision in the bill would not apply in state courts or other state entities or to state law claims that were brought in federal court . s. 987 defines those eligible to invoke the privilege more narrowly than the house version described above . under the senate bill , "covered persons" would be defined as those individuals , and the organizations that employ them , who investigate events and procure material via collection of documents , interviews , personal observations , and analysis on a regular basis ; have primary intent to disseminate such news and analysis at the inception of the information gathering process ; and obtain the information or news in order to disseminate the news to the public by one of the many means of distributing media . one of the primary differences between this definition and the house bill's definition is that it explicitly requires that the person have the intent to disseminate the information at the beginning of the information gathering process . furthermore , the senate bill provides a longer list of individuals that would be excluded from the definition of covered persons including agents of foreign powers , individuals on the terrorist watch list , those affiliated with designated terrorist organizations , and those who have committed terrorist acts . whereas h.r . 1962 would apply to all information obtained or created by covered persons as part of engaging in journalism , s. 987 would apply only to a subset of such information , which the bill would define as "protected information. the main difference between the bills is that s. 987 would protect information gathered by covered persons engaged in journalism if that information were obtained upon a promise of confidentiality or if the information would reveal the identity of a confidential source who had provided information to the covered person under a promise of confidentiality . s. 987 would create a tiered system for the federal government to obtain information from covered persons in which it would be most difficult to obtain information in the course of a civil case , and least difficult to obtain information in the course of a criminal case or investigation , particularly one that involves matters of national security . more specifically , under the bill , federal entities would not be allowed to compel disclosure of "protected information" from a "covered person," unless a court , after notice and an opportunity for the "covered person" to be heard , determined that one of the following exceptions applied .