appendix a . historical background palestinian political identity emerged during the british mandate period ( 1923-1948 ) , began to crystallize with the 1947 united nations partition plan ( general assembly resolution 181 ) , and grew stronger following israel's conquest and occupation of the west bank and gaza strip in 1967 . although in 1947 the united nations intended to create two states in palestine — one jewish and one arab — only the jewish state came into being . varying explanations for the failure to found an arab state alongside a jewish state in mandatory palestine place blame on the british , the zionists , neighboring arab states , the palestinians themselves , or some combination of these groups . as the state of israel won its independence in 1947-1948 , roughly 700,000 palestinians were driven or fled from their homes , an occurrence palestinians call the nakba ( "catastrophe" ) . many ended up in neighboring states ( egypt , syria , lebanon , and jordan ) or in gulf states such as kuwait . palestinians remaining in israel became israeli citizens . those who were in the west bank ( including east jerusalem ) and gaza were subject to jordanian and egyptian administration , respectively . with their population in disarray , and no clear hierarchical structure or polity to govern their affairs , palestinians' interests were largely represented by arab states who had conflicting interests . 1967 was a watershed year for the palestinians . in the june six - day war , israel decisively defeated the arab states who had styled themselves as the palestinians' protectors , seizing east jerusalem , the west bank , and the gaza strip ( as well as the sinai peninsula from egypt and the golan heights from syria ) . thus , israel gained control over the entire area that constituted palestine under the british mandate . israel's territorial gains provided buffer zones between israel's main jewish population centers and its traditional arab state antagonists . these buffer zones remain an important part of the israeli strategic calculus to this day . after the 1967 war , israel only effectively annexed east jerusalem ( as well as the golan heights ) , leaving the west bank and gaza under military occupation . however , both territories became increasingly economically linked with israel . furthermore , israel presided over the settlement of thousands of jewish civilians in both territories ( although many more in the west bank than gaza ) — officially initiating some of these projects and assuming security responsibility for all of them . settlement of the west bank increased markedly once the likud party , with its vision of a "greater israel" extending from the mediterranean sea to the jordan river , took power in 1977 . having israelis settle in the west bank presented some economic and cultural opportunities for palestinians , but also new challenges to their identity and cohesion , civil rights , and territorial contiguity . these challenges persist and have since intensified . the arab states' defeat in 1967 , and israeli rule and settlement of the west bank and gaza , allowed the palestine liberation organization ( plo ) to emerge as the representative of palestinian national aspirations .