both may play a role . as is discussed later in this report , mandated refinery investments have been required in diesel fuel refining to meet new product specifications . at this time , the price support for diesel fuel is primarily demand - driven , with the united states competing for world supply to supplement domestic production of middle distillates with product imports . it could be anticipated that , at some point , the price of a fuel could reach a level where there is some demand response . it is unclear what these price points may be . however , owing to the primary use of diesel fuel in the commercial sector for the delivery of goods and some services , demand for diesel is likely to be less elastic because , as has been noted , those costs will be passed on to consumers . demand outside the united states may also prove to be less elastic . gasoline is among the lighter components . diesel fuel and home heating oil come from the portion of the barrel that is termed "middle distillates" because the feedstock for these fuels settle out roughly in the middle of the distillation tower . crude oil itself is of varying densities , as well as sulfur content , generally distinguished as "light" or "heavy," or high and low quality oil . it is expressly because refiners often absorb the initial increases in crude prices that some are predicting that , if crude prices remain roughly in their current range or go higher , further price increases in all highway fuels are likely . how steep these increases may prove to be will depend very critically on the demand response to the price of motor fuels . the heavier fractions are recovered from the bottom where the heat is greatest . light crude will furnish a higher percentage of lighter products than heavy crude ; additional processing can increase the yield of lighter products from the heavier end of the barrel , but will add to product costs . once distilled , gasoline and middle distillates are further processed "downstream," where the addition of blending components and other steps create the finished petroleum products that are released to markets . the typical yields from a barrel of crude oil of gasoline and middle distillates range , respectively , around 45-47% and 25-27% depending on the time of year ( see table 1 ) . typically , refiners take some of their facilities offline for brief periods to perform maintenance and make seasonal adjustments to slightly favor the yield of gasoline or middle distillates . during the spring , refiners seek to build inventories of gasoline for the summer driving season . conversely , production of home heating oil for the heating season is maximized beginning during the summer . gasoline consumption has been averaging 9.0 million barrels daily ( mbd ) , while all distillate consumption is roughly 4.5 mbd . in 2007 , u.s. imports of middle distillates averaged 348,000 b / d in 2007 . as is discussed later in this report , world demand for middle distillates has grown and added to the pressure on prices for middle distillate imports .