consider implementation issues . the dod's analysis of the four alternatives evaluated against the six criteria resulted in the highest rankings for alternative a: improvements to the existing open - market dba system ; and alternative d: federal self - insurance with third - party administration . specifically , improving the existing open - market system was predicted to best minimize overhead and coverage costs ; provide the best correlation of premiums paid to claims incurred ; and provided the lowest risk to dod . federal self - insurance with third - party administration was predicted to best provided for a competitive marketplace and be the easiest to implement . although the dod's analysis of four major policy alternatives is comprehensive , there are limitations to its utility as a guide for congress in making changes to the overall dba system . the dod report only focuses on dod contractors and while these make up the bulk of dba - covered firms , other contracting agencies , such as dos and usaid may have different experiences and issues than dod and dod's recommended policy changes may not be as successful if applied across the entire federal government . two of the six criteria used to evaluate the four alternatives also serve to limit the utility of the dod analysis . congress required dod to consider the how each alternative provided for a competitive dba marketplace . this requirement may have biased the study against policy options , such as self - insurance or single or limited - source contracts for dba insurance which , by definition , do not support a competitive marketplace but which may still be viable policy options for congress to consider . in its analysis , dod added an additional criteria based on the ease of policy implementation . evaluations of alternatives against this criterion were based , in part , on how quickly policy changes could be made and whether or not federal laws or regulations would need to be changed . it is understandable that dod would consider this criterion necessary , given the time and cooperation within the executive branch and with the congress that regulatory and statutory changes would require . however , when looking at alternatives for making changes to the national dba program , congress may not want to limit itself to alternatives that provide for easy implementation . the dod report identified making improvements to the existing open - market dba system as one of the preferred alternatives . benefits are also paid to survivors of covered workers killed on the job . although many federal agencies have had or currently have overseas contracts subject to the dba , the departments of state ( dos ) and defense ( dod ) and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) are the major dba contractors operating in iraq and afghanistan . these agencies take different approaches to contracting for insurance services under the dba . dos and usaid have awarded competitive contracts through the use of blanket contracts , with fixed rates , to a single provider for each agency . in contrast , under the dod approach private contractors negotiate individually with private insurers .