these are discussed below in " other factors . the fact that parties are not acting in the most economically efficient manner at $0 / mtco 2 - e , calls into question the estimates for higher prices and further demonstrates the uncertainty contained in mitigation potential estimates . policy decisions from congress , u.s. states , and foreign governments would directly and indirectly affect the supply of offsets in a cap - and - trade program . the primary factor would be the design of the cap - and - trade system . other policies would also help shape the pool of offsets that could be used for compliance purposes . these policy choices are discussed below . how many offsets would be available as a compliance option if congress enacted a cap - and - trade program ? although economic models have generated estimates of offsets developed and used in a cap - and - trade system , the estimates are rife with uncertainty . this report examines the multiple variables that help shape offset supply . it is difficult to estimate the supply of offsets that might be available in a cap - and - trade system , because the supply is determined by many variables , including policy choices . figure 1 illustrates the various inputs and variables that would affect the potential supply of offsets in a cap - and - trade program . these factors — mitigation potential , policy choices , economic factors , emission allowance price , and other factors — are each discussed below . as figure 1 indicates , the factors do not act in isolation , but interact in a complex manner . mitigation potential is not synonymous with offset supply potential ( figure 1 ) . some of the activities included in mitigation potential estimates would likely not qualify as offsets in a cap - and - trade system . a striking example is biofuel production , which has been projected by some studies to play a substantial role in ghg mitigation in later years . by placing a price on carbon , a cap - and - trade program is expected to increase biofuel and biomass production . if a power plant substitutes a carbon - intensive fuel ( eg , coal ) with a less carbon - intensive fuel ( eg , biomass , such as switchgrass ) , the plant's ghg emissions would decrease . these emission reductions would be counted directly by the power plant . the increased biofuel use would mitigate ghg emissions , but would not count as an offset in a cap - and - trade program , because the reductions ( from the fuel substitution ) would be made directly by covered sources . mitigation potential estimates are often used as inputs for economic models of cap - and - trade legislation . for example , epa's 2009 mitigation potential estimates were used in the epa and energy information administration's ( eia ) analyses of h.r . both of these analyses generated estimates of the number and type of offsets that would be used by covered sources for compliance purposes . however , these offset supply estimates are imperfect , because the underlying data — mitigation potential estimates — contain considerable uncertainty .