oil prices have been volatile in 2008 . the stewfo uses a projected oil price of $100 per barrel in 2008 , and $51 in 2009 . if the price stays below $50 per barrel , as observed early in december 2008 , heating oil expenditures could be even less than projected . if the price of oil spikes to levels above projected values , the stewfo could underestimate expenditures . with a deteriorating economic condition , lower oil and petroleum product prices , and an unstable , tight world oil market , the price level for oil is uncertain . propane provides primary home heating for approximately 6.5 million households in the united states , or 6% of the total households supplied with fuels covered in this report . propane consumers are projected to experience a 12.4% , or $209 , decrease in expenditures this winter heating season . eia expects the number of propane consumers to decline by about 1.1% during 2008 and 2009 . however , expenditure decreases for this heat source are less than those expected for home heating oil consumers . consumption is expected to increase , but the price decreases expected for propane , about 14.3% , are less than those expected for heating oil , 23.5% . regionally , only 12% of households in the northeast use electricity , while 59% use electricity in the south . on average , electricity consumers can expect to pay 7.9% more for winter heating in 2008-2009 than in 2007-2008 . this increase is as a result of 6.5% higher prices for electricity as well as higher usage rates due to the expected colder temperatures . eia expects overall electricity demand growth in 2008 to be about 1% and flat during 2009 . as a result , little in the way of new demand will stress the generation and distribution system . electricity prices are directly affected by the cost of raw materials , notably natural gas prices , and coal prices , which are expected to continue to decrease from the peaks attained earlier in 2008 . the primary risk factors concerning the stewfo are the weather and economic conditions . total household expenditures on heating are equal to the price that must be paid times the quantity of fuel used . the weather , measured by the number of heating degree days , largely determines quantity of fuel used . conservation , in the form of reducing the temperature inside the house can also reduce the quantity of fuel consumed , but for a given desired temperature , heating degree days is the key factor . the 2008-2009 winter heating season is expected to be colder than recent winter seasons . the level of economic activity factor is open to several interpretations . loss of jobs and income would tend to depress consumption , but natural gas used for heating and cooking is a necessity for most consumers . also , it is unknown how deep the current recession is likely to be . oil prices are loosely linked to natural gas prices . historically , the linkage was through fuel substitution ; however , fuel oil is now only a minor competitor to natural gas in terms of fuel substitution .