for example . when is an emergency medical technician 'a professional' or simply a staffer with very serious work but with no real 'professional' responsibility ? how about a funeral director , a journalist , a paralegal , or a chef ? in each of these fields ( and in many others ) , a clear distinction between exempt and non - exempt must rest upon a precise analysis of the work that is being performed: the duties test . a number of questions need to be asked . does the worker exercise independent discretion and judgment ? does he have a choice of work assignments and some measure of independence over the content of his work ? does she have the power to hire or fire subordinates ? the duties test can be enormously complex , involving categories of workers across the entire spectrum . it can also be a source of near endless litigation as persons move into and out of exempt or non - exempt status . the new rule is in place and being tested . during recent months , the department has been engaged in numerous reevaluations of the work processes of eap workers . mainly , these reviews and analyses deal with the duties test ; but , such efforts tend to be of limited reach , often resting upon a specific case and particular assumptions and unable to be applied , with confidence , to general categories of workers . in early 2004 , prior to release of the final rule , labor secretary elaine chao stated that the "primary goal" of the proposed rule "is to have better rules in place that will benefit more workers" — especially "low - wage workers. its intent , she affirmed , is "to restore overtime protections , especially to low - wage , vulnerable workers who have little bargaining power with employers. ms. chao added: "clear , concise and updated rules will better protect workers and strengthen the department's ability to enforce the law. when the final rule was released in april 2004 , ms. chao stated: "the department is very proud of the final rule. she added that she was "pleased to see people recognize the significant gains to workers under our final rule" and noted that "there can be no doubt that workers win. but , again , there are two tests involved . raising the qualifying floor to $23,660 may be a "win" for certain low income workers . how the law ( or regulation ) might affect a worker , earning $30,000 a year ( higher than required but , in some regions , a low wage ) , assigned as a 'primary duty' an executive or administrative or professional function , and be stripped of his / her overtime pay protections , may be less clear . the dispute continued through the implementation date in august 2004 and into the 109 th congress ( 2005 ) , but largely without effect . "the predictions were not accurate," howard radzely , then dol's solicitor , was quoted as saying shortly after the new regulations had gone into effect . "almost without exception , the reports indicate people are gaining overtime protection.