in response to the e.o. , congress could include in statutory text what otherwise would have been non - statutory earmarks . alternatively , congress could incorporate by reference in statutory text any items contained in non - statutory documents . if congress wished to strengthen , weaken , prevent , repeal , or otherwise alter the directions specified in the e.o . or is it "political" in a different way ? what role does access to elected or appointed officials , either directly or through lobbyists , play in budgetary decision making in the executive branch ? given the apparent room for the exercise of discretion by congress , the president , and agency officials at various points in the budget process , how should constitutional obligations and powers be reconciled with practical considerations and concerns ? how may diverse views about representation , constitutionally prescribed responsibilities , effectiveness , efficiency , equity , transparency , ethics , and accountability be reconciled ? in addition , the president proposed that congress stop including earmarks in report language and instead place them in statute . he expressed his intention to enforce the proposal with his executive order . congress and agencies have a long history of using report language to guide agency decisions , facilitate communications and accountability , and provide more specificity in expectations about actions or funding . interaction with agencies through report language at times may provide flexibility to agencies that would not be available if provisions were included in statute . some observers see report language as allowing insufficient scrutiny in the legislative process , as the administration has argued . others , however , see report language as facilitating two - way communication between congress and agencies . one analyst judged that "controls" in report language have "proved to be a helpful device in permitting the delegation of discretionary authority to the agencies while at the same time retaining close legislative review. what implications does the president's executive order have for congress , the president , and agencies , in terms of control over the design and implementation of public policies ? what are the potential consequences for relations and communications between appropriations committees and agencies ? if agencies ignore expressions of congressional intent related to earmarks under orders from the president , will that have implications for how executive agencies respond to other communications contained in report language ? debates over earmark definitions and transparency have taken place for some time , but no generally accepted definitions of earmark - related terms appear to have been established . scrutiny , in turn , might confer some perception of merit for budget allocations that are able to withstand the scrutiny . it is not clear if the administration has included in its online database all instances of earmarks that agencies and the white house received through "other communication. pursuing that option might provide insight into how the administration and agencies respond to congressionally originated earmarks that are not contained in bill or report language and whether items were included on a selective basis .