egypt refused . hamas itself has expressed a desire to see the border reopened and managed by the palestinian authority . ironically , both of these positions pose challenges for egypt , which wants to keep hamas isolated , but not be held solely responsible for failing to do so by either israel or the united states . nevertheless , as violence between israel and hamas and other palestinian factions in the gaza strip continues , these issues will continue to fester . with hamas showing no indication that it is ready to renounce its stated goal of israel's destruction , all parties would appear to be a long way from seeing the gaza - egypt - israeli region at peace . if rafah crossing would open properly for trade , i may quit tunnelling. palestinian families divided by the partition of rafah in 1982 appear to have been the first to construct underground tunnels linking gaza and egypt to foster communication amongst extended family members . over time , rafah residents developed an economic rationale for tunneling , as smugglers could resell subsidized egyptian gasoline at a high profit in gaza . other smuggled items included u.s. dollars for money changers , wedding dowries , mail , cartons of cigarettes , drugs ( marijuana and heroin ) , gold , and spare car parts . israel became aware of the security dimension of smuggling tunnels during the first palestinian intifadah ( uprising ) , which began in 1987 . section 690 of p.l . 110-161 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 , withholds the obligation of $100 million in foreign military financing until the secretary of state certifies , among other things , that egypt has taken concrete steps to "detect and destroy the smuggling network and tunnels that lead from egypt to gaza. this withholding of fmf represents the first time that congress has successfully placed conditions on u.s. military assistance to egypt . the united states , which occasionally is thrust into the middle of disputes between israel and egypt , has attempted to broker a solution to the smuggling problem which is amenable to all parties . in the fall of 2007 , a department of defense delegation toured the gaza - egypt border , and the u.s. army corps of engineers drafted a geological assessment of the underground smuggling tunnels . as a result , the u.s. government has offered to allocate $23 million of egypt's annual foreign military financing ( fmf ) toward the procurement of more advanced detection equipment , such as censors and remote - controlled robotic devices . it is uncertain when this new equipment will be purchased and delivered . the divided border city of rafah has been the epicenter of smuggling for decades . rafah was divided under the terms of the 1979 israel - egypt peace treaty , which placed the more densely populated rafah city in the then israeli - occupied gaza strip and a much smaller town in egyptian controlled territory .