figure 1 . number of state presidential primaries , 1912-2008source: harold w. stanley and richard g. niemi , vital statistics on american politics , 2007-2008 . ( washington , dc: cq press , 2008 ) , p. 70 . for 2008 , figures are from the national association of secretaries of state ; 2012 figures are from the green papers website , available at http: / / www.thegreenpapers.com / . the reforms of the 1970s fundamentally changed the structure of the nominating system and , in turn , led to changes in the dynamics of nomination politics . under the old system , the drama of choosing the party's candidate occurred at the convention , where party leaders who controlled blocs of delegates would broker the choice of nominee . reform redirected the suspense of the nomination contest to the states , where presidential candidates sought support directly from voters in primaries and caucuses , with the media highlighting the results . this new dynamic boosted the importance of the earliest events in iowa and new hampshire , which eventually set off a trend toward rescheduling in other states in order to better attract candidate and media attention . the front - loading phenomenon has prevailed for more than 20 years , but may have abated somewhat as a result of controversy over the calendar in 2008 . for the first time since 1952 , the nomination contest for both parties did not include an incumbent president or vice president . a crowded field of republican and democratic candidates entered the race as a result . despite a fast - paced primary and caucus calendar that was expected to narrow the field quickly , that was not the case on the democratic side . some observers had suggested that an inconclusive primary season would result in a "brokered" convention , whereby the nominee would be chosen at the convention based on dealmaking and bargaining . speculation about such an outcome focused attention on the "superdelegates," a category of automatic , unpledged delegates who are not required to declare a presidential candidate preference . the last democratic nomination contest to feature a questionable convention outcome was in 1980 , before the creation of the superdelegate category . the 1984 democratic convention was the first to include superdelegates , who were added in response to rule changes that had sharply reduced the influence of party leaders and democratic office holders on the nominating process ( see preceding section of this report ) . following president carter's defeat in 1980 , the party added superdelegates as a counterbalance to the influence of rank - and - file voters . the superdelegates were introduced to promote party cohesion and to rally support for future nominees among party professionals and democrats in congress . it was believed that party leaders and elected officials , given their own political experience and knowledge , could also help with evaluating and selecting nominees . initially , the superdelegates were approximately 14% of all convention delegates ; they accounted for 20% of those who attended the 2008 convention .