the house passed a bill ( h.r . none would affect the operation of the top . at the center of congressional debate on the issue is the medicare provider accountability act , which has been introduced in the house ( h.r . 4287 ) and the senate ( s. 1307 ) . the act would require the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) to make its payments to health care providers and vendors under medicare parts a and b available for screening for delinquent tax debt under the fplp over two years: 50% of payments would be screened the first year and 100% of payments the following year . in addition , the proposal would subject these cms payments to screening under top in a bid to recover more non - tax debt , such as unpaid child support and student loans . finally it would implement a recommendation by an interagency federal task force ( the federal contractor tax compliance task force , or fctc ) to speed up the process for recovering unpaid taxes through the fplp . under current law , the irs has to send four tax bills and a special levy notice to a taxpayer before the agency can impose a levy on any property held by that individual or company . 4287 / s. 1307 would streamline the process by enabling the irs to initiate a levy of eligible federal payments to a tax debtor after what is known as a "notice and demand" for payment has been sent but before any levy notice and appeal proceedings have begun . congressional interest in the systematic offset of medicare payments to providers under parts a and b has grown in response to a report issued by the government accountability office ( gao ) at a hearing held by the senate homeland security and governmental affairs permanent subcommittee on investigations on march 20 , 2007 . the report found that the cms had no "mechanism to prevent physicians , health professionals , and suppliers who have tax debts from enrolling in or receiving payments from medicare. though the fplp had been in operation since 1997 , the cms had not participated in it or an interagency task force formed to improve the program's effectiveness . in the view of gao researchers , this lack of involvement has entailed a significant loss of federal revenue over time . in their estimate , if cms payments to health - care providers and vendors for part b alone had been subject to levy through the fplp , the federal government might have collected between $50 million and $140 million in delinquent taxes in the first nine months of 2005 . as of september 30 , 2005 , according to the report , more than 21,000 physicians , health care providers , and suppliers who received medicare part b payments owed over $1 billion in unpaid federal income , payroll , excise , unemployment , and other taxes . most of these taxpayers were organized for tax purposes as either sole proprietors or limited liability companies . 4848 ) in february 2008 that included a provision directing cms to participate in the fplp . it will be updated to reflect recent developments affecting either program .