appendix a . current u.s. legal immigration preference system appendix b . new zealand point system requirements basic requirements principal applicants under the skilled migrant category are assessed against: health , character and english language requirements ; and employability and capacity building requirements ; and settlement and contribution requirements . an application under the skilled migrant category will be approved if: the principal applicant and family members included in the application meet health and character , and english language requirements where required ; and the principal applicant qualifies for the points for employability and capacity building factors on the basis of which their expression of interest was selected from the pool ; or the principal applicant meets the criteria set from time to time by the minister of immigration on the basis of which their expression of interest was selected from the pool ; and the principal applicant is less than 56 years of age ; and the principal applicant is assessed as having the ability to successfully settle in and contribute to new zealand ; and all necessary verification of the application has been completed . the themes highlighted below are illustrative of the multifaceted aspects of this debate . nations currently using points systems , such as those discussed above , typically seek to tailor the selection process to recruit immigrants most likely to invigorate their economies . the stated objectives are generally to encourage migration that complements shortfalls and skill mismatches in their labor forces , coupled with other factors that are thought to correlate with success . the challenge for policy makers is adapting a point system — a method that is typically used to encourage migration — to manage the high - demand migration context of the united states . in this debate , "passing marks" and per - country ceilings will become key elements . the current preference system for selecting lprs to the united states is largely based upon relationships that are personal . more specifically , prospective lprs qualify either through marriage and close familial relationships and through the employer - employee relationships . a point system might well move the selection process away from the judgements of individuals and needs of local labor markets to a standardized set of criteria based on national priorities . at issue in this context is who / what is perceived to be the proper people / optimal entity to determine who will be permitted to come to the united states . whether a point system ( or any new mechanism for selecting immigrants ) is augmenting an existing selection system or replacing an existing selection system , it affects the debate . establishing a new stream of immigrants is likely to spark objections among those who oppose increasing immigration levels . if , alternatively , a point system replaces an existing set of immigration preference categories then stakeholders in the current system are likely to oppose it . if a point system creates an independent stream of immigrants it might reduce the control of employers over the selection process and bypass the labor market protections for u.s. workers . given that many policy makers as well as observers view immigration policy as a "zero - sum game," this aspect may be the most contentious of all .