the senate committee recommended the same amount . more than two - thirds of the foods program budget is devoted to field activities . the primary focus of the request was the protecting america's food supply initiative , including implementing the goals of fda's food protection plan , released in november 2007 . key challenges for the program include whether the agency's resources are adequate to oversee the number and diversity of facilities in the food system , and whether the agency's approach to inspection is properly aligned toward food safety risks , especially for imports of produce and seafood . the agency supports six program areas . five of these administer fda's regulatory responsibilities for products and are discussed later in this report . the sixth , toxicological research , is non - regulatory and involves activities ( including scientific research , technical advice , and training ) to inform fda's regulatory decisions . it is funded through both budget authority and user fees authorized by the prescription drug user fee act ( pdufa ) . the fy2009 request for the human drugs program was $789 million ( $407 million in budget authority and $381 million in user fees ) , a $80 million ( 11.3% ) increase over fy2008 . the requested amount for user fees included increased revenues from pdufa ( up $26.5 million to $354 million ) , a new user fee for the advisory review of dtc television advertisements ( $12 million ) , and a proposed new user fee program to support the review of generic drug applications ( generic drug user fee act , gdufa , $15 million ) . the senate committee recommendation ( $763 million total ) matched the budget authority request , but did not include the requested fees for dtc advertisement review or the proposed gdufa . key challenges for the program include ensuring the safety of imported drugs and ingredients , and identifying and acting on emerging safety and effectiveness information about drugs once they are on the market . the biologics program is responsible for ensuring the safety , purity , potency , and effectiveness of biological products . the program carries out its regulatory responsibilities in three areas: blood and blood products ; vaccines and allergenics ; and cells , tissues , and gene therapies . it is administered by fda's center for biologics evaluation and research ( cber ) and operates with both budget authority and user fees authorized by pdufa and the medical device user fee act ( mdufa ) . the fy2009 request for the biologics program was $268 million ( $181 million in budget authority and $87 million in user fees ) , a $19 million ( 7.8% ) increase over fy2008 . the increase would provide additional budget authority to cover blood and tissue safety , and to help cover a cost - of - living pay increase for the entire program . the requested amount for user fees includes increased revenue from pdufa ( up $4.3 million to $74.4 million ) , mdufa ( up almost $1 million to $11.5 million ) , and the new fee for review of dtc advertisements ( $1.4 million ) .