some remain dissatisfied with tsca . for example , in the 110 th congress , s. 742 , as reported by the senate committee on environment and public works , and h.r . 6903 would have banned many asbestos - containing materials . numerous states also have acted to control risks from chemicals that are not regulated under tsca . in addition , many nations have joined together to regulate persistent , organic , pollutants and persistent , bioaccumulative toxic substances in ways that the united states cannot under the current provisions of tsca . the european union adopted a new law , reach , that takes a different approach to the regulation of chemicals , eliminating the distinction between new and existing chemicals and requiring manufacturers to identify hazards and manage risks for all uses of their chemicals . multinational companies , therefore , may have to comply with multiple , possibly redundant or conflicting regulations . even if one concludes that tsca has performed successfully in the past , it may be reasonable to question the adequacy of a 1976 chemical law in the light of 30 years of scientific and technological advances . in particular , nanotechnology and gmo advances pose new challenges that many feel require clarified and possibly augmented authority under tsca , to protect human health and the environment . in 1991 , the u.s. court of appeals for the fifth circuit vacated and remanded an epa rule promulgated under section 6 that prohibited the manufacture , importation , processing , and distribution of asbestos in almost all products . the substantive heart of the corrosion proof decision was its conclusion that epa had insufficiently justified its ban . this conclusion was based on two grounds . first , the court said that epa failed to give adequate weight to section 6 ( a ) insistence that the regulatory approach chosen by epa be the "least burdensome" to achieve the agency - determined acceptable level of ( non - zero ) risk . epa's burden was especially difficult here , because the court noted that in imposing an asbestos ban , epa chose the most burdensome of the options afforded by section 6 ( a ) . by analyzing only two scenarios — the ban and no tsca regulation at all — the court held that epa failed to show , as tsca requires , that there was not some intermediate regulation that would achieve the acceptable risk level . "[t]he proper course for the epa to follow is to consider each regulatory option , beginning with the least burdensome , and the costs and benefits of regulation under each option. only such an exercise assures that the agency has not skipped a less - burdensome alternative . second , the court said epa also must present a stronger case for a ban of products for which substitutes are not now available ( as describes some of the asbestos products covered by the ban here ) , than of products for which substitutes are available . as to asbestos products for which substitutes are now available , epa declined to consider the harm from a probable substitute's increased use , even where it is a known carcinogen , the court added .