this report will not be updated . in 2005 , crs retained a contractor , the national opinion research center ( norc ) at the university of chicago , to create a database that could be used to analyze state pandemic preparedness and response plans . norc delivered the database to crs , containing information abstracted from one publicly available pandemic planning document from each of the 50 states and the district of columbia ( dc ) , in august 2006 . the most comprehensive publicly available document was used for analysis . available documents varied , and included ( 1 ) comprehensive pandemic preparedness and response plans ; ( 2 ) annexes to broader public health or emergency management plans ; or ( 3 ) brief summaries of pandemic preparedness plans . comprehensive pandemic plans were analyzed when available . they were intended to reflect a variety of public health preparedness activities that were presented in federal pandemic planning guidance documents available at the time , as well as a number of planning challenges and potential planning gaps that were the subject of ongoing policy discussions . while each individual variable was intended to reflect an essential element of pandemic preparedness , crs did not attempt to weigh the relative importance of each variable with respect to the others . the findings of this analysis are subject to a number of limitations . first , variables were developed intentionally to reveal planning gaps , rather than to document the universe of activities that may be described in the plans , or that may have been discussed in grant guidance . ( see the appendix. ) second , certain planning elements ( eg , reporting relationships between the health department and the governor , or plans for mass fatality management ) may not be fleshed out in the pandemic plan , but may be laid out in a state's public health preparedness or general emergency management plan . these broader plans were not analyzed , and in many cases were ( and are ) not publicly available . third , some states have published only brief summaries of extant pandemic plans that are not publicly available . by their nature , these summaries did not typically make substantive mention of planning activities . fifth , states may have developed detailed operational plans for certain aspects of pandemic planning ( such as ventilator triage ) , but may not have included them in the pandemic plan , or may not have updated the pandemic plan to reflect these narrowly tailored documents . sixth , while analyses began with keyword searches , "yes" findings were applied only to substantive discussions of relevant topics in the plan , not merely the finding of a keyword in a list , or another entry that lacked meaningful context for planning . while efforts were made to standardize analysis , these determinations were inherently subjective . just as public health authority is decentralized to state rather than federal authorities , it is also decentralized in some states , with local health departments having varying degrees of autonomy , further complicating planning efforts . variability among states in pandemic planning has been noted in another analysis . the decentralized nature of public health is often cited as an explanation .