like h.r . 5613 , s. 2819 would impose a one - year moratorium on rehabilitation and other medicaid regulations until april 1 , 2009 . on may 22 , 2008 , the senate passed the supplemental appropriations act of 2008 ( h.r . 2642 ) , which contained a moratorium until april 1 , 2009 , on implementation of the rehabilitation regulation . 2642 was amended by the house and passed on june 19 , 2008 . the house amendments included moratoria for six medicaid regulations , including rehabilitation services . in addition , h.r . 2642 retained requirements from h.r . 5613 for the secretary to report to the house energy and commerce and senate finance committees , and to hire an independent contractor to report on medicaid regulation issues . on june 26 , 2008 , the senate passed h.r . 2642 without changes to the house legislation , so that implementation of six medicaid regulations , including rehabilitation services , would be delayed until april 1 , 2009 . estimates of the financial impact of the proposed rule vary . some claim that cms underestimated the impact of the rehabilitation proposed rule and other medicaid regulations and that cms is attempting to shift medicaid costs to states . cms estimated that the proposed rule would reduce federal medicaid spending by approximately $180 million in fy2008 and $2.24 billion for the period fy2008-fy2012 . in a recent estimate for the period fy2008-fy2012 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) forecasted that federal medicaid outlays would decrease by $1.4 billion for the five - year period . a survey of state medicaid directors by the majority staff of the house committee on oversight and government reform estimated the financial impact of the rehabilitation proposed rule to be approximately $5.2 billion over five years from fy2009-fy2013 . there are at least three distinct perspectives on rehabilitation policy issues: ( 1 ) the viewpoint of the federal regulatory agency , cms , responsible for monitoring and enforcing states' compliance with federal medicaid statutes ; ( 2 ) the perspective of advocates representing children and adults who could receive medicaid rehabilitation services ; and ( 3 ) the stance of state governments and state medicaid agencies . cms believes there is evidence that additional guidance is needed to clarify what can and can not be claimed as rehabilitation services . cms cites criticism from gao and hhs / oig . the agency also notes that through the spa process it has discerned confusion among states about what is rehabilitation and habilitation and other issues related to rehabilitation . further cms claims , and as gao also has recommended , without clarifying guidance , states could inappropriately claim excess ffp by paying for services and administrative components of other non - medicaid state agencies that service medicaid beneficiaries . organizations representing individuals living with mental illness and their families , as well as child welfare and disability groups , have expressed concerns that "person - centered" care approaches , while well - intentioned , may be problematic with rehabilitation beneficiaries . these groups argue that rehabilitation therapy is often provided to individuals with serious mental health issues and these populations may be unable to be actively involved in their therapy decisions .