ebola . in february 2015 , amid the ebola outbreak in west africa that began in 2014 , the food and drug administration provided emergency authorization of a nanotechnology - enabled antigen test for the detection of ebola viruses . i nfluenza . medical researchers at the national institutes for health are using nanotechnology in the development of a molecule they intend to serve as a universal influenza vaccine that "stimulates the production of antibodies to fight against the ever - changing flu virus. diabetes . diabetes is the target of a nano - enabled skin patch that painlessly delivers insulin using an array of microneedles , each of which contains more than 100 million vesicles that release insulin in response to the detection of high glucose levels . renewable energy . a number of different nanotechnology applications may deliver important advances in renewable energy . one of the nni's signature initiatives — nanotechnology for solar energy collection and conversion — seeks to improve photovoltaic solar electricity generation , solar thermal energy generation and conversion , and solar - to - fuel conversions . the national renewable energy laboratory has developed a nanoparticle etching process that creates a texture on photovoltaic cells that gives a black appearance which can better absorb the sun's energy . these "black silicon" solar cells set a world record ( 18.2% ) for energy conversion efficiency . an application developed to improve solar thermal energy conversion efficiency uses a low - cost , scalable process to produce high - performance nanostructured coatings that enable thermal conversion efficiencies of more than 90% and increases the temperature range for heat - transfer fluids to more than 1200° fahrenheit . in addition , bio - inspired applications seek to use nanomaterials to produce fuels or feedstocks for high - value - added chemical products directly from sunlight . nanoscale semiconductor catalysts and additives show promise for improving the production of hydrogen from water using sunlight . the optical properties of these nanoscale catalysts allow the process to use a wider spectrum of sunlight . similarly , nanostructured photovoltaic devices ( eg , solar cells ) may improve the efficiency of converting sunlight into electricity by using a wider spectrum of sunlight . improved hydrogen storage , a key challenge in fuel cell applications , may be achieved by tapping the chemical properties and large surface area of certain nanostructured materials . nanotechnology offers the potential for improvements in energy storage , a key enabling technology for renewable energy , with at least one current prototype exceeding the energy storage of standard batteries by 40% . water treatment . nanotechnology approaches — such as nanosorbents , nanocatalysts , bioactive nanoparticles , nanostructured catalytic membranes , and nanoparticle enhanced filtration — may enable improved water quality in both large - scale water treatment plants and point - of - use systems . nanotechnology water desalination and filtration systems may offer affordable , scalable , and portable water filtration systems . filters employing nanoscale pores work by allowing water molecules to pass through , but preventing larger molecules , such as salt ions and other impurities ( eg , bacteria , viruses , heavy metals , and organic material ) , from doing so .