appendix a . legislative history of cse incentive payments before enactment of the cse program in 1975 , when a state or locality collected child support payments from a noncustodial parent on behalf of a family receiving aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) , the federal government was reimbursed for its share of the cost of afdc payments to the family . although local units of government ( eg , counties ) often enforced child support obligations , in most states they did not make any financial contributions toward funding afdc benefit payments . therefore the localities were not eligible for any share of the "savings" that occurred when child support was collected from a noncustodial parent on behalf of an afdc family . from the debate on the establishment of a cse program , congress concluded that a fiscal sharing in the results of child support collections could be a strong incentive for encouraging the local units of government to improve their cse activities . 90-248 , social security amendments of 1967 ( january 2 , 1968 ) although the formal cse program was not in existence , p.l . and ( 6 ) " will the elimination of the federal match of incentive payments adversely affect cse programs ? according to ocse , all states received a cse incentive payment in fy2011 . this means that all states attained a certain level of program performance . according to ocse , for all five performance measures , all states achieved applicable percentage scores that earned them incentives . moreover , a comparison of fy2002 data to fy2011 data shows that cse program performance has improved for all five performance measures . the national average for the paternity establishment score increased from 73% ( average of both the cse measure and the statewide measure ) in fy2002 to 98% in fy2011 ; the score for child support order establishment increased from 70% to 81% ; the score for current child support collections increased from 58% to 62% ; the score for child support arrearage cases increased from 60% to 62% ; and the cost - effectiveness score increased from 4.13 to 5.12 . as discussed in the following sections , the design of the cse incentive payment system raises questions about whether it is too heavily based on child support collections , and whether artificial thresholds adversely affect performance levels in that they unfairly allow states that are performing at significantly higher levels than other states to be given the same score ( at the high end of the performance scale and at the low end of the performance scale ) . ( 3 ) " should tanf funds be reduced because of poor cse performance ? ( 4 ) " why aren't the incentives and penalties consistent for the paternity establishment performance measure ? ( 5 ) " should incentive payments be based on individual state performance rather than aggregate state performance ? ultimately the amount of a state's incentive payment depends on how much the state collects in child support payments . if a state has a small amount of child cse collections , then even if it has high performance percentages for all five measures , its cse incentive payment would be small .