omb's circular no . a - 11 requires executive agencies to submit to omb "plans for an orderly shutdown in the event of a lapse in appropriations. omb has required the development and maintenance of these shutdown plans since 1980 . prior to the circular's 2011 revision , the circular broadly indicated that the plans were to be submitted to omb when initially prepared and also when revised . with the august 2011 revision of the circular , however , omb newly required that these plans be updated whenever there is a change in the source of funding for an agency program , or "any significant modification , expansion , or reduction in agency program activities. in any case , plans are required to be updated and submitted to omb with a minimum frequency of once every two years , starting august 1 , 2015 . the april and december 2011 releases of agency shutdown plans on the internet — on omb's website and on agency websites — brought a new level of transparency to agency shutdown planning . however , each release occurred on the final day of funding availability before an interim cr was scheduled to expire , and in the context of negotiations where an impasse seemed to many observers to be a possibility . it has been said that "conflict is endemic to budgeting. if conflict within congress or between congress and the president impedes the timely enactment of annual appropriations acts or continuing resolutions , a government shutdown may occur . along these lines , several options may present themselves to congress and the president during high - stakes negotiations over appropriations measures . the options include coming to agreement on regular appropriations acts by october 1 , the beginning of a new fiscal year ; using one or more interim continuing resolutions ( crs ) to extend temporary funding beyond the beginning of a fiscal year , until a point in time when negotiators make final decisions about full - year funding levels ; or not agreeing on full - year or interim appropriations acts , resulting in a temporary funding gap and a corresponding shutdown of affected federal government activities . if congress and the president pursue the second or third options , they may agree on full - year appropriations after the beginning of the fiscal year . these agreements may provide funding through regular appropriations acts — either in stand - alone or omnibus legislation — or , less commonly , through a full - year cr . congress and the president frequently agree on full - year or interim funding without coming to an impasse . on other occasions , however , congress and the president may not come to an accommodation in time to prevent a temporary funding gap . there are multiple exceptions to this general process , however , as this report explains later . programs that are funded by laws other than annual appropriations acts — such as entitlements like social security and other mandatory spending — also may be affected by a funding gap , if program execution relies on activities that receive annually appropriated funding .