to what end ? and , how conditional does congress want federal aid to fusion centers to be ? the current regime of hsgp funding includes some limited conditions for funding fusion centers . however , the fusion center guidelines remain entirely voluntary even for recipients of federal hsgp funds . as a result , for example , the federal government has no formal and systematic means of auditing whether each center is appropriately protecting civil liberties , or using federally funded intelligence analysts in a manner that is consistent with national goals and objectives for fusion centers , should they be explicitly defined . as outlined above , should congress determine it wishes to take action on this option , a range of possible legislative tools are available , as discussed below . the most obvious option is to continue the current manner of funding — that is , using the hsgp grants as the federal mechanism to make funding available for states and localities for potential allocation to state and regional fusion centers . this process is reliant on state grant applications , and the flow of federal funds to state / regional fusion centers is largely determined by the sub - federal designees that make homeland security grant allocation decisions within each state and / or municipality . furthermore , fusion centers compete with a wide range of homeland security initiatives for funding . while certain elements of hsgp funding are geared toward supporting fusion center development , there is no targeted funding stream directly allocated to fusion centers themselves . under this potential option , the current grant program could be slightly altered to address some of the oft cited hurdles that state and local officials believe impede the flow of federal grant funds to fusion center projects . two such alterations to be considered include: increasing the duration of grant cycles in order to allow for enhanced continuity and human resource planning , particularly for contract - supported intelligence analysts . building some level of autonomy into the hsgp "80 / 20" localities / state split of hsgp funding to allow state political leadership some autonomy to re - allocate a portion of overall hsgp funds to a single , designated state - wide fusion center . such flexibility could be conditioned on formal hsgp audits to ensure accountability and that funds re - allocated within state hsgp awards are consistent with the state's fusion center mission and federal fusion center guidelines . these audits would include input from fusion center leaders , state administrative agents , and the state's homeland security advisor . if it is determined that establishing a national network of fusion centers serves long - term , national homeland security interests , it may be reasonable to design a system which provides resources to state and local fusion centers commensurate with the national benefit derived .