8 of the constitution . the ucmj , passed by congress and implemented by the president through the manual for courts - martial ( mcm ) , governs military courts' jurisdiction and procedures . military courts exercise jurisdiction over officers and enlisted servicemembers on active duty . however , the scope of their jurisdiction may extend beyond individuals serving on active duty . specifically , such jurisdiction extends to cases involving retired servicemembers who receive military pay or hospital care from an armed force ; specified members of reserve units ; enemy combatants ; and other individuals with connections to military operations or benefits . as noted below in the discussion of united states v. stevenson , questions remain regarding the scope of military courts' power over retired servicemembers . however , it is clear that military courts' jurisdiction extends to military veterans only when a veteran maintains at least some current relationship with the military . if a defendant's connection with the armed forces is sufficient to establish jurisdiction , a military court may try that defendant for a broad range of offenses , including conduct not related to official military duties , as long as the alleged conduct constitutes a crime under the ucmj . the ucmj includes some crimes that are unique to military service . for example , under the ucmj , a defendant might be prosecuted for effecting unlawful enlistment , appointment , or separation ; desertion ; or absence without leave . however , the armed forces may also prosecute defendants under the ucmj for conduct over which civilian courts could also exert jurisdiction . for example , the ucmj criminalizes murder , rape , robbery , and other common law crimes . article i military courts handle military cases throughout the chain of appellate review . appeal to the u.s. supreme court is permitted at the end of the process only in specified circumstances . the ucmj creates various military courts and provides appellate procedures for them . after an initial investigation and a court - martial , which is a trial - level proceeding , military cases undergo various stages of review within the military justice system . first , each court - martial proceeding has a "convening authority," who is a commissioned officer ( other than the defendant's accuser ) who convenes the investigation and court - martial proceeding and then approves or modifies the court - martial's findings and sentences . convening authorities do not provide legal review ; instead , they provide the equivalent of sentencing determinations by giving "full and fair consideration to matters submitted by the accused and determining appropriate action on the sentence. under the ucmj , convening authorities have "substantial discretion" to modify sentences and findings . after a convening authority approves or modifies a court - martial decision , a court of criminal appeals offers the first opportunity for legal review in military cases . each branch of the armed services has a court of criminal appeals , comprised of panels of military judges established by the judge advocate general for each branch . the courts of criminal appeals review cases in panels or , occasionally , en banc .