independent judgment . finally , the board found that the 12 charge nurses exercised independent judgment in assigning other staff . the charge nurses made assignments in light of the skills of employees and the nursing time that would be required during a given shift . the nlrb noted that the "process of equalizing work loads at the hospital involves independent judgment. although oakwood healthcare maintained a written policy for assigning nursing personnel to deliver care to patients , the board observed that charge nurses were given considerable latitude in making decisions on how to assign nursing personnel . the board concluded that when a charge nurse makes an assignment based on the skill , experience , and temperament of nursing personnel and the patients , that nurse has "exercised the requisite discretion to make the assignment a supervisory function 'requir[ing] the use of independent judgment.' in addition , the board found that , because the 12 charge nurses served in that capacity on every shift that they worked , they spent a "regular and substantial" portion of their work time performing supervisory functions . the board also found that charge nurses in the emergency room were not supervisors . the board concluded that the nurses did not exercise independent judgment in assigning employees to places within the emergency room . finally , the board found that none of the rotating charge nurses was a supervisor . in the 110 th congress , following the decision in oakwood healthcare inc . , representative robert andrews and senator chris dodd introduced the re - empowerment of skilled and professional employees and construction tradesworkers ( respect ) act ( h.r . the legislation was not introduced in the 111 th congress . a similar version of the respect act was introduced in the 112 th congress by senator richard blumenthal ( s. 2128 ) . the respect act would create a narrower definition of supervisor than exists under current law . supporters of the legislation argue that the respect act would ensure that only true supervisors are excluded from protection under the nlra . opponents maintain that the legislation would change the definition of supervisor that has been in place for 60 years . the respect act would amend the nlra's definition of "supervisor" by removing two supervisory functions from the existing 12 functions and by adding a limiting phrase . the legislation would eliminate "assign" and "responsibly to direct" from the current supervisory functions . in addition , the act would add ( immediately after "in the interest of the employer" ) the phrase "and for a majority of the individual's worktime. this addition would seem to respond to the nlrb's decision in oakwood healthcare , inc . in its decision , the board maintained: where an individual is engaged part time as a supervisor and the rest of the time as a unit employee , the legal standard for a supervisory determination is whether the individual spends a regular and substantial portion of his / her work time performing supervisory functions . under the board's standard , "regular" means according to a pattern or schedule , as opposed to sporadic substitution .