federal grants are not benefits or entitlements to individuals . about 1,800 assistance programs are classified as grants . assistance listing descriptions include the following: federal agency administering a program legislation authorizing the program objectives and goals of program types of financial or nonfinancial assistance uses and restrictions eligibility requirements application and award process criteria for selecting proposals amount of obligations for some past and current fiscal years range and average of financial assistance regulations , guidelines , and literature relevant to a program information contacts and headquarters , regional , and local offices related programs examples of funded projects formula and matching requirements , where applicable requirements for postassistance reports grants.gov http: / / www.grants.gov fedconnect https: / / www.fedconnect.net after grantseekers identify federal programs in beta.sam.gov and contact agencies ( see section below ) , they may be directed to register and apply at websites such as grants.gov or fedconnect when application announcements for competitive grants become available . the websites allow grantseekers to register and download applications for current competitive funding opportunities from all 26 federal grants - making agencies . grantseekers themselves can check on notices of funding availability ( nofas ) or requests for proposals ( rfps ) ; sign up to receive email notification of grant opportunities ; and apply for federal grants online through a unified process . the sites also guide grantseekers in obtaining dun and bradstreet ( duns ) numbers and registering with the system for award management ( sam ) ; both are required for all federal grants ( follow instructions at http: / / www.grants.gov / web / grants / applicants / organization - registration.html ) . one limitation to grants.gov and fedconnect.net is the exclusion of state - level grant program information . for example , grants.gov provides information only about the funding opportunities for primary grant recipients ( federal grant funds may be passed through the state to the local level ; state government departments and agencies administer federal formula and block grants , and also fund projects ) . a local constituent would not be able to access information on grants.gov about how to apply for federal funds available from a pass - through state - level agency , for example . to download and submit an application from grants.gov or fedconnect , registration is required . the sites provide a narrated tutorial on how to complete a grant application package and a frequently asked questions ( faqs ) page . once an application is submitted , grants applicants can then track progress of their application using their unique id and password . applications can be identified by cfda number , funding opportunity number , competition id , or tracking number . much of the federal grant budget moves to the states through formula and block grants . state , regional , and local federal offices often handle grants applications and funds disbursement . each federal agency has its own procedures: applicants should call the department or agency in question before applying for funding to obtain the most up - to - date information . for eligible state and local governments and nonprofit organizations , after identifying appropriate programs it is recommended grantseekers contact federal and state agencies early in the process , before submitting formal applications .