ยง4321 et seq. ) among other provisions , nepa requires federal agencies to assess the potential environmental impacts of a proposed action before proceeding . exempted from nepa's requirements are emergency response actions under provisions of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( the stafford act , 42 u.s.c . these exempted activities include providing essential relief to victims and implementing protective measures necessary to reduce immediate threats to life , property , and public health and safety . nepa's environmental review requirements may , however , be applicable to long - term recovery projects , such as the modification , mitigation , or expansion of existing structures or the relocation of certain structures located in a floodplain . most agencies have implemented nepa as an "umbrella" statute . as such , it forms a framework for the coordination or demonstration of compliance with any study , review , or consultation required by any other environmental law . the use of nepa in this capacity has led to some confusion . the need to comply with a separate environmental law such as the clean water act ( cwa ) , endangered species act ( esa ) , or national historic preservation act ( nhpa ) may be identified within the framework of the nepa process , but nepa itself is not the source of the obligation . if , theoretically , the requirement to comply with nepa were removed , compliance with each applicable law would still be required . in the past , there has been congressional interest in the nepa implementation process for disaster - related projects . this interest has been driven , in part , by federal grant applicants who have been confused about both their role in the nepa process and what the law requires . to address these issues , this report discusses the nepa process as it applies to projects for which federal funding to recover from or prepare for a disaster may be requested by local , tribal , or state grant applicants . specifically , the report provides an overview of the nepa process as it applies to such projects , identifies the types of projects ( categorized by the federal funding source ) likely to require environmental review , and delineates both the types of projects for which no or minimal environmental review is required ( those for which statutory or categorical exclusions apply ) and those that likely require more in - depth review . this report focuses on the nepa process as it applies to projects that require grant applicants ( i.e. , state or local agencies ) to provide certain information for their grant requests to be considered eligible for potential approval . it does not address the nepa process as it applies to disaster - related projects that would likely involve collection of the necessary environmental review documentation by the federal agency responsible for the project ( eg , water resources projects undertaken by the army corps of engineers ) . two agencies that provide a significant proportion of applicant - requested funding for disaster - related projects are the department of homeland security's federal emergency management agency ( fema ) and the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) .