appendix a . major focus areas of climate change bills and enacted legislation in the 110 th congress appendix b . key provisions of climate change legislation in the 110 th  congres . these topics are discussed briefly below . appendix a categorizes the bills and enacted legislation by the topics discussed below . appendix b provides a brief summary of each bill's provisions and status in the legislative process . global climate change is a complex issue . while most scientists agree that the climate is changing in response to ghg emissions , uncertainties concerning the causes and effects of climate change remain and are a continuing subject of extensive scientific research . these uncertainties include the potential effects on natural systems , as well as effects on social and political systems . further , research is ongoing regarding technologies that improve efficiency , reduce fossil fuel consumption , and capture and store carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) emissions . one approach to addressing climate change is to promote the deployment and diffusion of technologies to reduce ghg emissions , such as carbon capture and storage ( or sequestration ) . within the legislative proposals , there are different methods of promoting technology deployment . one deployment strategy may involve tax incentives for investment in technologies to improve efficiency and / or lower emissions . other deployment strategies would provide grants , loans , and other incentives for technology transfer to developing countries . in the 110 th congress , some bills deal solely with technology deployment through tax incentives for lower - carbon technology or grants to develop and deploy carbon capture and sequestration , or through requirements that the federal government use technology with lower emissions . other bills that create mandatory ghg reduction programs also include technology deployment as one component . the united states ratified the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) in 1992 . five years later , the united states signed the convention's kyoto protocol , but it was never submitted to the senate for ratification . in 2001 , president george w. bush rejected the kyoto protocol and withdrew the united states from subsequent negotiations . since that time , the united states has entered into other cooperative agreements , including the asia - pacific partnership on clean development and climate . this partnership focuses on voluntary action by member states to promote cleaner technology and related goals . however , u.s. participation in discussions over binding agreements has been limited . some critics of ghg regulation argue that the effects on global ghg concentrations — and consequently the effects on climate — from any reduction scheme will be limited . some therefore contend that investment should focus on preparing communities and systems to adapt to the effects of a changing climate . this notion is shared by some proponents of ghg regulation , who argue that because of earlier greenhouse gas emissions , some level of warming will occur regardless of mitigation activity . those stakeholders support adaptation initiatives in concert with mitigation efforts . pursuant to the unfccc , the united states publishes annual reports on its ghg emissions .