in contrast to h.r . 2419 , the senate bill does not increase the appropriation for title ii . the senate bill increases the share of title ii funds that can be used to cover project - related expenses of pvos to not less than 7.5% . the house - passed bill stipulates that of the funds made available for title ii , not less than $450 million annually be made available for nonemergency ( development ) food aid . this minimum level of non - emergency assistance could not be waived unless requested by the administrator of usaid , followed by enactment of a law approving the administrator's request . the senate bill establishes a minimum of $600 million for development food aid that also would not be subject to waivers . following passage of the house - passed bill , the office of management and budget , in its statement of administrative policy , said that it strongly opposed this provision because it would deprive the administration of the ability to quickly waive it in an emergency . omb estimated that this house bill provision would result in a $100 million decrease in emergency food aid . the house - passed farm bill disregarded the administration's sole farm bill food aid proposal for legislative authority to allocate up to 25% of title ii funds to local or regional purchase of commodities for emergency relief . 2419 did , however , stipulate that $40 million of the funds appropriated for usaid's international disaster and famine assistance ( idfa ) program be allocated to famine prevention and relief . idfa funds can be used to purchase commodities locally or regionally . in contrast , the senate farm bill establishes a pilot program , authorized at $25 million annually , to explore how local or regional procurement of food in emergency situations might be used . both bills extend provision for the food aid consultative group ( facg ) , which reviews the effectiveness of rules for the title ii program . the group is composed of representatives of usaid , usda , pvos , recipient countries , and u.s. agricultural producers . the senate bill adds a representative of the maritime transport sector to the facg . both bills extend the authorization for usaid grants for stockpiling and distributing shelf - stable foods . the house bill increases the amount that can be appropriated from $3 million to $7 million ; the senate bill increases the amount to $8 million . in addition , the bills extend authorization for the use of p.l . 480 funds for prepositioning of agricultural commodities overseas . the house bill increases from not more than $2 million to not more than $8 million the amount that can be spent to store commodities overseas . the senate bill increases the amount that can be spent on overseas storage to not more than $4 million . both bills reauthorize the ogonowski farmer - to - farmer program .