most of these buses are required to have lap belts . but nhtsa is considering requiring that the smaller type ii school buses , which are currently required to have a lap belt , be required to have a lap / shoulder belt . if nhtsa does make that change , some 20% of the nation's school bus fleet would be required to have lap / shoulder belts ( including the impact of california's requirement that all its school buses be equipped with lap / shoulder belts ) . that ratio could rise to almost 30% if texas implements its law . the texas law will require students to use the belts . given that 98% of school - age child deaths during school travel hours occur in modes other than school buses , there are other options that could have a greater impact on increasing the safety of school children than requiring that seat belts be installed on large school buses . for example , shifting students from relatively more dangerous modes of transport to school ( such as bicycling , walking , and passenger vehicles driven by teens ) to relatively safer modes ( such as school buses ) is one way of making school children safer . while federal funding is generally not provided for purchasing large school buses , a grant program to encourage school districts to increase the percentage of students who travel to school by bus could promote safety . congress also recently created a new program to make the most dangerous modes of school transportation—walking and bicycling—safer . other options include making school bus and passenger vehicle pick - up and drop - off locations safer and implementing and enforcing graduated licensing programs for teen drivers . the ntsb has recommended that school buses be equipped with onboard data recorders , both to provide additional information about crashes that could lead to improved occupant protection practices , and also because experience has shown that the mere presence ( and presumably , knowledge on the part of drivers ) of onboard data recorders on vehicles has often led to reductions in the number of crashes experienced by those vehicles . this produces an estimated 5.5 billion student trips annually . between 1995 and 2005 , there were a total of 1,368 fatal crashes involving school transportation vehicles . school buses are larger and heavier than most other vehicles on the road , so most fatalities in school transportation - related crashes are not to school bus occupants , but to occupants of other vehicles or pedestrians . only 97 ( 7% ) of those crashes resulted in a fatality to an occupant of the school transportation vehicle . in those 97 crashes , a total of 119 occupants of the school transportation vehicles were killed—45 school vehicle drivers and 74 school vehicle passengers . thus , during that 11-year period , there were an average of 8.8 school transportation vehicle crashes and 6.7 school vehicle passenger deaths each year . as table 1 shows , in a 2002 study of the relative risks of different modes by which children are transported to school , the transportation research board found that school buses were the safest mode ( except for other buses ) .