the america competes act is an authorization act . new programs established by the act will not be initiated unless funded through subsequent appropriations . •    fellowships – a program to support graduate students and early career scientists was proposed by sc and is under discussion within doe . within the office of science is the workforce development for teachers and scientists office . although this office is funded at the level requested by the bush administration , neither the arra nor the explanatory statement specify any funding for specific america competes act activities within this program . at this point , the degree to which the obama administration will agree with the bush administration regarding how these funds are implemented for specific america competes act authorized stem education programs at doe is unknown . also at doe , arpa - e faces a unique challenge , as this new organization received its first funding prior to the appointment of a director , or hiring of any staff . similarly , increases in the authorization level of existing programs may or may not translate into increased funding . the following section discusses some of the america competes act programs in relation to the president's fy2009 budget submission . the fy2009 request information is based on the bush administration fy2009 congressional budget request documents from the doe and the nsf . nist indicated that it is drafting a spending plan . at ed , states must take actions to improve the collection and use of data in order to receive additional funding from arra funds . the obama administration has set up a website , http: / / www.recovery.gov . the agencies whose america competes act activities that received arra funds have launched subsidiary websites . this is particularly true for funds provided through the arra . at doe , the acting director of the office of science ( sc ) indicates that the following actions will be taken with arra funds: •    facility construction – funds accelerate completion of a number of ongoing construction projects for major scientific user facilities , major items of equipment for those facilities , and laboratory infrastructure . general plant projects ( gpp ) update laboratory infrastructure and establish new laboratory research space , renovate existing laboratory space , demolish inadequate facilities , and improve utility systems across sc labs . •    facility operations / infrastructure – funds increase operations , experimental support , and infrastructure improvements at scientific user facilities across sc . •    research – funds support selected research programs across sc and are chosen to minimize out - year mortgages . energy frontier research centers are included . •    computing – funds support advanced networking ; mid - range distributed computing ; and computation partnerships in areas important to doe energy missions . special steps may need to be taken to assure these funds are spent appropriately , and to achieve the desired outcomes . possible policy options to respond to this concern are discussed further in crs report rl34497 , advanced research projects agency - energy ( arpa - e ) : background , status , and selected issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .