appendix . appendix a . what are the costs associated with africom ? how are these costs affected by africom's chosen headquarters location ? how closely do the state department and dod coordinate on plans for the command and on u.s. military efforts in africa in general ? what are the obama administration's views on the development of africom's interagency process ? has africom's enhanced integration of non - dod usg agency personnel proven effective in supporting the command's mission ? how is africom addressing the intelligence community's need to realign its resources directed toward the continent ? what are africom's current intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) needs ? how is the obama administration ensuring that u.s. military efforts in africa do not overshadow or contradict u.s. diplomatic and development objectives ? should conflict prevention activities be an essential part of dod's mandate , and are they sustainable ? what are the authorities granted to u.s. chiefs of mission regarding combatant command activities in the countries to which they are posted , and are these authorities sufficient ? how prominent are counterterrorism operations and programs , particularly relative to the peacekeeping training and support components , in africom's mandate ? would some dod - implemented counterterrorism programs be more appropriately implemented by other u.s. agencies ? how do africom's civil affairs teams contribute to the command's mission ? are the legal authorities guiding dod's implementation of security cooperation programs sufficient for africom to fulfill its mandate ? do any of these authorities hinder the u.s. military's ability to conduct these programs ? are there procedural challenges that hinder africom's ability to conduct its capacity building mandate in a timely manner ? does the lack of assigned forces affect africom's ability to implement its mandate ? how can africom ensure that improvements in partner capacity are sustained ? how does dod ensure that the training and equipment provided to african forces are not used to suppress internal dissent or threaten other nations ? this report provides information on africom's mission , structure , interagency coordination , and its basing and manpower requirements . it also gives a broad overview of u.s. strategic interests in africa and the role of u.s. military efforts on the continent . issues on the african continent have not historically been identified as strategic priorities for the u.s. military , and u.s. military engagement in africa has been sporadic . according to one defense analyst , "during the cold war , united states foreign policy toward sub - saharan africa had little to do with africa. after the fall of the soviet union , many u.s. policymakers considered the u.s. military's role and responsibilities on the continent to be minimal . in 1995 , the department of defense outlined its view of africa in its u.s. security strategy for sub - saharan africa , asserting that "ultimately we see very little traditional strategic interest in africa. in 1998 , following terrorist attacks on two u.s. embassies in east africa , the united states conducted a retaliatory attack against a pharmaceutical factory in khartoum , sudan , that clinton administration officials initially contended was producing precursors for chemical weapons for al qaeda .