, part 151 . by this process , indian owners of fee land , that is , land owned outright and unencumbered by liens that impair marketability , may apply to have their fee title conveyed to the soi to be held in trust for their benefit . 2455 , the elko motocross and tribal conveyance act , included a provision transferring approximately 373 acres of bureau of land management land to be held in trust for the te - moak tribe of western shoshone indians of nevada for certain specified purposes . the legislation would have provided that the land "shall not be eligible , or considered to have been taken into trust , for class ii gaming or class iii gaming ( as those terms are defined in section 4 of the indian gaming regulatory act ( 25 u.s.c . 323 , the muscogee nation of florida federal recognition act , would have recognized and authorized the soi to take land into trust for the muscogee nation of florida . it contains explicit authority for the soi to take land into trust for the muscogee nation of florida under 25 c.f.r. , part 151 . s. 402 , an amendment to the siletz tribe indian restoration act , would have authorized the secretary to take land into trust for the siletz indian tribe , subject to specified conditions , provided that the land is within the boundaries of the original 1855 siletz coast reservation , and that the real property taken into trust is not to be "eligible , or used , for any gaming activity carried out under the indian gaming regulatory act.... " s. 1132 / h.r . 1803 , the lumbee recognition act , would have provided for federal recognition of the lumbee tribe of north carolina and authorized the secretary to take land into trust for the tribe . it includes a provision prohibiting the tribe from conducting "gaming activities as a matter of claimed inherent authority or under the authority of any federal law , including the indian gaming regulatory act … or under any regulations thereunder promulgated by the secretary of the interior or the national indian gaming commission. 2442 would have provided federal recognition for the duwamish tribe and authorized the soi to take land into trust within an area to be identified , within 10 years , by the soi as the aboriginal homelands of the duwamish tribe . 1225 , the samish indian nation homelands act of 2012 , subject to certain conditions , would have required the secretary to take certain land into trust for the samish indian nation and prohibited igra gaming on the land . 2455 would have transferred certain bureau of land management land to the secretary in trust for the te - moak tribe of western shoshone indians of nevada and prohibited igra gaming on the land . the bill would also have transferred land to be held in trust for each of the following tribes: fort mcdermott paiute and shoshone tribe ; the shoshone paiute tribes of the duck valley indian reservation ; the summit lake paiute tribe ; the south fork band council ; the reno - sparks indian colony ; and the pyramid lake paiute tribe .