other bills , including h.r . several explanations are possible . first , the market could be manipulated . price manipulation , which is illegal under the commodity exchange act , involves deliberate strategies by a trader or group of traders to push prices to artificial levels . how could the price discovery function of the energy derivatives market have broken ? since derivatives markets reward correct predictions about future prices , manipulation can be very profitable . most manipulations in the past have involved short - lived price spikes , brought about by spreading false information , or concerted buying or selling . on july 7 , 2008 , the cftc announced that it would modify the no - action letter to the dubai exchange on terms similar to the agreement with ice futures europe . the view that excessive speculation is driving up energy prices is widely held , but controversial . the question of whether current prices are justified by fundamental factors of supply and demand , or whether irrational exuberance has created a bubble in energy prices ( similar to what was observed in dot - com stocks in the late 1990s ) , is beyond the scope of this report . however , testimony presented to congress has identified a recent trend in financial markets that some argue may be putting upward pressure on prices: decisions by institutional investors , such as pension funds , foundations , or endowments , to allocate a part of their portfolio to commodities . from the point of view of a fund manager , investment in commodities may be very attractive under current market conditions . average returns on stocks and bonds have been relatively low for the past few years , and there is little optimism that they will improve in the near term . commodities , on the other hand have been the "hot sector. while commodity investment is recognized as being highly risky , a risky asset in a large , diversified portfolio does not necessarily increase overall portfolio risk . the risk of a downturn in commodity prices is not generally correlated with risks in stocks or bonds ; in some cases , there may be an inverse relationship . for example , if the price of oil drops suddenly , an institution may lose money on its commodity investment , but the price change will be good for its transportation stocks . institutional investors may take positions in commodities in a number of ways , but they do not generally trade on the futures exchanges directly . instead , they use an intermediary , such as a commodity index fund or an otc swap contract that is structured to match the return of a published index of commodity prices . as a result of this investment strategy , institutional investors in commodities are often called "index traders.