postal service . section 504 was the first federal civil rights law generally prohibiting discrimination against individuals with disabilities . the concepts of section 504 and its implementing regulations were used in crafting the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) in 1990 . the ada and section 504 are , therefore , very similar and have some overlapping coverage but also have several important distinctions . for example , section 504 is limited to programs receiving federal funds or the executive agencies and the postal service while the ada broadly covers the private sector regardless of whether federal funds are involved and does not cover the executive agencies or the postal service . the ada amendments act of 2008 , p.l . 110-325 , amended the definition of disability in the ada and the definition of disability applicable to section 504 . this report examines section 504 , the recent amendments to the definition of disability , section 504's regulations , and supreme court interpretations . section 504's differences with the ada , and its relationship to the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) , are also discussed . the supreme court has examined section 504 in numerous contexts and , since the enactment of the ada in 1990 , has often referenced section 504 in its analysis of ada cases . the first section 504 case to reach the supreme court was southeastern community college v. davis . in southeastern , the plaintiff was a student with a serious hearing disability and who sought to be trained as a registered nurse . the college argued that she was not "otherwise qualified" as she could not understand speech except through lip reading and that this limitation made it unsafe for her to participate in the normal clinical program . the supreme court agreed with the college , noting that it was unlikely that she "could benefit from any affirmative action that the regulations reasonably could be interpreted as requiring. the court concluded that there was no violation of ยง504 when southeastern concluded that respondent did not qualify for admission to its program . nothing in the language or history of ยง504 reflects an intention to limit the freedom of an educational institution to require reasonable physical qualifications for admission to a clinical training program . nor has there been any showing in this case that any action short of a substantial change in southeastern's program would render unreasonable the qualifications it imposed . similarly , in alexander v. choate the supreme court found no violation of section 504 where medicaid recipients with disabilities claimed that a proposed 14-day limitation on in - patient coverage had a discriminatory effect on individuals with disabilities . the court found that the limitation was neutral on its face as it would provide medicaid users with or without disabilities with "identical and effective hospital services. section 504 did not require the state to alter its definition of the medicaid benefit because individuals with disabilities have greater medical needs . citing southeastern , the court observed that section 504 requires even - handed treatment and an opportunity for individuals with disabilities to participate and benefit from programs receiving federal funds .