amends 38 u.s.c. , chapter 17 , and adds a new section . following is a summary of each of these provisions . expresses the sense of congress , recognizing that va is a leader in the field of tbi care , and also acknowledges that dod and va have made efforts to provide a smooth transition of medical care and rehabilitative services to servicemembers as they transition from the dod health care system to that of the va . however , it is the sense of congress that more can be done to assist veterans and their families in the continuum of the rehabilitation , recovery , and reintegration of wounded or injured servicemembers and veterans into their communities . it requires the va secretary to develop an individualized plan for rehabilitation and reintegration into the community for each veteran or servicemember who receives inpatient or outpatient care at the va for tbi . this plan must be provided in writing to each veteran or servicemember before such individual is discharged from inpatient care at a va medical facility , or as soon as practicable following a diagnosis of tbi by the va . it requires that each individualized plan for rehabilitation include ( 1 ) rehabilitation objectives for improving the physical , cognitive , and vocational functioning of a veteran or servicemember with a tbi in order that such individual regain independence and reintegrate into the community ; ( 2 ) access , as needed , to all appropriate rehabilitative components of the tbi continuum of care ; ( 3 ) a description of specific rehabilitative treatments and other services , to include the type , frequency , duration , and location of such treatments and services ; ( 4 ) the name of the designated case manager responsible for the implementation of the individualized plan ; and ( 5 ) the dates on which the effectiveness of the plan will be reviewed . requires the va secretary to develop the individualized plan based on a comprehensive assessment of the physical , cognitive , vocational , neuropsychological and social impairments of the veteran or servicemember . the assessment must also take into consideration the family education and family support needs of such individual after discharge from inpatient care . the assessment will be performed by a team of individuals , with relevant expertise as stipulated in this section . requires the va secretary to assign a case manager for each veteran or servicemember with a tbi . the case manager will be responsible for the implementation of the individualized plan , and the coordination of care . the secretary must ensure that such case manager has specific expertise , either through experience , education , or training , in the care required by the individual to whom such case manager is assigned . requires the va secretary , to the maximum extent practicable , to involve the family members or legal guardian of the veteran or servicemember with a tbi in developing the individualized plan .