billion for csp . the enacted farm bill did not include a senate proposal that would have closely coordinated csp and eqip under the so - called comprehensive stewardship incentives program . eqip is administered by usda's nrcs and provides technical and cost - share assistance to farmers and ranchers for promoting agricultural production and environmental quality by supporting the installation or implementation of structural and management practices on eligible agricultural land . eqip includes a number of subprograms , including the colorado river basin salinity control , conservation innovation grants , the ground and surface water conservation program , and the klamath river basin . the enacted 2008 farm bill ( secs . 2501-2510 ) expands the program to cover practices that enhance soil , surface and ground water , air quality , and conserve energy ; it also covers grazing land , forestland , wetlands , and other types of land and natural resources that support wildlife . in evaluating applications , cost - effectiveness and comprehensive treatment of resource issues are given priority . the bill sets aside 5% of the eqip spending for beginning farmers and ranchers and 5% for socially disadvantaged farmers and ranchers , providing up to 90% of the costs of implementing an eqip plan for these farmers . it also provides payments to assist tribal or native corporation members , and producers transitioning to organic production . the 2008 farm bill lowers the eqip payment limit to $300,000 ( down from $450,000 ) in any 6-year period per entity , except in cases of special environmental significance including projects involving methane digesters , as determined by usda . projects with organic production benefits are capped at $20,000 annually or $80,000 in any six - year period . the enacted bill retains the requirement that 60% of funds be made available for cost - sharing to livestock producers , including an incentive payments for producers who develop a comprehensive nutrient management plan . the bill reserves $37.5 million of annual eqip funds for the conservation innovation grants program and modifies the grants to cover air quality concerns associated with agriculture ( including greenhouse gas emissions ) . it also replaces the ground and surface water conservation program within eqip with a new agricultural water enhancement program ( awep ) to address water quality and quantity concerns on agricultural land , highlighting certain priority areas and providing additional mandatory funds for the program . the manager's report accompanying the farm bill suggests priority areas under the programs to include the eastern snake plain aquifer region , puget sound , the ogallala aquifer , the sacramento river watershed , the upper mississippi river basin , the red river of the north basin , and the everglades . awep prioritizes assistance to areas experiencing significant drought . the bill provides a total of $280 million through fy2012 for awep activities . funding for eqip is authorized at $1.2 billion ( fy2008 ) , $1.337 billion ( fy2009 ) , $1.45 billion ( fy2010 ) , $1.588 billion ( fy2011 ) , and $1.75 billion ( fy2012 ) .