on the investments from the other . it will allow exceptions for measures intended to accomplish social objectives , such as to increase employment in certain regions of the country , promote training of workforce , and protect the environment . the agreement also prohibits a requirement that senior managers be of a particular nationality but will allow a requirement that the majority of board of directors be of a particular nationality . similar to other u.s. ftas , the korus fta establishes procedures for the settlement of investor - state disputes involving investments covered under the agreement where the investor from one partner - country alleges that the government of the other partner - country is violating his rights under the fta . the fta stipulates that the two parties should try to first resolve the dispute through consultations and negotiations . but , if that does not work , the agreement provides for arbitration procedures and the establishment of tribunals as provided under the "convention on the settlement of investment disputes between states and nationals of other states. the usitc concluded that u.s. investors , especially investors in financial services , would likely gain from the korus fta . ( see section on " financial and other services ." the united states has been the predominate partner in terms of foreign investment and stands to gain the most from the protections provided by the korus fta . however , south korean investments in the united states are increasing , and therefore , south korea could benefit as well . in addition to those sections addressing pharmaceutical manufacturing ( see discussion above ) , the korus fta contains other provisions on intellectual property rights ( ipr ) protection in u.s. - south korean trade . under the fta the united states and south korea reaffirm their commitments under the wto trade - related aspects of intellectual property rights ( trips ) agreement and other international agreements and conventions on intellectual property . but the two countries made ipr commitments beyond those agreements with provisions that require each government to extend national treatment to ipr holders from the other country ; require transparency through the publication of regulations and laws regarding intellectual property rights ; facilitate the registration of and protection of trademarks and established limitations on the use of geographical indications ; ensure the right of authors , performers , producers of recordings to determine use of copyrighted products ; require copyright protection for no less than 70 years ; thus , south korea agrees to extend its copyright protection term , an objective of u.s. copyright holders ; protect copyrighted material against piracy and provide penalties for those who abet piracy including the seizure and destruction of pirated and counterfeit products ; protect copyrighted performances on the internet ; and protect encrypted programming over satellites and cable signals . on may 10 , 2007 , a bipartisan group of congressional leaders and the bush administration released a statement that provided language to be included in pending ftas , including korus fta .