this report next turns to a review of these issues . congressional interest in industrial designs spans a number of different issues and industries . this breadth of interest in strengthening intellectual property rights for industrial designs arguably reflects the changing nature of the u.s. economy . given the increasing sophistication of foreign manufacturing , the protection of industrial designs provides one mechanism for sustaining competitive domestic design - based industries . as attorney regan keebaugh explains , "[i]f economic reality means the united states can no longer compete in the production side of manufacturing , then one way to maintain jobs in the manufacturing industry is through developing a strong design industry to ensure that products made overseas are designed in the united states. intellectual property laws are said to promote innovative industries by establishing exclusive rights in new inventions , industrial designs , and other creations . absent such rights , "free riders" could easily duplicate and exploit the innovative developments of others . further , because they incurred no design and development costs , copyists could likely undersell the original innovator . the resulting inability of innovators to capitalize on their creations would lead to an environment where too little research and development occurs . intellectual property rights may also encourage others to design around these proprietary interests , pointing the way to new products , markets , economies of production and even entire industries . although the established intellectual property paradigms of copyrights , trademarks , and patents provide protection for traditional works of authorship , brand names , and inventions , they also limit or deny protection for other sorts of subject matter . as this report has explained , copyright , trade dress , and design patent law to varying degrees deny protection to industrial designs with a functional component . sui generis protection systems may potentially fill gaps that may not have been anticipated by the framers of the traditional intellectual property regimes . sui generis protection regimes also offer a potential advantage when compared to the copyright , trademark , and patent statutes . although the established forms of intellectual property apply broadly to numerous industries and types of innovations , sui generis protection regimes may be more precisely tailored to meet the needs of particular industries . for example , the acquisition of rights could be designed to fit the perceived needs of particular industries , the scope and term of protection may be particular product cycles , and competitors and consumers could enjoy the privilege to use protected subject matter in certain circumstances . policy makers may also appreciate that the designs of previous sui generis regimes have tended to be based upon one of the established intellectual property paradigms . for example , the rights established under the semiconductor chip protection act of 1984 are similar to copyright . on the other hand , both the design and plant patent systems were incorporated into the existing utility patent laws and therefore follow a patent - like model . some observers believe that copyright - or trademark - like protection represents the most appropriate scheme of protection for industrial designs because neither regime requires courts or government officials to analyze the merits of "creative expression applied to goods.