these issues are discussed below . the potential problems highlighted below should not necessarily rule out entire carbon offset categories . if offset project developers can address these potential obstacles , the offsets may be credible . however , it may be difficult for offset buyers to know if these problems were addressed ( as discussed later in the report ) . the precise size or value of the voluntary offset market is unknown , because there is currently no registry or tracking system that follows exchanges in the voluntary market . two studies examined approximately 30 companies and / or groups that sell carbon offsets on the voluntary market . the following list highlights findings from the analyses: the prices for carbon offsets range between $5 and $25 per ton of carbon . offset prices show a correlation with offset quality . overhead costs can vary substantially by seller . however , this factor may not be a good indicator of offset quality . the tax status of a seller ( profit firm vs. nonprofit group ) was not a good indicator of offset quality . arguably , the most significant finding of the two studies is the general correlation between offset price and offset quality . this correlation is more striking , considering the range of offset prices ( $5 to $25 per ton of carbon reduced ) . carbon offset purchases are intended to generate emission reductions that would not have occurred otherwise . in terms of global climate change mitigation , an emission reduction , avoidance , or sequestration is beneficial regardless of where or how it occurs . for example , a ton of carbon reduced at a power plant will have the same atmospheric effect as a ton of carbon reduced , avoided , or sequestered through an offset project . the core issue for carbon offset projects is: do they actually offset emissions generated elsewhere ? if the credibility of the voluntary offsets is uncertain , claims of carbon neutrality may lack merit . evidence suggests that not all offset projects are of equal quality , because they are developed through a range of standards . although some standards are considered stringent , others are less so . in some cases , the standards used are not even made available to the purchaser . due to the lack of common standards , some observers have referred to the current voluntary market as the "wild west. this does not suggest that all carbon offsets are low quality , but that the consumer is forced to adopt a buyer - beware mentality when purchasing carbon offsets . this places the responsibility on consumers to judge the quality of carbon offsets . the voluntary carbon offset market raises several issues that congress may consider . the viability — both actual and perceived — of the offset market may influence future policy decisions regarding climate change . for instance , some people are concerned that the range in the quality of voluntary market offsets may damage the overall credibility of carbon offsets . if this occurs , it may affect policy decisions concerning whether or not to include offsets as an option in a mandatory reduction program . this is an important policy question for congress .