this report will be updated as necessary . nsps grew out of george w. bush administration assertions that the gs system was incapable of creating a responsive and flexible national security workforce . in april 2003 , dod sent a proposal , entitled "the defense transformation for the 21 st century act," to congress . the proposal recommended changing the statutory basis for much of dod's civilian personnel system to create a "more flexible , mission - driven system of human resources management" that could "adequately address the 21 st century national security environment. many provisions in the dod proposal were ultimately included in title xi of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2004 ( p.l . 108-136 ) — including personnel flexibilities to create nsps . the act made some dod personnel policies more flexible than those governed by title 5 of the u.s. code , which includes most of the provisions governing civilian employees . the flexibilities , including the authority to eliminate pay grades and steps , gave dod and office of personnel management ( opm ) officials the opportunity to design a pay system that attempted to more closely link employee performance to pay . the new system was to help the department "develop a more flexible civilian personnel management system that would enhance [the department's] ability to execute [its] national security mission. on june 2 , 2003 , shortly after dod released its proposed changes in personnel flexibilities for nsps , senator susan collins , then - chairman of the senate committee on governmental affairs , introduced s. 1166 ( 108th congress ) . the bill , entitled the national security personnel system act , would have granted dod additional pay flexibilities for its large civilian workforce . the bill was referred to the senate governmental affairs committee . on june 4 , 2003 , the committee conducted a hearing on the bill . following the hearing , senators george v. voinovich and thomas carper asked then - comptroller general david m. walker to respond to several additional questions about dod's ability to motivate and control its workforce . walker's response , submitted on july 3 , 2003 , included the following comments: based on our experience , while dod's leadership has the intent and the ability to transform the department , the needed institutional infrastructure is not in place in a vast majority of dod organizations... . finally , nsps has four pay schedules: professional / analytical ; technician / support ; supervisor / manager ; and student . and there are between two and four pay bands within each pay schedule . pay schedules divide employees into groups by the "types of work being performed , knowledge or skill level , and pay ranges. because of the nature of career groups , some groups have higher starting salaries and higher salary caps than others . a professional / analytical employee , for example , has a higher salary cap than a technician / support employee . most pay schedules have three pay bands: expert ; journey ; and entry / development . figure 1 uses the standard career group to demonstrate how pay schedules and pay bands fit within career groups .