dividends and interest are taxable to their recipients . the sba's small business investment company ( sbic ) program is designed to stimulate private equity investments and long - term loans to small businesses . the jumpstart our business startups act ( jobs act ; p.l . 112-106 ) makes it easier for certain small firms to sell stock to investors . for many purposes , the small business administration defines a small business as one with 500 or fewer employees . small businesses by their nature have fewer employees than do large firms . they have fewer assets , less equipment , and undertake smaller projects . as a result , a representative small business needs to raise less money than a large business in the same industry . on the one hand , small businesses are unable to take advantage of economies of scale in raising capital such as bonds . for example , a small business borrowing $10,000 may pay a higher interest rate than an equally risky large business borrowing $10 million . on the other hand , large businesses may find only a few lenders who can accommodate their financing needs , whereas small businesses may borrow from any of several lenders . those who are concerned about the availability of credit to small businesses frequently suggest a number of reasons that small businesses may pay a higher interest rate or face more requirements to get a loan than an equally creditworthy larger business . these include the following: small businesses are thought to be more affected by swings in the economy and consequently are riskier . small businesses have a higher failure rate than comparable larger businesses and consequently are riskier . potential lenders have a harder time assessing how creditworthy a small business is . there are great differences between small businesses in the same industry and many reasons for borrowing money . this variation makes it difficult to develop general standards that can be applied to all small businesses . there is limited reliable financial information on many small businesses . many small businesses are young , have a short credit history , and have not been through a full business cycle . most small businesses are privately owned and do not publish current , detailed financial information . many small businesses use staff instead of independent accountants to create financial reports . small businesses have less collateral to pledge for a loan than do large businesses . this can lead to lenders ( and the sba ) requiring owners to pledge personally owned real estate as collateral . financial institutions , such as commercial banks , that have ongoing relationships with a small business are considered by many to have an advantage in lending because of their experience working with the small business . the history between a small business and the bank that serves it gives the bank information on the owners , managers , markets , and potential of the loan applicant that is not available to other lenders . this can lead to better lending decisions and may facilitate monitoring the business's financial health , which reduces the risk to the lender . over a business cycle , small business borrowing is likely to fluctuate .