project impact is not mitigation . however , it is also worth noting that congress's interest in mitigation remains . as previously noted , legislation has been introduced to reauthorize pdm . recent legislation has been introduced in the 113 th congress in both chambers to add a mitigation component to fema's fire management assistance grants ( fmags ) which are authorized under the stafford act in section 420 . the use of steel reinforcement to allow buildings to sway with an earthquake is an example of both mitigation and resilience . the ability of the internet to allow information - packets to find multiple open channels and opportunistically use whatever is available is another example of resilient design that can mitigate the impact of a threat . to either further the confusion or bring some clarity to the argument , the president's most recent budget ( fy2015 ) contained an opportunity , growth , and security initiative . that initiative suggested directing $400 million into the pdm program to promote resilience and mitigation measures . this was within the same budget that recommended zeroing out the pdm program . recent budget submissions by the administration , including the recent fy2015 budget , have staked out varying positions on pdm . those positions , along with the issues discussed in this report , are some of the broader considerations the congress may choose to take up regarding federal mitigation policy in the future and the pdm program's role in that policy . one observer notes the way that resilience and mitigation can co - exist and be complementary: the national preparedness goal defines resilience as , "the ability to adapt to changing conditions and withstand and rapidly recover from disruption due to emergencies. within this discussion it should also be noted that while mitigation found its footing over the last 10 years as evidence supported its cost - benefits , the terminology of "resilience" became fashionable and , it could be argued , confusing . this "rebranding" may have sought to broaden the concept , or simply to provide a new identity to this work to reinvigorate it . but changing the vocabulary also can sow confusion among potential recipients , causing them to ask: "does mitigation contribute to resilience ? or is resilience a broader concept than addressing natural hazards ? some have conjectured that resilience is a broader term than mitigation that reaches beyond engineered projects to human habits and desires . considered in this fashion , mitigation would appear to contribute to overall resilience . 111-351 that sought to increase funding by authorizing the appropriation of $180 million for 2011 , and $200 million for fiscal years 2012 and 2013 . in many communities it became the catch - phrase to get local leaders together to look at ways to do mitigation . for fy2003 and fy2004 , congress increased funding for pre - disaster mitigation to $150 million from the previous $25 million level . also , congress had inserted legislative language in the fy2003 appropriations act , which became law on february 20 , 2003 , stating that pdm funds "shall be awarded on a competitive basis.