appendix a . prior legislative activit . the administration's proposed fy2012 defense budget requested $877.0 million in air force research and development funding to begin the kc - 46a acquisition . as passed by the house , h.r . 1540 recommended $849.9 million in funding for the next generation aerial refueling aircraft program , a reduction of $27.2 million from the administration's request , the bill also included a requirement to report on changes in the kc - 46a acquisition program: sec . annual comptroller general report on the kc - 46a aircraft acquisition program . ( a ) annual gao review - during the period beginning on the date of the enactment of this act and ending on march 1 , 2017 , the comptroller general of the united states shall conduct an annual review of the kc - 46a aircraft acquisition program . ( b ) annual reports - ( 1 ) in general - not later than march 1 of each year beginning in 2012 and ending in 2017 , the comptroller general shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the review of the kc - 46a aircraft acquisition program conducted under subsection ( a ) . ( 2 ) matters to be included - each report on the review of the kc - 46a aircraft acquisition program shall include the following: ( a ) the extent to which the program is meeting engineering , manufacturing , development , and procurement cost , schedule , performance , and risk mitigation goals . ( b ) with respect to meeting the desired initial operational capability and full operational capability dates for the kc - 46a aircraft , the progress and results of — ( i ) developmental and operational testing of the aircraft ; and ( ii ) plans for correcting deficiencies in aircraft performance , operational effectiveness , reliability , suitability , and safety . ( c ) an assessment of kc - 46a aircraft procurement plans , production results , and efforts to improve manufacturing efficiency and supplier performance . ( d ) an assessment of the acquisition strategy of the kc - 46a aircraft , including whether such strategy is in compliance with acquisition management best - practices and the acquisition policy and regulations of the department of defense . ( e ) a risk assessment of the integrated master schedule and the test and evaluation master plan of the kc - 46a aircraft as it relates to — ( i ) the probability of success ; ( ii ) the funding required for such aircraft compared with the funding budgeted ; and ( iii ) development and production concurrency . ( 3 ) additional information - in submitting to the congressional defense committees the first report under paragraph ( 1 ) and a report following any changes made by the secretary of the air force to the baseline documentation of the kc - 46a aircraft acquisition program , the comptroller general shall include , with respect to such program , an assessment of the sufficiency and objectivity of — ( a ) the integrated baseline review document ; ( b ) the initial capabilities document ; ( c ) the capabilities development document ; and ( d ) the systems requirement document .