in certain circumstances , the csa recordkeeping provisions do not apply . congress may also add a substance to a schedule through legislation . the csa creates a "closed system" of distribution in which distribution may lawfully occur among registered handlers of controlled substances , referred to as "registrants. central to this closed system of distribution is the registration of all persons or entities authorized by the dea to handle controlled substances . the dea has described the movement of a controlled substance from manufacture to the patient as follows: [a] controlled substance , after being manufactured by a dea - registered manufacturer , may be transferred to a dea - registered distributor for subsequent distribution to a dea - registered retail pharmacy . after a dea - registered practitioner , such as a physician or a dentist , issues a prescription for a controlled substance to a patient ( i.e. , the ultimate user ) , that patient can fill that prescription at a retail pharmacy to obtain that controlled substance . in this system , the manufacturer , the distributor , the practitioner , and the retail pharmacy are all required to be dea registrants , or to be exempted from the requirement of registration , to participate in the process . all registrants are required by the csa to maintain complete and accurate inventories and records of all regulated transactions involving controlled substances and listed chemicals , as well as provide adequate security controls to prevent their diversion . for example , the prescribing or administering of methadone for the treatment of narcotic addiction must be in conformity with the csa's recordkeeping provisions . the csa also does not apply to research conducted in conformity with the exemption granted under certain provisions of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) or to preclinical research or teaching . therefore , a particular controlled substance is always under the control of a dea - registered person until it reaches the patient or is destroyed , and the csa's regulatory requirements "ensure that all controlled substances are accounted for from their creation until their dispensing or destruction. it is important to note that the csa allows for exceptions and also exempts certain individuals from some or all of its regulatory requirements . for example , individuals exempted from registration requirements include , among others , officers or employees of the dea , officers of the u.s. customs service , offers or employees of the u.s. food and drug administration , and any other federal officers who are authorized to possess , import , or export controlled substances in the course of their official duties . officers or employees of any state , or political subdivision of a state , who are engaged in enforcement of state or local laws relating to controlled substances , are also exempt from registering with the dea . a person who has lawfully obtained , and who possesses , a controlled substance for his own use is also not required to register .