currently , cellulosic ethanol is not produced on a commercial scale . advanced biofuels based on non - food feedstocks are generating much interest . feedstocks that could be grown on marginal land with reduced inputs compared with corn would solve the food versus fuel issue , it has been argued . however , biofuels that rely on other sources of biomass , including agricultural wastes , municipal solid waste , and dedicated non - food energy crops such as perennial grasses , fast - growing trees , and algae are still years from commercial production . nonetheless , this interest has led to proposals to support and / or mandate biofuels produced from feedstocks other than corn starch through explicit requirements , research , development and extension funding , and / or tax incentives . biofuels — transportation fuels produced from plant and animal materials — have attracted particular interest . this initial rfs required the increasing use of renewable fuel in gasoline , starting at 4.0 billion gallons in 2006 and increasing to 7.5 billion gallons in 2012 . however , the rfs was significantly expanded on december 19 , 2007 , when president bush signed the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa ) . instead of requiring 5.4 billion gallons of renewable fuel in 2008 , the new law requires 9.0 billion gallons . further , the 2007 law requires that the rfs be expanded to 36 billion gallons of renewable fuel by 2022 , as compared to an estimated 8.6 billion gallons under epact . although this is not an explicit ethanol mandate , it is expected that much of this requirement will be met using corn - based ethanol . the u.s. ethanol industry expanded rapidly in response to epact , outpacing the required growth in the earlier rfs and leading some proponents of corn - based ethanol to support an increase in the mandated levels of the rfs . the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( 2008 farm bill , p.l . 110-246 ) promotes the development of cellulosic ethanol production through new tax credits , reduces slightly the blender's tax credit for corn - derived ethanol beginning in 2009 , and continues the tariff on imported ethanol . it also expands research on agricultural renewable energy and encourages infrastructure development needed for cellulosic ethanol production . during the final months of the farm bill debate , both food and fuel prices increased dramatically , and the role of corn - based ethanol in food price inflation became the subject of intense debate . because of the rapid expansion of u.s. corn ethanol capacity — as of december 2008 , existing capacity was an estimated at 10.4 billion gallons per year , while an additional 1.8 billion gallons was under construction — some are concerned that the united states will soon reach the limit of ethanol that can be produced from corn .