the 2008 ndaa ( p.l . 110-181 ) requires that either the commander or at least one deputy commander billet at northcom be filled with a national guard officer . in july 2006 , northcom announced the cheyenne mountain operations center ( cmoc ) was undergoing an 18-month transition with day - to - day operations moving from the underground complex 15 miles west of peterson to a combined norad / northcom command center at peterson . the cold war vintage facility will remain in a "standby" status and be used for exercises or contingencies . northcom believes the combined command center will increase unity of effort and operational effectiveness , enabling an effective response to a full spectrum of threats . however , the government accountability office ( gao ) has voiced concern over costs , as well as incomplete analyses of security implications and operational effects of the proposed moves . to address the concerns , the 2008 national defense authorization act ( p.l . 110-181 ) stipulates funding for the cmoc realignment upon the dod submitting a report to congress that compares the cost of relocation with anticipated operational benefits , details functions that will remain at cmoc and maintain connectivity with functions that transfer out of cmoc , outlines plans for the relocation of norad , and explains the results of and independent security and vulnerability assessment of the new command center at peterson afb , colorado , along with dod plans , costs , and schedules for mitigating identified risks . the report is due to congress on march 1 , 2008 . after the report is submitted , gao has 120 days to submit to congress a review of dod's report . finally , by march 16 , 2008 , the secretary of the air force must submit a master recapitalization plan for cheyenne mountain air station . an april 2008 gao study examined availability of personnel available to northcom to both plan for and execute assigned missions . this issue was initially deferred to the commission on the national guard and reserves . the commission recommended that either the commander or deputy commander of northcom be filled by a reserve component officer , but it recommended against adding a second deputy commander billet to allow both active duty and reserve component representation at the deputy level . the gao found that northcom planning positions are staffed at relatively high levels in comparison with other geographic combatant commands , and that northcom officials believed they possessed adequate numbers of planning personnel . on the other hand , the gao questioned whether dod has assigned adequate numbers of forces to northcom to execute assigned missions . the gao found that unlike other geographic combatant commands within dod , dod has only routinely assigned air defense and supporting forces to northcom . as a result , the gao asserted that the lack of units specifically identified to execute northcom's plans may increase the level of risk to homeland defense or civil support operations in terms of the availability of a sufficient number of personnel with the appropriate level of training and equipment for conducting the domestic mission .