by 1999 , the company was abolished . many of mexico's domestic reforms in agriculture coincided with nafta negotiations , beginning in 1991 , and continued beyond the implementation of nafta in 1994 . the unilateral reforms in the agricultural sector make it difficult to separate those effects from the effects of nafta . views of nafta within mexico are mixed . media reports tend to highlight the anti - nafta sentiment in the mexican agricultural sector , but according to an extensive non - partisan opinion survey conducted by two independent groups in mexico , the majority of the mexican population views nafta favorably . a public opinion survey conducted in 2006 showed that the majority of the mexican population favors trade liberalization with the united states and canada . the survey , conducted by the centro de investigación y docencia económicas ( cide ) and the consejo mexicano de asuntos internacionales ( mexican council on foreign relations , comexi ) , also showed that mexicans have a very positive view of globalization , though there is some division on whether nafta should be renegotiated and whether mexico should continue forming new trade agreements with other countries . the survey examined the views of the general public and another group of individuals , labeled as "leaders" in the study , which comprises 259 representatives from five sectors ( government , politics , business , media and academic , and non - government organizations ) with an interest in international affairs or professional ties with other countries . this report will be updated as events warrant . in 1990 , the president of mexico at the time , carlos salinas de gortari , approached then u.s. president george h.w . bush with the idea of forming a free trade agreement ( fta ) . president salinas de gortari's motivations in pursuing an fta with the united states were to increase economic growth by attracting foreign direct investment ( fdi ) ; boosting exports ; creating industrial jobs ; and giving the mexican economy a growth stimulus . the mexican economy had experienced many difficulties throughout most of the 1980s with a significant deepening of poverty . mexico's intention in entering nafta was to increase export diversification by attracting fdi , which would help create jobs , increase wage rates , and reduce poverty . at the time nafta went into effect , many studies predicted that the agreement would cause an overall positive impact on the mexican economy . from the 1930s through part of the 1980s , mexico maintained a strong protectionist trade policy in an effort to be independent of any foreign power and as a means to industrialization . mexico established a policy of import substitution in the 1930s , consisting of a broad , general protection of the entire industrial sector . mexico placed high restrictions on foreign investment and controlled the exchange rate to encourage domestic industrial growth . mexico also nationalized the oil industry during this time . these protectionist economic policies remained in effect until the country began to experience a series of economic challenges caused by a number of factors . the 1980s in mexico were marked by inflation and a declining standard of living .