further testing would be required . it is possible that pakistani scientist a.q . khan may have provided north korea the same chinese - origin nuclear weapon design he provided to libya and iran . even though that design was for an heu - based device , it would still help north korea develop a reliable warhead for ballistic missiles — small , light , and robust enough to tolerate the extreme conditions encountered through a ballistic trajectory . learning more about what is needed for miniaturization of warheads for ballistic missiles could have been the goal of north korea's testing smaller nuclear devices . u.s. officials in their threat assessments have described the north korean nuclear capabilities as being more for deterrence , international prestige , and coercive diplomacy than for war fighting , and assess that pyongyang most likely "would consider using nuclear weapons only under narrow circumstances. the director of national intelligence said in early 2012 that "we also assess , albeit with low confidence , pyongyang probably would not attempt to use nuclear weapons against us forces or territory , unless it perceived its regime to be on the verge of military defeat and risked an irretrievable loss of control. statements by north korean officials emphasize that moves to expand their nuclear arsenal are in response to perceived threats by the united states against the north korean regime . nuclear weapons also give north korea leverage in diplomatic negotiations , and threatening rhetoric often coincides with times of crisis or transitions in negotiations . in january 2008 , a north korean media report stated that the country "will further strengthen our war deterrent capabilities in response to u.s. attempts to initiate nuclear war," to express its displeasure that it had not yet been removed from the u.s. terrorism list . statements from pyongyang in january 2009 may also be part of a strategy to increase leverage in nuclear talks , or could indicate an increasing role for the north korean military in nuclear policy making . a spokesman for north korea's general staff said on april 18 , 2009 , that the revolutionary armed forces "will opt for increasing the nation's defense capability including nuclear deterrent in every way. at the same time , the dprk issues periodic statements , such as its 2010 new year's address stating its dedication to achieving a nuclear - free korean peninsula through negotiations . in may 2012 , north korea changed its constitution to say that it was a "nuclear - armed state. on april 1 , 2013 , its party congress adopted the "law on consolidating position of nuclear weapons state. the official media ( kcna ) summarized the law as saying that nuclear weapons "serve the purpose of deterring and repelling the aggression and attack of the enemy against the dprk and dealing deadly retaliatory blows at the strongholds of aggression until the world is denuclearized. the statement also said that the "nuclear weapons of the dprk can be used only by a final order of the supreme commander of the korean people's army to repel invasion or attack from a hostile nuclear weapons state and make retaliatory strikes .