overall party strength data for the 98 th congress were taken from the congressional directory . the data in this report are from the earliest available complete information of each congress contained in these two primary documents . unfilled seats on committees ( if so noted in the secretaries' lists or the congressional directory ) are counted in individual and overall committee totals for consistency . tables 2- 19 show the following for each of the 18 congresses examined , by majority , minority , and independents ( where present ) senate party breakdown and majority margin ; total committee seats , majority and minority committee seats , and majority margin ; the standing and select committees ( with legislative jurisdiction ) as established and named in each congress ; committee seats allocated to the majority and minority parties , including independents ( where present ) , for each committee ; and majority - minority seat margin for each committee . table 1 shows a comparison of majority party strength in the senate chamber with total majority committee seats for the 98 th congress ( 1983-1985 ) through the 115 th congress ( 2017-2019 ) . for the 99 th through 115 th congresses , data on overall party strength in the senate for each congress were taken from the same lists . data for the 107 th congress reflect committee ratios established after the senate reorganization in june 2001 as a result of the end of a power - sharing agreement . an additional table ( table 1 ) provides a comparison of majority party strength in the senate chamber and total committee seats . the data presented in this report are drawn from the official committee assignment lists issued by the secretary of the senate , after assignments were made in each congress . in general , the result of these discussions has been to apportion total committee seats to the majority and minority parties in a manner that corresponds to the party strength in the full chamber . a finding of this report indicates that the majority party ratios on committees roughly approximate the majority party strength in the senate chamber , regardless of which party has been in control . this report shows senate committee party ratios for 18 congresses , covering the period of the 98 th congress ( 1983-1985 ) through the beginning of the 115 th congress ( 2017-2019 ) . in addition to the standing committees , data on permanent select committees with legislative jurisdiction are also included . determining sizes , ratios , and committee assignments are among the first actions taken after a general election and at the beginning of a congress . the standing rules of the senate are silent on the subject of committee party ratios ; the apportionment of committee seats results from discussions beginning in the early organization period between majority and minority party leadership . the party ratio in the senate standing committees is the proportional number of members of each party caucus assigned to each committee .