this risk is measured as the standard deviation of the rate of return . all of these authorities rest exclusively with the united states congress . the companies that sponsor defined benefit pension plans have a financial interest in lobbying congress to persuade it not to make pbgc premiums too high or plan funding requirements too onerous , because increases in premiums and stricter funding standards directly affect these firms' annual profit - and - loss statements . the pbgc is required by law to invest its income from premiums in securities backed by the full faith and credit of the u.s. government . it has the legal authority , however , to invest its trust fund , consisting mainly of the assets of underfunded plans for which the pbgc has become the trustee , in assets of its choice . in announcing the new investment policy adopted in 2008 , the pbgc stated its desire to maximize its investment income , and thus reduce its deficit . however , while the pbgc has asserted that its new policy will be less risky in the long - term than its previous policy , some of the assumptions underlying that assertion are open to question . the pbgc adopted its new investment policy in part in response to an analysis of investment options conducted for the agency by rocaton investment advisors , llc . the conclusions reached in that analysis are sensitive to the methods and assumptions on which they were based . an assessment of the relative risks of the pbgc's previous investment policy and its new policy , for example , depends largely on how the risk associated with each class of assets in the portfolio is measured , and on the relative weights of each class of asset in the old and new portfolios . the risk associated with holding a given financial asset is that the actual rate of return will deviate from the expected rate of return . the more volatile the asset — that is , the more widely actual annual rates of return are dispersed around the average — the greater the standard deviation . in its study for the pbgc , rocaton assumed that the rate of return on long - term treasury bonds ( with a 15-year average duration ) will have a standard deviation of 11.2% . crs examined rates of return on long - term treasury bonds over the period from 1926 through 2007 and found the standard deviation around the mean real rate of return to be 8.4% for 10-year treasury bonds and 11.2% for 30-year treasury bonds . the rocaton study assumed that the rate of return on u.s. equities would have a standard deviation of 15% . crs examined rates of return on u.s. equities as measured by the standard & poor's 500 index over the period from 1926 through 2007 and found the standard deviation around the mean annual real rate of return to be 20% . rocaton's lower estimate of the volatility of returns on stocks could be significant to the extent that it could appear to make investments in stocks less risky than the historical data indicate .