this report focuses on purchase cards . the use of purchase cards has expanded at a rapid rate since the mid - 1990s . spurred by legislative and regulatory reforms designed to increase purchase card use for small acquisitions , the dollar volume of federal government purchase card transactions grew from $527 million in fy1993 , to $19.3 billion in fy2009 . while the use of purchase cards has been credited with reducing administrative costs , audits of agency purchase card programs have found varying degrees of waste , fraud , and abuse . one of the most common risk factors cited by auditors is a weak internal control environment: many agencies have failed to implement adequate safeguards against card misuse , even as their purchase card programs grew . in response to these findings , congress has held hearings and introduced legislation that would enhance the management and oversight of agency purchase card programs . in addition , the office of management and budget ( omb ) has issued guidance that requires agencies to implement internal controls that are designed to minimize the risk of purchase card abuse . this report begins by providing background on agency purchase card programs . it then discusses identified weaknesses in agency purchase card controls that have contributed to card misuse , and examines legislation introduced in the 111 th congress that would address these weaknesses . the government's purchase card program has its origins in executive order 12352 , issued by president reagan in 1982 . during that same time span , the number of cardholders nearly tripled to 270,000 , and the number of purchase card transactions increased from 1.5 million to just under 21.8 million in fy2009 . few agencies are able to dedicate employees to work full - time as aos ; rather , ao duties , which include time - intensive activities such as reviewing cardholder statements , often fall to staff who already have full workloads . not surprisingly , some aos have said it is difficult to find the time to carefully review purchase card statements because of the demands of their other responsibilities . this problem may be compounded if the number of cardholders assigned to an ao — referred to as the span of control — increases . there is no government - wide span of control policy , but gao has recommended that agencies assign no more than seven cardholders to each ao ; beyond that 7:1 ratio , the ability of the ao to conduct effective oversight may be diminished , particularly when the ao has other , significant duties . although data are limited , audits have found that , at some agencies , the span of control exceeds gao's recommendation . in 2006 , according to gao , 2,150 purchase card holders at the department of homeland security — nearly 20% of dhs's total number of cardholders — were managed by aos with a span of control in excess of 7:1 . additional research might be useful for determining whether aos are hindered in their ability to provide effective oversight due to either the number of accounts they are expected to monitor , or to the demands of their other duties , or both .