each of these benefits is discussed in more detail below . the psob death benefit is a mandatory program , and the disability and education benefits are discretionary programs . as such , congress appropriates "such sums as are necessary" each fiscal year to fund the psob death benefit program while appropriating separate amounts for both the disability and education benefits programs . only individuals who are public safety officers , or their eligible survivors , are eligible to receive psob benefits . for the purposes of the psob act , a "public safety officer" is defined as an individual serving a public agency in an official capacity , with or without compensation , as a law enforcement officer , firefighter , or a chaplain ; an employee of the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) who is performing official duties , if those official duties are related to a major disaster or emergency that has been or is later declared to exist with respect to the area under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( 42 u.s.c . 5121 et seq. ) and are determined by the administrator of fema to be hazardous duties ; an employee of a state , local , or tribal emergency management or civil defense agency who is performing official duties in cooperation with fema , if those official duties are related to a major disaster or emergency that has been or is later declared to exist with respect to the area under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act and are determined by the head of the agency to be hazardous duties ; or a member of a rescue squad or ambulance crew who , as authorized or licensed by law and by the applicable agency or entity , is engaging in rescue activities or providing emergency medical services . the psob program provides a death benefit to eligible survivors of a public safety officer whose death is the direct and proximate result of a traumatic injury sustained in the line of duty or certain work - related heart attacks or strokes . to receive a death benefit , the claimant must establish that the public safety officer died as the direct and proximate result of an injury sustained in the line of duty . under the program , it is presumed that a public safety officer who dies from a heart attack , stroke , or vascular rupture while engaged in , on duty after , or within 24 hours of participating in a non - routine stressful or strenuous physical law enforcement , fire suppression , rescue , hazardous material response , emergency medical services , prison security , disaster relief , or other emergency response activity or a training exercise involving non - routine stressful or strenuous physical activity , has died in the line of duty for death benefit purposes . however , the statutory presumption can be overcome with competent medical evidence to the contrary . the psob program pays a one - time lump sum death benefit to eligible survivors of a public safety officer killed in the line of duty . 104-238 ) authorized the public safety officers' educational assistance ( psoea ) program .