appendix a . status of ucr and nibrs reporting , by state appendix b. ucr part i and part ii offenses the fbi collects data on both the number of offenses known to police and the number of arrests made for all part i offenses . a motor vehicle is self - propelled and runs on land surface and not on rails . motorboats , construction equipment , airplanes , and farming equipment are specifically excluded from this category . arson any willful or malicious burning or attempt to burn , with or without intent to defraud , a dwelling house , public building , motor vehicle or aircraft , personal property of another , etc . part ii offenses other assaults ( simple ) assaults and attempted assaults which are not of an aggravated nature and do not result in serious injury to the victim . stalking , intimidation , coercion , and hazing are included . forgery and counterfeiting the altering , copying , or imitating of something , without authority or right , with the intent to deceive or defraud by passing the copy or thing altered or imitated as that which is original or genuine ; or the selling , buying , or possession of an altered , copied , or imitated thing with the intent to deceive or defraud . attempts are included . fraud the intentional perversion of the truth for the purpose of inducing another person or other entity in reliance upon it to part with something of value or to surrender a legal right . fraudulent conversion and obtaining of money or property by false pretenses . confidence games and bad checks , except forgeries and counterfeiting , are included . embezzlement the unlawful misappropriation or misapplication by an offender to his / her own use or purpose of money , property , or some other thing of value entrusted to his / her care , custody , or control . stolen property: buying , receiving , possessing buying , receiving , possessing , selling , concealing , or transporting any property with the knowledge that it has been unlawfully taken , as by burglary , embezzlement , fraud , larceny , robbery , etc . attempts are included . vandalism to willfully or maliciously destroy , injure , disfigure , or deface any public or private property , real or personal , without the consent of the owner or person having custody or control by cutting , tearing , breaking , marking , painting , drawing , covering with filth , or any other such means as may be specified by local law . attempts are included . weapons: carrying , possessing , etc the violation of laws or ordinances prohibiting the manufacture , sale , purchase , transportation , possession , concealment , or use of firearms , cutting instruments , explosives , incendiary devices , or other deadly weapons . attempts are included . prostitution and commercialized vice the unlawful promotion of or participation in sexual activities for profit , including attempts .