basic research is generally available to all competitors . even when basic research presents the potential for commercial exploitation , it may not deliver national advantage . open publication and free exchange of research results are guiding principles of federally funded fundamental research and research conducted by u.s. colleges and universities . this approach may allow for the rapid expansion of global scientific and technical knowledge as new work is built on the scaffolding of previous work . however , the information is available to all competitors , u.s. and foreign alike , and thus may not confer competitive advantage to the united states . u.s. - based companies may conduct production and other work outside of the united states . in today's economy , supply chains are global and the work required to develop , design , produce , market , sell , and service products is generally conducted where it can be done most efficiently . even if u.s. - based companies successfully develop and bring nanotechnology materials and products to market , work may be conducted , and the economic value captured , outside of the united states . some economists assert that international r&d collaboration can benefit the united states as well by improving the productivity of the r&d process . with these caveats , the following section reviews input and non - economic output measures as indicators of the u.s. competitive position in nanotechnology . federal policies and investments may offer tools that can make the united states the most attractive place for companies to conduct a greater share of value - adding activities , contributing to u.s. economic growth and job creation . u.s. - educated foreign students may return home to conduct research and create new businesses . in the era following world war ii , many of the most gifted and talented students from around the world were attracted to the science and engineering programs of u.s. colleges and universities . for many years , many of those who graduated from these programs decided to stay in the united states and contributed to u.s. global scientific , engineering , and economic leadership . today , many foreign students educated in the united states have economic opportunities in their home countries that did not exist for previous generations . some nations are making strong appeals and offering significant incentives for their students to return home to conduct research and create enterprises . thus , federal support for universities , in general , and scientific and engineering research activities , in particular , may contribute to the development of leading scientists and engineers who might return to their home countries to exploit the knowledge , capabilities , and networks developed in the united states . small businesses may lack the resources needed to bring their nanotechnology innovations to market . federal programs , such as the small business innovation research ( sbir ) program and the small business technology transfer ( sttr ) program , support leading - edge nanotechnology research by small innovative firms . federally funded university research can produce small start - up ventures .