tsvangirai refused to do so . some believe zanu - pf had planned to negotiate even before the runoff , but wanted to enter the talks from a position of power , with mugabe having won the second round . as noted above , although observers suggest that the march 29 election day was largely peaceful , reports of politically motivated violence subsequently increased to a level not seen in two decades , according to advocacy groups . the mdc alleged that over 500 of its supporters were killed in the months after the election . ambassador james mcgee implicated the ruling party in orchestrating the attacks . zanu - pf and the zimbabwean army denied involvement with the violence , although the army ; police ; intelligence service ; "war veterans ; " and zimbabwe's national youth service , also known as the "green bombers," were all implicated . one week after the elections , self - styled war veteran leader jabuli sibanda warned , "it has come to our realization that the elections were used as another war front to prepare for the reinvasion of our country.... as freedom fighters , we feel compelled to repel the invasion," echoing a frequent mugabe refrain that an opposition victory would be tantamount to the british reinstating colonial rule . the state - owned herald newspaper contributed to fears of a white takeover in the wake of the election , reporting , "an increasing number of white former commercial farmers are reportedly threatening resettled black farmers throughout the country with eviction from their farms or face the wrath of an anticipated 'incoming mdc government.' these pronouncements coincided with farm invasions throughout the country , and by mid - april 2008 the commercial farmers union reported that over 100 of the estimated remaining 400 white farmers had been forced off their lands . further evictions in 2009 may have reduced the number to less than 250 . zimbabwe's rural areas appear to have been the hardest hit by the post - election violence ; the u.s. embassy in harare documented thousands who fled the countryside for urban areas in the months after the march elections . most harare medical clinics were at full capacity during the height of the violence , according to the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) . zimbabwe's largest farmers' union reported that militias displaced over 40,000 farm workers , and there were widespread reports of burned homes , granaries , and livestock . the united nations' resident representative in zimbabwe stated at the time , "there is an emerging pattern of political violence inflicted mainly , but not exclusively , on suspected followers of the mdc. the level of violence was confirmed by an eight - person sadc mission: "we have seen it , there are people in hospital who said they have been tortured , you have seen pictures , you have seen pictures of houses that have been destroyed and so on. some zimbabwean officials , including the police chief , accused the mdc of rigging and inciting violence . more than 10 newly elected mdc legislators were arrested in the wake of the march elections . sixteen other mdc officials and human rights activists were charged with terrorism and sabotage .