navy. another press report stated: northrop grumman corp ( noc ) has "much more work to do" to improve its performance on navy ships , but problems with a $13.6-billion amphibious ship program were not solely the contractor's making , chief executive ron sugar said in a june 29 letter . "the original acquisition strategy was changed after contract award , there was funding instability , limited early funding for critical vendor information , and the 'integrated' navy / contractor design team produced constant design churn and thousands of design changes," sugar wrote , responding to a tersely worded letter from navy secretary donald winter . "when issues arise , we aggressively address them in an immediate and methodical way . upon hearing there may be a problem with lube oil leaks on lpd 17 , we immediately responded with technical staff to assist in the navy's efforts and began our own in - house critique. she added that "we are proactively conducting a comprehensive review of our procedures , processes and policies surrounding the lpd - class ships currently under construction at our gulf coast shipyards . this effort includes the implementation of short - term corrective actions until , aligned with our customer , we fully determine the cause and need for any long - term corrective actions to ensure conformance and reinforce the commitment to quality we have in our work . we have invited and welcomed navy participation throughout our own internal review process. on capitol hill , lawmakers also are taking notice . josh holly , a spokesman for the republican side of the house armed services committee , said members "continue to follow [san antonio's] challenges . the seapower subcommittee is aware of the most recent issues , although the navy has not briefed us yet. rep. joe sestak , d - pa. , a former vice admiral , said after viewing the photos: "it looks like more of a systemic problem from when it was built. "the ones who suffer are the bluejackets," said sestak , a member of the house armed services committee and former top warfare requirements and programs officer for the navy . naval analyst and author norman polmar put it more bluntly . "it's criminal . it's criminal that the navy accepted this ship," he said . "and this is two and a half years after the navy accepted the ship . it's bad enough that it was delivered this way. polmar said he thinks the san antonio should be towed back to the shipyard . "as a taxpayer and as a naval analyst," he said , "i'm fuming.".. who ' s to blame ? those familiar with the situation do not blame the crew or navy engineers for the problem , comparing it with the discovery of a flaw in your car's chassis during a road trip: you may have topped off the oil and filled the gas tank before you left , they say , but you can't be expected to examine work completed long ago , when the car was built at the auto plant . even those responsible for ensuring the material condition of the fleet — the ultracritical board of inspection and survey — do so under certain assumptions , one navy source said .