the senate recedes . the conferees note that the implementation of current legislation and regulatory guidance should facilitate reduction of petroleum - based fuels by the department . each of these studies is more fully examined below . the government sponsored reports seem to indicate , with limited exceptions , that dod should consider various options for reducing its reliance on fossil fuels . aviation fuel in particular is viewed as a primary target of that reduction as it accounts for the largest share of fuel consumed by the department . generally , dod has several available methods for decreasing its use of petroleum - based aviation fuel . they can be placed in two categories: 1 ) increasing the use and supply of alternative fuels and 2 ) decreasing the demand for petroleum - based fuel . in the first category , options include producing synthetic fuel from coal , natural gas , and biomass , as well as hydrogen fuel cells . in the second category , dod can use various existing technologies to increase the fuel - efficiency of weapon systems and modify operating procedures and polices to use less fuel . all the options have limitations and none provide a perfect solution . whether it is more prudent to aggressively pursue alternative fuels or concentrate resources on decreasing the department's fuel demand is a matter of debate . there are many who suggest that dod can spur the development of a viable domestic coal - to - liquid industry . others suggest that developing such an industry would contribute to carbon emissions and divert funds from the development of alternative fuels produced from renewable sources as well as from efforts to increase the fuel - efficiency of weapon systems . the following is a discussion of the most frequently cited options . dod's efforts to explore greater use of alternative aviation fuel and to reduce its overall consumption of petroleum - based fuel have been lauded by many . however , the department's ability to follow through with its initiatives may be adversely affected by a number of factors . they include dod organizational structure , funding , and external expectations for dod in the nation's search for alternative fuel sources . considering the issues discussed , there appear to be at least six options for congress . these potential options may be mutually reinforcing and not "either / or" options . dod's progress in energy security may be enhanced with clearer lines of authority . currently , different offices within dod share responsibility for the department's various energy related initiatives . the office of the director , defense research and engineering seems to have taken on something of a leadership role but , notwithstanding its leadership of the dod task force on energy security , ddr&e's mission is to "ensure that the warfighters today and tomorrow have superior and affordable technology to support their missions , and to give them revolutionary war - winning capabilities. it's mission does not encompass many other possible aspects of energy strategy such as acquisitions , installations , finances , and operations . on the other hand , it may be argued that adding another layer of "bureaucracy" is unnecessary when functions are already in place to handle individual issues .