governments share in the profits of companies through tax collections . table 5 presents income taxes reported on the financial statements of major integrated oil companies between 2005 and 2010 . these include income taxes paid to the u.s. federal government , as well as income tax payments to state and local governments and foreign governments . tax payments by these five companies increased 32% between 2005 and 2007 , before decreasing in recent years . total tax payments by the major integrated oil companies in 2009 and 2010 were substantially lower than tax payments during the previous four years . also important to the public policy question might be the actual size of the profits and what the industry did with them . if an industry invests profits into increased production capacity , the increased supply may ultimately cause prices to fall and the profits to dissipate . as the analysis in this report shows , the experience between 2003 and the first quarter of 2011 suggests that investments in oil exploration and development have not managed to keep company oil output from declining from the peak attained in 2006 . numerous bills have been introduced in the congress over this period to tax the oil and gas industry's record profits . broadly , there are two ways that tax policy can be used to increase taxes on oil and gas profits . first , congress could scale back or eliminate various tax incentives and preferences currently available to the industry . should a wpt — or other type of additional tax — be imposed on the oil and gas industry it is important to note that the potential economic consequences of different types of taxes differ . an excise tax type of wpt could lead to a reduction in domestic oil production , but would not likely lead to an increase in the price of petroleum for consumers . an income tax type wpt would be less likely to distort domestic production in the short - run . however , as resources are reallocated over time , and income tax type wpt could affect domestic production . in the short - run , an income tax type wpt would be unlikely to have much effect on prices . over time , however , it is possible that an income tax type wpt could lead to price increases . another option for increasing taxes on the oil and gas industry , one that has been considered in the 112 th congress , is scaling back existing tax benefits . rescinding the § 199 domestic production deduction for oil and gas companies is another option for increasing taxes on the industry . this option , however , does not target windfall profits , but would instead effectively increase the marginal corporate tax rate for domestic oil and gas producers . repeal of the § 199 deduction would be unlikely to reduce output or increase prices in the short - run . further , any long - run market impacts on production and prices would likely be small . second , congress could directly increase taxes on the industry , through some form of an excess profits tax or windfall profits tax .