for some observers , the results of these first meetings have been mixed . the 2007 framework presented the tec with two priorities . the first was to build upon the established sectoral dialogues which had been taking place between u.s. and european commission regulatory experts . these dialogues have included issues involving pharmaceuticals , automobile safety , cosmetics , consumer product safety , food safety , energy efficiency , and medical devices . the second priority was identified as the "lighthouse priority projects. these included a review of policies on intellectual property rights and piracy , secure ports and trade , financial markets , innovation and technology , and investment . the creation of the tec was predicated on the premise that past efforts to achieve regulatory cooperation or convergence had been inadequate due to the technical nature of the work , the case - by - case , ad hoc approach , often assumed by regulatory agencies , and a lack of political leadership committed to having the regulators cooperate . european affiliate earnings in the united states were reported to be flat in 2008 . for those interested in the transatlantic economic relationship , this broad mandate to include the legislators has resulted in an increased interest in the role the u.s. congress and the european parliament can or should play in regulatory cooperation and convergence . this massive amount of ownership of companies in each other's markets translates into billions of dollars of sales , profits , production , and expenditures on research and development . many representatives of congress and the european parliament have long argued for greater legislative participation in broader u.s. - eu relations including such matters and participation in the annual u.s. – eu summit process . numerous pieces of legislation have been introduced and even passed in both congress and the parliament over the past seven years calling for enhanced dialogue and coordination between the congress and the european parliament in matters related to the transatlantic economic relationship . in 2004 and 2005 , the european parliament passed resolutions supporting the completion of the transatlantic market by 2015 . in addition , an estimated 6-7 million americans are employed by european affiliates operating in the united states , and almost an equal number of eu citizens work for american companies in europe . in the current global economic crisis , these figures have declined somewhat but will still constitute significant transatlantic economic and financial activity . the combined weight of these two economic superpowers means that how the united states and eu manage their relationship and the difficult issues involving domestic regulations , competition policy , and foreign investment often helps determine how the rest of the world deals with similar issues . the tld is an inter - parliamentary entity , and as such , does not have , at this point , a mandate to formally represent congress as a whole or even the house separately . until the tld and congress itself , have a better understanding of what is expected of it and how it will carry out its mandate as an advisor to the tec , doubts will remain .