other ramifications of medimmune on the patent law are significant . the licensees then filed a counterclaim for declaratory judgment that the underlying patents were invalid . second , the decision promises to play a role in drafting and negotiating the terms of patent licensing agreements , as licensors - patentees may be interested in having licensees agree to the inclusion of "no challenge" clauses . in lone dissent , justice clarence thomas maintained that a patent licensee in good standing must breach its license prior to challenging the validity of the underlying patent . he stated , "[t]he declaratory judgment procedure cannot be used to obtain advanced rulings on matters that would be addressed in a future case of actual controversy. in his view , medimmune's suit was an attempt to seek a ruling on hypothetical or conjectural matters , and thus federal courts lacked article iii jurisdiction over its claims . since medimmune was decided , the federal circuit has acknowledged that the first prong of its "two - part test" for declaratory judgment jurisdiction , the "reasonable apprehension of suit" prong , is no longer valid because it contradicts supreme court precedent as explained by the medimmune court . medimmune , however , left open several unresolved questions whose impact on the patent law remain to be seen ; lower courts' interpretations of the decision will be instructive , and the supreme court may well revisit the issues it declined to address in medimmune during a future case . for example , the lear court had ruled that a repudiating licensee need not comply with its contract and continue paying royalties until the patent is held invalid by a court . however , the medimmune court "express[ed] no opinion" on whether a nonrepudiating licensee is relieved of its contract obligations during the suit challenging the patent's validity . therefore , the applicability of the licensee estoppel doctrine to this situation is an open question after medimmune . also , the medimmune court had emphasized that district courts still have statutory discretionary authority to decline to hear declaratory judgment actions ; it will be up to licensors - patentees to craft "equitable , prudential , and policy arguments" to successfully persuade the district court to exercise that discretion . finally , the medimmune court did not consider the enforceability of drafting a provision in a license agreement that obliged a licensee not to challenge the validity of the underlying patent unless he or she breached the license . first , the ruling may spark an increase in patent litigation activity , as more patent licensees may find it easier to bring declaratory judgment actions to challenge the patent's validity — without having to terminate or breach their license agreements before doing so . it is also likely that the decision may have an impact beyond patent law , as it may be applicable to licensing and contract law matters that do not involve intellectual property . however , the licensees continued to pay royalties "under protest," although it was being required to do so under an injunction decree that the patentees had obtained in an earlier case .