there has been no further action . crs conducted the interviews before learning of the existence of schedule m - 3 . none of the interviewees knew of the form either , judging by the conversations . the early information from the new irs form shows that the brownfields tax incentive is indeed being used by large and midsize businesses , and somewhat more than the survey indicated . the number of corporations reporting its use are likely to rise from 110 as other corporations and partnerships begin filing the m - 3 . there will also continue to be an unknown number of smaller businesses with total assets of less than $10 million that will take advantage of section 198 . the survey showed an average of about 44 brownfield certifications per year in 2003-2007 , and the irs form revealed that 110 corporations reported deductions for cleanup costs of $295 million in 2004 , an average of $2.68 million per company . one would expect , but there is no way to know , that the companies worked on more than one site each . the schedule m - 3 data confirm the survey findings that the provision is not used as much as was expected when section 198 first became law . nevertheless , these first results show that $295 million was reported as a deduction item on schedule m - 3 for tax purposes by the private sector for cleaning up brownfields in 2004 , and that was the goal of the provision: to provide an incentive to bring contaminated lands back into productive use . the $295 million figure is from voluntary reporting by only a portion of the pertinent taxpayer universe , and it is very likely to increase now that the use of schedule m - 3 is mandatory for all corporations and partnerships . there is probably no way to measure whether the tax incentive has proven to be the reason why any certain number of brownfields have been cleaned up . nor are we likely to know if repeal of the recapture provision would lead to more cleanups at economically marginal sites . the best observation may be what the interviewed developers said: that it can be a useful tool in some circumstances in putting a brownfield remediation / land development deal together . in that sense , brownfield supporters note that it has been a help in cleaning up the half million or more brownfield sites around the united states . it should be remembered that there is a certain unknown number of cleanups being accomplished by firms with assets under $10 million . from the survey , it does not seem that there are a great many of them , but it is also plausible that a fair number are also being done by individuals with no knowledge of irs's 1994 revenue ruling or the section 198 tax incentive , and are simply treating their cleanup costs as normal development expenses . a factor that has sometimes affected the passage of the brownfields tax incentive is that it is one of a number of tax credits , deductions , and taxpayer benefits that have all been considered together in recent years . this group changes from year to year .