some of the provisions in h.r . 527 appeared to address certain long - standing issues of concern regarding the implementation of the rfa ( eg , the inclusion of "indirect" effects in the definition of "economic impact," and clarifying that section 610 reviews are required for any rule determined to have a seisnse , even if an frfa was not prepared ) . other provisions appear to add to the number or depth of the analytical and notification requirements placed on rulemaking agencies . perhaps most notably , the sba chief counsel for advocacy is required to issue rules governing agency compliance with the rfa . if those rules clarify what is meant by the term "significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities," they have the potential to improve the implementation of the rfa as well as related statutory requirements . other portions of h.r . 527 appear to widen the scope and impact of the rfa substantially . for example , by defining a covered "rule" using the definition in section 551 ( 4 ) of title 5 , the rfa would appear to include not just legislative rules that appear in the federal register and the code of federal regulations , but also agency guidance documents and policy statements . also , the amendments to section 609 of title 5 would , if enacted , substantially broaden the requirement for advocacy review panels . currently , the requirements only apply to epa and osha , and will extend to the cfpb when the agency is established in july 2010 . 527 would , if enacted , expand the panel requirements to all agencies , and make them applicable to "major" rules , even if they did not have a seisnse . also , some rules that are considered "major" impose no compliance costs , and instead are considered major because they involve more than $100 million in federal transfer payments ( eg , to medicare and medicaid providers , or as crop subsidies ) , fees for government services ( eg , passport application fees paid to the department of state ) , or consumer spending ( eg , migratory bird hunting rules issued by the department of the interior ) . some observers have indicated that these changes to the rfa could affect agencies' ability to issue needed regulations , while others have applauded the changes . both groups would likely agree that the amendments , if enacted , would fundamentally alter the nature and rfa's reach and requirements . should agencies consider the rfa triggered when a rule has a significant positive impact on small entities ? gao went on to say the following: these questions are not simply matters of administrative conjecture within the agencies . for example , for more than 20 years , courts have ruled that agencies need not prepare regulatory flexibility analyses if the effects of a rule on an industry are indirect .