compliance in pending cases , by [author name scrubbed] . the island nations of the eastern caribbean are among the smallest countries in the world . ( see tables 1 and 2 and figure 1 . ) ethnically , a majority of the regional's population is of african heritage , descendants of slaves brought to the west indies in the 17 th to 19 th centuries to work on sugar plantations . small minorities of ethnic chinese are also found in several caribbean nations and a javanese population is found in suriname . both cuba and the dominican republic have large populations of spanish descent , but in both countries , people of mixed african - spanish heritage make up the majority of the population . descendants of indigenous caribbean peoples , the arawak and carib indians , constitute small minorities in several caribbean island nations , while guyana and suriname have minorities of several amerindian tribes . belize , in addition to having a small garifuna ( mixed african and amerindian heritage ) population , also has a significant indigenous mayan population . many countries in the region share a common british colonial heritage , while cuba and the dominican republic were spanish colonies , haiti was french , and suriname was dutch . stemming from its diverse colonial history , the region includes 12 predominantly english - speaking nations . in several nations , however , more than one language is spoken , and in several countries , a common patois or dialect is spoken . haiti has two official languages: creole , the common language spoken by most of the population ; and french , which is spoken only by about 10% of the population . in several of the english - speaking caribbean nations , a french patois is also spoken , evidence of a historical era when british and france vied for colonial control in the region . u.s. interests in the caribbean are diverse , and include economic , political , and security concerns . during the cold war , security concerns tended to eclipse other policy interests , and focused on the potential threat in the region from the soviet union and cuba . in the aftermath of the cold war , other u.s. policy interests emerged from the shadow of the east - west conflict in the caribbean and u.s. policy priorities shifted from one emphasizing security concerns to a new focus on strengthened economic relations through trade and investment . with the september 2001 terrorist attacks in the united states , security concerns have re - emerged as a major u.s. interest in the caribbean . the administration describes the caribbean as america's "third border," with events in the region having a direct impact on the homeland security of the united states . it describes caribbean nations as "vital partners on security , trade , health , the environment , education , regional democracy , and other hemispheric issues. the united states has close relations with most caribbean nations , with the exception of cuba under fidel castro .