in addition , p.l . 111-5 prohibited all administrative actions to implement the final rule on outpatient hospital services until after june 30 , 2009 . this law included a "sense of congress" that the secretary of hhs should not promulgate final regulations for the cost limits on public providers , graduate medical education , and rehabilitation services . since that time , these rules have been affected by other federal actions ( see table 1 ) . the rule on cost limits for public providers was vacated by a federal judge . the obama administration has taken additional actions on the remaining six rules . congress placed a moratorium that prohibited the hhs secretary from taking any action — such as finalizing the rule — to impose restrictions that were more restrictive than those in effect on july 1 , 2007 , and extended the moratorium in a separate appropriations act . a later law included a "sense of congress" that the secretary should not promulgate the proposed rule as a final rule . this rule was withdrawn by the obama administration . several factors may have led to this withdrawal , including the "sense of the congress" in p.l . 111-5 , the complexity of the underlying issues and the public comments received , and the desire to assure that cms has the flexibility to reevaluate the issues as well as explore options and alternatives with stakeholders . the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l . 111-5 ) extended the existing moratorium on the final or interim final regulations on case management services , provider taxes , and school - based administration and transportation services until july 1 , 2009 . the three rules regarding school - based administration and transportation services , outpatient hospital services , and case management have been rescinded in part or altogether . enforcement of a portion of the rule on provider taxes has been delayed . the secretary issued an interim final rule with a comment period in december 2007 that became effective in march 2008 . all medicaid authorities related to all case management services , including tcm and services delivered through waivers , were subject to this rule . it also directly addressed case management issues that previously might have been considered open to interpretation . cms contended that specific guidance and definitions were needed to avoid further excessive federal outlays . the proposed rule was also intended to reduce previous confusion about the overlap between medicaid tcm and similar services provided through other non - medicaid programs . opponents of this rule argued that it is more restrictive than congress intended in dra , and would result in cuts to tcm services since alternatives to medicaid funding are scarce . in addition , the new administrative requirements and complexities of the rule may increase state costs while decreasing provider participation and beneficiaries' access to quality medical care . seven regulations were the subject of considerable controversy in the 110 th congress . each of these regulations , to differing degrees , would limit payments for certain services and / or affect payments to providers . as per the supplemental appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .