it can only save itself. the china investment corporation , ltd. ( cic ) is a semi - independent , quasi - governmental investment firm established by the chinese government to invest a portion of the nation's foreign exchange reserves . the cic reports directly to china's state council , conferring it with the equivalent standing of a ministry , and the state council's leader , premier wen jiabao . according to one source , the cic will have three major departments for its investment functions — 1 . central huijin investment company ( chic ) , which will provide capital to domestic financial firms ; 2 . china jianyin investments , which will manage domestic assets and the disposal of nonperforming loans ; and 3 . a new department to manage overseas investments . the investment objectives of the cic have been gradually revealed by the cic's leadership . just prior to the creation of china's sovereign wealth fund , jesse wang jianxi , a member of the cic's preparatory group , stated , "the mission for this company [cic] is purely investment - return driven. however , the actual meaning of "purely investment - return driven" is open to interpretation . in april 2008 , wang , in his new role as the cic's executive vice president and chief risk officer , provided a more specific statement of the cic's investment goals , indicating that the company was "quite conservative at this time," seeking a rate of return on its investments of "about mid - one - digit or slightly above one digit. since the onset of the global financial crisis , there are indications that the cic's expectations for the rate of return on its current and future investments may have been lowered . starting in the summer of 2008 , there emerged indications that china was rethinking cic's role . cic's poor overseas investment performance , plus internal and external administrative tensions , gave rise to discussions about reforming cic . internally , there were problems reconciling cic's overall investment mission with the chic's domestic investment focus . externally , the state administration of foreign exchange ( safe ) , which reports directly to the pboc , made an apparent bid to challenge cic's role as the chinese government's leading overseas investment fund . while there have been no major changes to cic so far , there are clear indications that china's leaders are keeping an eye on cic's progress . in july 2008 , sources in china reported that chinese officials were discussing the possible separation of cic and the chic . the officials perceived a tension between cic's commercial orientation and the chic's role as investor in china's larger financial institutions . in addition , the connection between cic and the chic apparently led the u.s. federal reserve to postpone granting licenses for ccb and icbc branches in new york city . on october 22 , 2008 , china's state council announced that it was assigning new roles to the chic and china jianyin investment company , but keeping both firms under cic . the chic was to serve as a investment institution holding majority stakes in china's larger state - owned banks .