it could also undermine confidence in u.s. security guarantees more generally . japan has been a staunch npt supporter in good standing ever since . despite multiple reiterations of japan's non - nuclear status , this orthodoxy has been challenged on several occasions , usually when japan has felt strategic vulnerability . probably the most prominent episode occurred in the mid - 1960s: china tested a nuclear device for the first time in 1964 , and the united states was engaged in the vietnam war . prime minister eisaku sato secretly commissioned several academics to produce a study exploring the costs and benefits of japan's possible nuclearization , the so - called "1968 / 70 internal report. depending on the severity of the perceived threat from china , japanese and u.s. officials could reconsider their views on japan's non - nuclear status . if the two koreas unify while north korea still holds nuclear weapons and the new state opts to keep a nuclear arsenal , japan may face a different calculation . perhaps the single most important factor to date in dissuading tokyo from developing a nuclear arsenal is the u.s. guarantee to protect japan's security . since the threat of nuclear attack developed during the cold war , japan has been included under the u.s. "nuclear umbrella," although some ambiguity exists about whether the united states is committed to respond with nuclear weapons in the event of a nuclear attack on japan . u.s. officials have hinted that it would: following north korea's 2006 nuclear test , former secretary of state condoleezza rice , in tokyo , said , " ... the united states has the will and the capability to meet the full range , and i underscore full range , of its deterrent and security commitments to japan. most policymakers in japan continue to emphasize that strengthening the alliance as well as shared conventional capabilities is more sound strategy than pursuing an independent nuclear capability . during the cold war , the threat of mutually assured destruction to the united states and the soviet union created a sort of perverse stability in international politics ; japan , as the major pacific front of the u.s. containment strategy , felt confident in u.s. extended deterrence . although the united states has reiterated its commitment to defend japan , the strategic stakes have changed , leading some in japan to question the american pledge . if japan decided to go nuclear , its international reputation as a principled advocate for non - proliferation would erode . some in japan are nervous that if the united states develops a closer relationship with china , the gap between tokyo's and washington's security perspectives will grow and further weaken the u.s. commitment . these critics also point to what they perceive as the soft negotiating position on north korea's denuclearization in the six - party talks as further evidence that the united states does not share japan's strategic perspective . a weakening of the bilateral alliance may strengthen the hand of those that want to explore the possibility of japan developing its own deterrence .