like h.r . 5515 would enable individuals who are terminated from employment as a result of a disapproval notice ( akin to a final nonconfirmation under e - verify ) to seek administrative and judicial review . the seevs , which h.r . 5515 would direct ssa to establish by regulation , would provide for identity authentication and employment eligibility verification . it would use the services of private sector entities to enroll new employees by means of identity authentication , to protect authenticated information through biometric technology , and to verify employment eligibility . employees would be afforded the same rights and protections in connection with responses to inquiries under the seevs as under the eevs . 5515 also would increase monetary penalties for employer violations of ina §274a prohibitions on unlawful employment ( §104 ) and would amend ina §274b on unfair immigration - related employment practices to add new antidiscrimination requirements related to the eevs and the seevs ( §103 ) . in addition , the bill would provide for the disclosure of certain information in the national directory of new hires by the department of health and human services to dhs ( §106 ) . the admission of refugees to the united states and their resettlement here are authorized by the ina . the u.s. worldwide refugee ceiling for fy2009 is 80,000 , with 75,000 of these numbers allocated among the regions of the world and the remaining 5,000 comprising an "unallocated reserve" to be used if , and where , additional refugee slots are needed . fy2008 refugee admissions totaled 60,192 , below the fy2008 ceiling of 80,000 but above the fy2007 total of 48,282 . as of november 30 , 2008 , fy2009 refugee admissions total 7,416 . refugee numbers that are unused in a fiscal year are lost ; they do not carry over into the following year . dos handles overseas processing of refugees , which is conducted through a system of three priorities for admission . priority one ( p - 1 ) covers compelling protection cases and individuals for whom no durable solution exists , who are referred to the u.s. refugee program by unhcr , a u.s. embassy , or a designated nongovernmental organization ( ngo ) . all nationalities are eligible for p - 1 processing . priority two ( p - 2 ) covers groups of special humanitarian concern to the united states . it includes specific groups within certain nationalities , clans , or ethnic groups , such as iranian religious minorities and certain iraqis associated with the united states ( see below ) . priority three ( p - 3 ) comprises family reunification cases involving spouses , unmarried children under age 21 , and parents of persons who were admitted to the united states as refugees or granted asylum . eighteen nationalities are eligible for p - 3 processing in fy2009 . in most cases , to be considered for refugee resettlement in the united states , an individual must be outside his or her country of nationality . uscis is responsible for adjudicating refugee cases . it makes determinations about whether an individual qualifies for refugee status and is otherwise admissible to the united states .