however , p.l . 110-289 removed the phrase "below market federal loans" from the definition of federal subsidy in the lihtc statute . see table 1 . a second change authorized through p.l . 111-374 was funding for section 811 rental assistance only ( i.e. , not provided in conjunction with section 811 capital grants ) , called the project rental assistance ( pra ) program . in fy2012 , for the first time since the creation of section 811 , congress provided no new funding for section 811 capital grants . instead , funds were available to renew existing rental assistance contracts and for pra program rental assistance to be applied to units of housing developed with low income housing tax credits , funds through the home program , or other funding sources . for more information , see the section " project rental assistance ( pra ) program . see table 1 for section 811 funding levels , including vouchers , through fy2016 and proposed fy2017 funding . financing affordable housing , including housing for persons with disabilities , may require multiple streams of funding in order to support the design , construction , and ongoing operating costs of a project . in addition to federal funds provided through hud programs , affordable housing developers may use mortgage revenue bonds , tax credits , and local housing trust fund resources , among other sources , to develop housing for low - income and special needs populations . while hud funds once might have been sufficient on their own to develop an affordable housing project , that is rarely the case today . this is true for section 811 developers , who often must bring together multiple sources of funding to develop a project . in 2000 , in order to help section 811 developers bring together multiple financing sources , congress enacted a law that makes the interaction of section 811 funds and the low - income housing tax credits ( lihtcs ) more feasible by changing the definition of "private nonprofit organization" in the section 811 statute . this change , and its implication for section 811 developers , is described below . the value of lihtcs is determined , in part , based on the cost of developing a property — referred to as the qualified basis . the costs of constructing , acquiring , and rehabilitating a property ( among other costs ) are included in calculating the qualified basis , but the amount must then be reduced by any federal grants received by the developer , which in turn reduces the value of the tax credits . therefore , if a nonprofit developer were to receive a section 811 capital grant , its value would be subtracted in calculating the qualified basis which could result in minimal lihtcs . the homeownership and economic opportunity act ( p.l . 106-569 ) , enacted in 2000 , allowed for - profit limited partnerships , where a nonprofit organization is the sole general partner , to be eligible section 811 owners . the changed law allows a nonprofit section 811 grantee to loan the section 811 capital grant to the limited partnership .