what if the sale is at a loss ? if the government makes a financial contribution , how much should it be and how should it be financed ? one of the lessons from these four instances of government intervention is that those in financial difficulty are frequently reluctant to acknowledge the existence or severity of the problem . on the other hand , in these four cases , recognition that substantial losses had occurred was a key to beginning the recovery process . the question remaining was how the losses could be paid for at the least cost . most government market interventions have used the emergency medicine principal of triage to divide those into distress into three groups: those who cannot be helped with the resources available , those who will recover ( or at least survive ) without any help , and those who will recover only with immediate assistance . the difficulty is in determining to which category the affected persons or institutions should be assigned . holc and brady bonds involved negotiations between the borrower and the organizations involved in the refinancing . not every distressed borrower was willing or able to meet the terms of the assistance effort . it is probably unrealistic to expect that any plan could keep all subprime borrowers in their homes . should there be an income limit ? what should happen if foreclosure becomes necessary ? what should be the government's continuing role ? should the program have a fixed life ? what restrictions , if any , should be placed on the ability of homeowners that receive assistance to sell their homes in the future ? what if the sale is at a profit ? for example , some borrowers will become unemployed and not have the income to make even reduced mortgage payments . even a moratorium on foreclosures would prevent loss of homes only while the moratorium lasts . the holc experience was that some of those who could be helped would not contact the holc . it was necessary for holc to reach out to borrowers who became delinquent and to develop personalized plans to modify the mortgage so that it could be repaid eventually . many of the largest mortgage lenders and associations such as those represented by hope now are urging delinquent homeowners to talk with their lenders and credit counselors . hope now , also , is dividing callers into three categories trying to work quickly with the easiest situations first so that those who require more extensive help can get the resources needed . economists use the phrase "moral hazard" to represent the change in behavior due to insuring risks . purchasing insurance probably makes some individuals more likely to take risks than would be prudent without the financial safety net . economists who worry about moral hazard are concerned that a government intervention in a market outcome also encourages individuals and companies to pay less attention to risk in the future in the expectation that the government will intervene again . they worry that in the case of a government intervention to help homeowners , the possibility of a repeat of the intervention could encourage some lenders to lend more than they would , absent the history of government action .