the focus of this report is the fda budget . the discussion does not , therefore , explore other possible constraints on fda's meeting its responsibilities and the public's expectations . such factors could include the agency's lack of strong advocates , both externally ( such as nih has with its patient advocacy groups ) and internally ( because of chronic vacancies in key leadership positions , including the commissioner ) . independent of whether the fda budget is sufficient to cover agency responsibilities is how fda manages the resources it does have . the influence of non - budgetary factors likely complicates agency actions , though analyzing that is beyond the scope of this report . these propose to: restructure the pdufa trigger mechanism to minimize its unintended effect of pulling resources from non - pdufa activities . authorize fda to bypass the hhs and omb budget offices in submitting its request for appropriations to congress . require , in addition to the omb - processed budget request , that the fda commissioner submit to congress a professional judgment budget based on his or her personal expertise and experience . move fda appropriations from the appropriations subcommittees on agriculture to the labor - hhs subcommittees , which handle most other agencies involved in protecting the public's health . this report tracks , as consistently as possible with publicly available material , the fda budget numbers and employee numbers ( ftes ) from fy2007 back to fy1980 . the goal was to provide about 25 years of budget and fte history accompanied by changes in the agency's statutory responsibilities . only limited budget and fte data are available from bills and reports of the congressional appropriations committees . citing constraints on its staff time , fda indicated that it would only be able to provide data for recent years . therefore , this report used data prepared annually by fda for congress at the beginning of each budget cycle and presented in the justification documents . the justifications are prepared initially by fda and transmitted through hhs to omb , often with adjustments made by hhs and omb . these documents provide detailed budget and fte data along with an extensive narrative . over the years , changes in agency organization , accounting methods , definitions , and other conditions resulted in variations in data presentation in the justification documents . although some data inconsistencies found in the documents could be explained , other inconsistencies could not . this section of the report provides the basic approach used to calculate historical budget and fte numbers , highlights inconsistencies among the justification documents , and describes the steps taken to make the data as consistent as possible . there may be additional data inconsistencies that were not found because they were less readily apparent . the annual justification documents present first the overall fda information ( narrative , and budget and fte data ) followed by information for the various activity areas within the agency . except as noted below , this report uses data from the actuals column in tables labeled: all purpose table — total program level ; all purpose table — budget authority ; and all purpose table — user fees .