each of these is discussed below . in response to canada's request for consultations on u.s. subsidies , then - u.s. secretary of agriculture mike johanns declared in early 2007 that the united states would vigorously defend u.s. farm programs against any possible wto challenge by canada . a spokesman for the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) declared that this dispute was an unnecessary diversion of resources and time from the doha round negotiations . the official also stated that u.s. farm programs were designed to be in compliance with its wto obligations and believed that the panel would agree . the official also added that some measures identified by canada and brazil had ceased to exist prior to the 2002 farm bill , and that others were not part of the consultations with canada . with respect to the ruling that export credit guarantees operate like illegal export subsidies , provisions in the 2008 farm bill ( p.l . 110-246 ; section 3101 ( a ) ) , enacted into law on june 18 , 2008 , would appear to have brought the export credit guarantee program into compliance with wto rules by eliminating the "subsidy" component of export credit guarantees . this includes repeal of authority for both the gsm - 103 program ( which guaranteed longer - term — 3-10 years — financing ) and the supplier credit guarantee program ( which guaranteed very short - term — up to 1 year — financing of exports ) , as well as repeal of the 1% cap on loan origination fees for the gsm - 102 program ( which guaranteed intermediate - term — up to 3 years — financing ) . the 1% fee cap had prevented charging market - based fees and had contributed to the export credit program operating as a wto - illegal export subsidy . the new farm bill ( sec . 3101 ( b ) ) also caps the credit subsidy for the program at $40 million annually . however , the 2008 farm bill did not address the issue surrounding the disqualification of direct payments from the wto's green box ams exclusion due to the planting restriction on fruits , vegetables , and wild rice on program base acres . instead , direct payments are extended ( sec . 1103 ) with no change to the current planting restriction , except for 84,000 acres of pilot programs in seven states ( sec . this retention of the status quo in the face of the cotton panel's ruling and recommendation has important wto implications , as it would appear to favor the charge that the united states has exceeded its total ams limit in at least two years ( 1999 and 2000 ) if direct payments are included in the ams calculation ( figure 1 ) . many market analysts suggest that these two cases brought by brazil and canada are harbingers of future challenges to u.s. commodity programs . if either country were to successfully pursue its case , it could affect most u.s. program commodities , since the charges against the u.s. export credit guarantee program and ams limit extend to all major program crops .