its share of the power generation market has grown . domestic supply has remained stable and even increased in recent months . new developments in alaska increase the likelihood that a pipeline from the north slope will proceed . the natural gas industry continues to attract capital for new pipeline and storage infrastructure . liquefied natural gas ( lng ) imports hit a record level in 2007 , even as import facilities continue to have low utilization rates . weather and the economy remain important factors in natural gas prices , as well . these rates are generally determined by state regulators and involve both ( 1 ) the approval of costs and rates of return and ( 2 ) the allocation of costs among customer classes ( eg , residential , commercial , industrial ) . this may indicate that slack in the supply side is decreasing . the opening of the rockies express natural gas pipeline out of the rocky mountain production region appears to have relieved transmission congestion there . this improved the net back price within the production area . the wellhead price in the rockies area increased from $4.82 per million btu in november 2007 to $8.41 in march 2008 . this improves the incentives for producers to find and develop new supplies in this area . the natural gas pipeline from the north slope of alaska has made progress . in january 2008 , the governor of alaska announced that one of the pipeline project applications under the state alaska gasline inducement act ( agia ) was judged complete . most of this increased use and the drop come from growth , then decline , in natural gas for power generation . eia forecasts the arrival of alaska natural gas to the lower - 48 via pipeline in 2020 , with deliveries reaching 2.4 tcf per year by 2030 . this is a two year delay from eia's 2007 forecast . eia's forecast of gradual reductions in natural gas prices depends on certain assumptions embedded in the forecast . these factors have uncertainty associated with them , as discussed next . since the end of 2007 , several noteworthy developments have occurred in the natural gas markets: eia reports natural gas price increases in 2008 . for the 2007-2008 heating season ( november - march ) , the average spot price at the wellhead increased more than 30% from the beginning to the end of heating season , to $8.06 per million btu . storage levels towards the end of the heating season dropped below five year averages . in the first storage report after the 2007-2008 heating season , working gas storage was at 1,234 billion cubic feet , the lowest level since april 30 , 2004 . this may indicate that slack in the supply side is decreasing . in april 2008 , two of the north slope gas producers , bp and conocophillips , announced that they had joined together to start a potentially competing effort , the denali alaska gas pipeline , which has an open season target date ( date when capacity will be offered to potential shippers ) of 2010 and an in - service target of 2018 ( stated by the producers as a 10-year target ) .