this has not occurred . in 2009 , there were no imports of knitted or crocheted fabrics . since 2003 , imports of woven apparel fell by 39% per year from $38 million to $3 million in 2009 , and imports of knit apparel likewise fell by 22% per year from $233 million to $68 million . the most significant gains have been in u.s. imports of pharmaceuticals from singapore . imports of such products jumped from $0.09 billion in 2003 to $3.0 billion in 2007 , although they declined to $2.0 billion in 2009 . singapore is the ninth largest supplier of pharmaceuticals to the united states , behind belgium , israel , and switzerland , but ahead of italy , japan , and india . the vast majority ( 95% ) of these imports ( $1.9 billion ) were cardiovascular medicaments ( hs 3004909120 ) . the increase in imports of pharmaceuticals from singapore cannot be attributed to a reduction in u.s. tariffs under the fta . pharmaceuticals already enter the united states duty free . rather what appears to have occurred is the development of singapore as a regional center for multinational pharmaceutical companies — both for manufacturing and for research and development . two major factors have contributed to this . the first is the strengthening of intellectual property protection and new or revised laws in singapore . the second is the development of a biomedical industrial park ( tuas medical park ) for pharmaceutical companies to locate production and other facilities plus a research complex called biopolis that houses biomedical research institutes , councils , and related organizations . multinational companies have come to dominate the manufacture of pharmaceuticals in singapore . these include merck sharp and dohme , aventis , glaxosmithkline , pfizer , schering - plough , wyeth , and eli lilly . singapore is increasingly becoming a base for both regional and global pharmaceutical production for a growing number of multinational companies . the government goal is to have at least ten multinational pharmaceutical manufacturing facilities operational in singapore by 2010 . much of the production is for export , particularly to north america and europe . exports from other asian countries also flow into singapore for re - export . the country exports more pharmaceuticals than any other "asian tiger" economy ( hong kong , taiwan , and south korea ) . before the fta , a sizable proportion of singapore's pharmaceutical exports were transshipments from other countries . while such re - exports continue to increase , exports of domestic production now dominate . figure 6 shows singapore's global exports of pharmaceuticals and the rapid increase in domestic exports relative to re - exports . from 2002 to 2006 , the re - export share of all pharmaceutical exports dropped from 60% to 11% . in the modern globalized economy , much trade is intra - industry . the old economic model of trade in which each country specializes in certain products and exchanges them for others in which it has a comparative disadvantage only remotely resembles trade between industrialized economies populated by multinational enterprises . in many cases , the united states both imports and exports products in the same sector .