appendix b . examples of reported enforcement actions and penalties over time the following figures and tables provide examples of the type of enforcement data collected , compiled , and reported over time . they are intended to show proportional relationships of the various types of enforcement actions ( eg , administrative vs. judicial ) in a given year and by statute , not annual or long - term enforcement trends . to compare the reported activities from year to year requires more detailed information regarding the specific circumstances in those years . there can be significant variability from year to year in how data were reported and which entities reported . epa has refined terms and definitions in the data elements from year to year . other factors that result in variability include the introduction of new regulatory requirements in a given year , and fruition of statutory deadlines . the figures presented below reflect longer - term data ( 15 to 20 years ) through fy2013 , whereas the tables generally provide data for the most recent five years , depending on the availability of data for the most recent fiscal year . results are presented by action ( eg , administrative , civil judicial , criminal judicial ) , and where readily reported , for actions by statute ( eg , clean water act , clean air act ) . the data have been compiled from epa's annual fiscal year results reports , national enforcement trends charts and tables , and data provided directly to crs by epa . no public access was available . this web interface application sent queries and drew data from the idea ( discussed above ) system , which integrates facility data from different epa databases . idea copies many epa and non - epa databases , and organizes the information to facilitate cross - database analysis . see http: / / www.epa.gov / compliance / data / systems / multimedia / aboutotis.html ( website no longer supported ) . a number of other databases , mostly for single media , also include compliance / enforcement data . many of these databases were the basis for certain data elements in the various idea and otis integrated databases , and typically were not directly available to the public . other databases included the air facility system ( afs ) ; permit compliance system ( pcs ) ; resource conservation and recovery act information system ( rcrainfo ) ; national compliance data base system and federal insecticide , fungicide , and rodenticide act / toxic substances control act tracking system ( ncdb / ftts ) ; and safe drinking water information system / federal ( sdwis / fed ) . although the information on the integrated systems did not represent "real time" data , it was updated once a month when oeca refreshed the source data systems . additionally , epa routinely made improvements to existing aspects of otis , idea , and echo , and often enhanced the system by adding new search capabilities and tools . for example , in december 2012 epa announced that it had completed a major , multi - year database modernization for searching clean water act actions .