appendix a . provisions in the coastal zone management act , as amended section 302 lists 13 congressional findings about the national interest in the condition and changing circumstances of the coastal zone . section 303 states the declaration of policy . it identifies as the purposes of the act "to preserve , protect , develop , and where ever possible , to restore or enhance" resources of the coastal zone ; to assist states in implementing management plans for at least 11 listed purposes ; to encourage special area management plans to improve predictable decision - making ; to encourage intergovernmental cooperation ; to encourage intergovernmental sharing of information ; and to respond to changing circumstances affecting coastal environments . section 304 lists 19 definitions , including "coastal zone," "coastal resources of national significance," and "special area management plan. section 305 authorizes participants to submit their management program to the secretary of commerce for approval . section 306 authorizes grants to participants to implement approved programs . nine program elements are specified for plans , and the participant must meet specified requirements . procedures are specified for modifying or amending programs . section 306a establishes the coastal resources improvement program , which provides grants to participants to preserve or restore resources that meet certain qualifications , redevelop urban waterfronts , provide access to coastal areas , and provide a process to develop aquaculture facilities . section 307 authorizes the federal consistency provisions , which requires that each participant be given the opportunity to certify that all federal actions in or affecting its defined coastal zone be consistent with its federally approved coastal management program . it also includes provisions for coordination and cooperation . section 308 establishes a coastal zone management fund to make loans to address regional issues , demonstration projects , respond to emergencies and disasters , recognize excellence ( see section 314 ) , and applying the public trust doctrine . section 309 establishes coastal zone enhancement grants for nine specified purposes , including protecting and enhancing wetlands ; addressing hazards ; improving coastal access ; reducing marine debris ; developing procedures to address the secondary effects of coastal development ; working with special area management plans ; planning for ocean resources ; and facilitating energy - related activities and aquaculture facilities . section 310 authorizes the secretary of commerce to provide technical assistance and research results to participants to support their coastal management efforts . section 311 requires 30 days notice for public hearings . section 312 requires noaa to periodically review and evaluate every participant's performance in implementing its program , and permits the withholding or withdrawal of financial assistance if a recipient is "failing to adhere" to its program . section 313 specifies the maintenance of record by participants and grants federal access to those records . section 314 establishes the annual walter b. jones awards for excellence in coastal zone management , specifies who is eligible , and identifies the types of awards . section 315 authorizes the national estuarine research reserve system . participants nominate sites to be protected by participants and used as research and education centers . the system goal is to designate sites in every biogeographical coastal region so that comparative research projects can be conducted .