that power is broad . it encompasses inquiries concerning the administration of existing laws as well as proposed or possibly needed statutes. the court did not limit the power of congressional inquiry to cases of "wrongdoing. it emphasized , however , that congress's investigative power is at its peak when the subject is alleged waste , fraud , abuse , or maladministration within a government department . the investigative power , the court stated , "comprehends probes into departments of the federal government to expose corruption , inefficiency , or waste. "[t]he first congresses" held "inquiries dealing with suspected corruption or mismanagement by government officials" and subsequently , in a series of decisions , "[t]he court recognized the danger to effective and honest conduct of the government if the legislature's power to probe corruption in the executive branch were unduly hampered. accordingly , the court now clearly recognizes "the power of the congress to inquire into and publicize corruption , maladministration , or inefficiencies in the agencies of government. congress's inherent contempt power is not specifically granted by the constitution , but is considered necessary to investigate and legislate effectively . the validity of the inherent contempt power was upheld in the early supreme court decision anderson v. dunn and reiterated in mcgrain v. daugherty . under the inherent contempt power , the individual is brought before the house or senate by the sergeant - at - arms , tried at the bar of the body , and can be imprisoned or detained in the capitol or perhaps elsewhere . the purpose of the imprisonment or other sanction may be either punitive or coercive . thus , the witness can be imprisoned for a specified period of time as punishment , or for an indefinite period ( but not , at least by the house , beyond the end of a session of the congress ) until he agrees to comply . one commentator has concluded that the procedure followed by the house in the contempt citation challenged in anderson is typical of that employed in the inherent contempt cases: these traditional methods may be explained by using as an illustration anderson v. dunn ... . in 1818 , a member of the house of representatives accused anderson , a non - member , of trying to bribe him... . the house adopted a resolution pursuant to which the speaker ordered the sergeant - at - arms to arrest anderson and bring him before the bar of the house ( to answer the charge ) . when anderson appeared , the speaker informed him why he had been brought before the house and asked if he had any requests for assistance in answering the charge . anderson stated his requests , and the house granted him counsel , compulsory process for defense witnesses , and a copy , of the accusatory letter . anderson called his witnesses ; the house heard and questioned them and him . it then passed a resolution finding him guilty of contempt and directing the speaker to reprimand him and then to discharge him from custody .