appendix a . disaster relief and humanitarian assistance , including civic action dod roles and responsibility disaster relief and humanitarian assistance have long been considered traditional , albeit secondary , dod roles . dod is one of the three principal u.s. government departments that provides disaster and other humanitarian assistance overseas . dod humanitarian relief in disasters and other emergency and recovery situations is often carried out in coordination with or under the direction of u.s. government civilian agencies . the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) office of foreign disaster assistance ( ofda ) takes the lead in disaster assistance ; the state department takes the lead in assisting refugees . dod humanitarian assistance also takes place in the context of military operations , some of which are conducted solely for humanitarian purposes and others in which humanitarian activities are carried out as a strategic supplement to combat operations or military training exercises . in many situations , dod also cooperates and coordinates with international organizations , such as the united nations and the international committee of the red cross ( icrc ) , and a wide variety of non - governmental organizations . among the foreign policy questions that the 111 th congress will face is one that has surfaced repeatedly for over 60 years and has resurfaced during the previous congress: what is the appropriate role for the department of defense ( dod ) in foreign assistance ? dod has long played a role in u.s. efforts to assist foreign populations , militaries , and governments . the use of dod to provide foreign assistance stems in general from the perception that dod can contribute unique or vital capabilities and resources because it possesses the manpower , materiel , and organizational assets to respond to international needs . over the years , congress has shaped the dod role through a wide variety of authorities contained in the foreign relations and intercourse ( title 22 u.s. code ) and armed services ( title 10 u.s. code ) statutes , and through annual legislation . to some analysts , the dod role has been in effect a product of congress's willingness to fund defense rather than foreign affairs budgets . in some instances , the activities in which dod participates serve an institutional purpose for the u.s. military , providing u.s. soldiers and sailors with opportunities for military training , for cultivating military - to - military contacts , and for gathering information on foreign countries where they may someday be called to operate . the historical dod role in foreign assistance can be regarded roughly as serving three purposes: responding to humanitarian and basic needs . since at least the 19 th century , u.s. military forces have provided urgent assistance to foreign populations in time of disasters , such as earthquakes and floods . more recently , u.s. military forces have also provided aid in humanitarian crises such as famines and forced population movements . dod aids foreign populations under authorities to conduct humanitarian assistance in a variety of other circumstances , including as an adjunct to military training and exercises with and as part of military operations . building foreign military capacity and capabilities .