first . there is the scope of the task: vast numbers of projects scattered throughout the united states , administered by different agencies and involving hundreds of contractors and subcontractors , working under dissimilar circumstances and in diverse labor markets . second . there is the problem of the availability of documentation . since the contractors involved are of the private sector , how much useful information has been preserved ? thus , precise estimates of impacts ought to be viewed with considerable caution . during each congress , some measures have normally been introduced that would strengthen , diminish , or repeal the davis - bacon act . generally , the issues have been contentious and , in some cases , have been a threat to enactment of the underlying measures . there follows a series of davis - bacon related issues upon which some legislative action has been taken during the 110 th congress . in some cases , the presence of a davis - bacon proposal does not appear to have been an impediment to enactment ; in other cases , davis - bacon seems to have been determinant . through more than a decade , authorization for funding of the clean water act state revolving fund ( cwa / srf ) has been a matter of contention with the authorizing committees of both the house and the senate . each time a bill has been brought up for consideration , various issues were raised — among them , coverage under the davis - bacon act — and , ultimately , the bills died . in the 110 th congress , consideration of the cwa / srf issue commenced in the house very early in 2007 , with davis - bacon an essential ingredient in the proceedings . although the house has passed the cwa / srf , it has not been acted upon in the senate . on january 12 , 2007 , representative nick rahall introduced h.r . 6 , the creating long - term energy alternatives for the nation act of 2007 . a week later , the bill was adopted by the house ( 264 ayes to 163 nays ) and was subsequently placed on the senate legislative calendar . ultimately , the bill was adopted by each body , becoming p.l . the farm , nutrition , and bioenergy act of 2007 ( h.r . 2419 ) , as passed by the house , contains loan guarantees for biorefineries and biofuel production facilities . it was the construction of these plants that suggested a davis - bacon provision and encouraged the committee on agriculture to propose one . 2419 was passed by the house on july 27 , 2007 , with davis - bacon a part of the new farm bill . on december 14 , 2007 , a much expanded farm bill was approved by the senate ( apparently without davis - bacon ) . the senate asked for a conference . that request did not meet with an immediate response ; and , the process continued into the spring without resolution and is ongoing .