appendix b . short - term analog flash and emergency readiness act during the wilmington test , stations were able to continue broadcasting dtv consumer information on their analog channels . consumers who had not upgraded their analog televisions were still able to receive a screen explaining what was happening and providing telephone numbers and websites for more information and assistance . under current law , full - power television stations are prohibited from broadcasting anything on their analog channels after the transition deadline . legislation has been introduced in the 110 th congress which would give stations short - term authority to maintain operation of their analog channel for a short period after the transition . the short - term analog flash and emergency readiness ( safer ) act ( h.r . first , are public education and outreach efforts sufficient , and is the federal government playing a sufficient role in leading that effort ? with limited funding , both the fcc and the ntia have relied heavily on a strategy of leveraging private sector efforts . on the one hand , private sector groups have a market incentive to ensure that the public is ready for the digital transition: for example , the consumer electronics industry wants to sell dtv products , and broadcasters want their viewers to be able to continue watching their local broadcasts . accordingly , industry groups have launched multifaceted public outreach campaigns . on the other hand , critics question whether market forces will ensure that public outreach efforts are sufficiently targeted to those segments of american society ( the elderly , non - english speakers , rural areas , disabled citizens , minorities , the economically disadvantaged ) that may be more at risk of being adversely affected by the digital switch - over . a second major question is the extent to which ntia's converter box program will meet the needs of analog television households , and the extent to which coupon and converter box supply problems , equipment and installation problems , and reception issues may surface for consumers . will retail outlets — whether large or small stores , whether in urban , suburban , or rural areas — stock sufficient numbers of boxes to meet the demand of consumers seeking to redeem the $40 coupons ? will ntia , manufacturers , and retailers be prepared and able to meet the spike in demand for coupons and boxes as the transition date nears ? and finally , will anticipated consumer problems with converter box set - up , antennas , and digital signal reception be adequately addressed ? with the june 12 transition having taken place , congress , the fcc , and the ntia will be closely monitoring ongoing dtv transition problems , particularly issues related to the reception of digital television signals . appendix a. dtv test pilot program in wilmington , north carolina on september 8 , 2008 , most broadcast television stations in wilmington , nc , permanently ceased transmitting programs with their analog signal and went digital - only in response to an fcc pilot program announced on may 8 , 2008 .