the fiscal year ? revenue estimation ? financial management safeguards ? contingency and emergency reserve funds ? borrowing limits ? protocol for issuance of general obligation bonds ? if congress does not grant the district full budget autonomy , which specific provisions currently in place are regarded as particularly burdensome and of high priority for removal by district officials ? some examples might include the power to change the fiscal year dates or relax requirements for the reserve fund . if full budget autonomy is not approved , what would be an appropriate compromise ? what prevents the district from passing needed changes to the home rule act through congress under the prevailing legislative structure , including improvements in the budget process and the fiscal year ? how have delays in congressional approval of the district's budget harmed the operation of the district government ? the proposed district of columbia budget autonomy act of 2007 , h.r . 733 , 110 th congress , is the latest in a series of bills dating back to 1981 and the 97 th congress that have sought to provide budget autonomy for the district of columbia . in 1973 , with the passage of the district of columbia self - government and governmental reorganization act , commonly known as the district of columbia home rule act , congress acted to "... grant to the inhabitants of the district of columbia powers of local self - government ; ... and , to the greatest extent possible , consistent with the constitutional mandate , relieve congress of the burden of legislating upon essentially local district matters. during consideration of the home rule act , budget autonomy for the district was a feature of the original house bill , but was abandoned as congress adopted the substitute senate resolution . in the intervening 34 years , the issue has repeatedly been brought before congress . this appendix contains an accounting of previous bills that proposed budget autonomy for the district of columbia , including the main provisions of the bills , the relevant context surrounding their introduction , and important actions of congress with regard to such bills . summary district of columbia budget autonomy act of 2007 , h.r . 733 , is the latest in a series of bills dating back to 1981 and the 97 th congress that have sought to provide budget autonomy for the district of columbia . none have become law . briefly , bills seeking budget autonomy for d.c. may be grouped into five categories: district of columbia budget autonomy acts: 97 th - 99 th congresses . these bills sought to grant the district of columbia autonomy over the expenditure of own - source revenues . fiscal protection act , 104 th congress . this bill would have provided the district with the authority to spend own - source revenue to continue district operations . it required written notification from the district of columbia chief financial officer ( cfo ) to interested parties , including both the president and the appropriations committees in the house and senate . fiscal integrity act , 107 th congress , and the district of columbia budget autonomy acts , 108 th , 109 th congresses .