cellulosic feedstocks may have some environmental drawbacks . some crops suggested for biomass are invasive species when planted in non - native environments . municipal solid wastes may likely require extensive sorting to segregate usable material and may also contain hazardous material that is expensive to remove . in addition , congress has considered the definition of biofuels and biofuel feedstocks that qualify for federal incentives . estimates for commercial production of cellulosic biofuels vary widely . some small - scale plants came online in 2010 . however , the pace of plant construction falls short of doe's stated goal to make cellulosic ethanol competitive as a mature technology by 2012 . some analysts have predicted a growth trend for the cellulosic ethanol industry similar to that for corn - starch ethanol . however , there is a major difference between the two: the basic process for making corn - starch ethanol ( fermentation ) is thousands of years old , whereas that for cellulosic is very new . the usda office of energy and new uses projects that cellulosic biofuels are not expected to be commercially viable on a large scale until at least 2015 . however , the cellulosic biofuel portion of the rfs mandate is set at 3 billion gallons by 2015 , a substantial amount . in its january 2009 baseline , the food and agricultural policy research institute ( fapri ) of the university of missouri assumes cellulosic biofuel production will fall behind the rfs and , as a consequence , the mandate will be waived by epa . in an august 2009 baseline update , fapri projects cellulosic ethanol production in 2013 at 245 mgpy , about one - third of the 1 billion gallons in the rfs for that year . others contend such support could distort market signals . numerous partnerships have been formed: british petroleum ( bp ) and verenium announced a partnership in august 2008 to accelerate the commercialization of cellulosic ethanol , with bp investing $90 million in the deal . in another collaboration , royal dutch shell has teamed up with imogen corporation to develop cellulosic ethanol processes . mascoma , a major ethanol producer , raised $30 million to support its investment in cellulosic feedstock conversion with technical support from general motors and marathon oil . a collaboration between monsanto and mendel biotechnology inc. will focus on the breeding and development of crops for production of cellulosic biofuels . usda and doe are currently engaged in a variety of activities to encourage development and demonstration of cellulosic biofuels technologies . the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa , p.l . 110 - 140 ) , the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( the 2008 farm bill , p.l . 110 - 246 ) , and other legislation support research and development of a broad range of cellulosic technologies through usda and doe programs . many of these programs extend the goals of the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact , p.l . 109 - 58 ) and president bush's 20 in 10 initiative .