about 63% of those who contracted the disease have died . a number of u.s. agencies , centers , and departments implement a range of programs aimed at treating and containing the global spread of tuberculosis . congress designates funds for global tb interventions only to the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , while other agencies and departments draw from general funds ( see table a - 5 in the appendix ) . because agencies and departments might use discretionary funds to support global tb initiatives , some u.s. international tb activities might not be included here , such as research conducted by the national institute of health ( nih ) to develop a new tb drug with a shorter treatment regimen . a number of organizations collaborate to combat tb globally . most of these adhere to guidelines and recommendations that who and its partners drafted . who is the directing and coordinating authority for health within the united nations system . it is responsible for providing leadership on global health matters , shaping the health research agenda , setting norms and standards , articulating evidence - based policy options , providing technical support to countries , and monitoring and assessing health trends . since pepfar was launched in fy2004 , overall u.s. spending on international tb initiatives has hovered around $90 million ( see table a - 5 in the appendix ) . in fy2004 , congress appropriated $85.1 million to usaid for global tb efforts , $92.0 million in fy2005 , $91.5 million in fy2006 , and $94.9 million in fy2007 . more than a century after its development , in most developing countries , tb is primarily identified through microscopic examination of sputum . this tool , however , only detects from 40% to 60% of tb cases , and as little as 20% of hiv co - infected cases . although sputum testing has limited reliability , this procedure is the most widely used in developing countries and is usually performed only after tb treatment has failed — after which the patient could have transmitted the disease to others . about 85% of all countries who reported tb testing practices to who indicated that all suspected pulmonary tb cases undergo sputum testing . of the 22 hbcs , 7 did not meet the minimum requirement of at least one sputum testing laboratory per 100,000 persons ( see table a - 7 in the appendix ) . health experts also advocate for improved access to advanced testing technology , because sputum tests do not reliably detect smear - negative tb cases , particularly among hiv - positive patients . culturing , a process requiring laboratory diagnosis , is the most definitive method of detecting tb , particularly in smear - negative cases . who recommends that countries have at least one laboratory per 5 million people that is capable of culturing samples . seven of the 22 high - burden countries meet this minimum requirement: brazil ( 5.1 ) , cambodia ( 1.1 ) , china ( 1.4 ) , russia ( 34.0 ) , south africa ( 1.3 ) , thailand ( 5.1 ) , and vietnam ( 1.0 ) meet this criteria .