appendix a . with the enactment of p.l . 99-272 in 1986 , congress authorized the va to collect payments from third - party health insurers for the treatment of veterans with nonservice - connected disabilities ; it also established co - payments from veterans for this care . under current law , the va is authorized to collect from third - party health insurers to offset the cost of medical care furnished to a veteran for the treatment of a nonservice - connected condition . if the va treats an insured veteran for a nonservice - connected disability , and the veteran is also determined by the va to have co - payment responsibilities , the va will apply the payment collected from the insurer to satisfy the veteran's co - payment debt related to that treatment . under the current co - payment billing process , in cases where the cost of a veteran's medical care for a nonservice - connected condition appears to qualify for billing under reimbursable insurance and co - payment , the va medical facilities sends the bill to the insurance provider . the veteran's co - payment obligation is placed on hold for 90 days pending payment from the third - party payer . if no payment is received from the third - party payer within 90 days , a bill is sent to the veteran for the full co - payment amount . however , when insurers reimburse the va after the 90-day period , the va must absorb the cost of additional staff time for processing a refund if the veteran has already paid the bill . on all insurance policies , the entire amount of the claim payment is applied first to the co - payment . the veteran is then billed only for the portion of the co - payment not covered by the insurance reimbursement and the portion of the co - payment for services not covered by the veteran's insurance plan ( see figure 2 ) . under the administration's proposal , veterans receiving medical care services for treatment of non - service - connected disabilities will receive a bill for their entire co - payment , and the co - payment will not be reduced by collection recoveries from third - party health plans . this proposal would apply to all veterans who make co - payments . according to va estimates , this proposal will increase revenue by $44 million in fy2008 and $217 million over five years . the house and senate appropriations committees have not addressed this issue because it is an issue in the purview of the authorizing committees . on february 15 , 2007 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) testified that "assuming no major changes in policy and no major changes in enrollment trends ... that [vha] medical spending would increase from $35 billion in 2007 to $66 billion in 2025 , or 88 percent cumulative real growth . that increase implies annual real growth that averages 3.6 percent over the period. the house and senate appropriations committees have expressed concern that the president's budget has not accurately projected the future cost of health care for veterans from fy2008-fy2012 .