3652 or "the bill. this report's analysis of the bill will be limited to the modifications it proposes for â§ 1113 of the bankruptcy code . these modifications are found in â§ 8 of the bill . â§ 1113 as well as adding six new subsections . as written , the bill would entirely replace the text of the first three subsections ; however , the actual change to the text of the first subsection is minimal . at first glance , the bill appears to make dramatic changes in the bankruptcy code , but in some cases , the bill's language may be clarifying the code rather than substantively changing it . in other cases , the language in the bill may be intended to either legislate resolution of some point of law that has been disputed in the courts or legislatively overrule existing case law . however , since there are no committee reports as yet , crs cannot discern with certainty the sponsors' intent in proposing the changes . the proposed changes will be discussed in order , subsection by subsection , with accompanying discussion about the current state of the law , including ambiguities in the current code , various courts' interpretations , and scholarly writings about 11 u.s.c . all headings referencing a subsection of 11 u.s.c . â§ 1113 refer to the subsections as proposed by this bill . in its findings , the bill states that congress finds that chapter 11 was enacted "to protect jobs and enhance enterprise value for all stakeholders," but is , instead , being used to "caus[e] the burdens of bankruptcy to fall disproportionately and overwhelmingly on employees and retirees. revising the process for rejection of cbas is one of the ways this bill proposes to rectify the inequities it asserts . for many companies in bankruptcy , expense for employees is the largest expense in the budget , and some modification of that expense may be essential to their successful reorganization . section 1113 , as it currently exists , has provided labor groups with protection from debtor companies' unfettered rejections of cbas , but has also provided a method for debtor companies to reject cbas when they could not reach a compromise with the authorized representatives of the labor groups . the proposed revisions to section 1113 would constrain both debtor companies and the courts when debtors file under chapter 11 . the bill clearly contemplates allowing labor groups to have a greater , possibly definitive , role in determining the feasibility of reorganization . labor groups , but not debtors , would be allowed to request arbitration rather than a court hearing to determine approval of a debtor's request to reject a cba . in certain circumstances , the bill would allow labor groups to obtain future relief due to changed circumstances without having to bargain with the company . the bill would also extend the right to strike to all labor groups whenever a cba was modified or rejected without their consent . finally , the bill provides labor groups with a defined remedy for rejection of a cba , though courts might differ in their interpretation of that remedy .