appendix a . number of judgeships , vacancies , active judges , departures from active service , and method of departure for article iii u.s. district courts , court of international trade , and u.s. courts of appeals , 1985-2007 appendix b. nominal and real salaries for u.s. district court and court of appeals judges , 1955-200 . those who argue against raising judicial salary tend to make four arguments . first , they note that the salaries of federal judges are high relative to all workers in the united states . the 2006 salary of federal district court judges ( $165,200 ) would put judges somewhere between the 90 th and 95 th percentile among all american households , assuming no other members of the household had income as defined by the census bureau . court of appeals judges ( 2006 salary of $175,100 ) and supreme court justices ( 2006 salary of $203,000 for associate justices and $212,100 for the chief justice ) would be above the 95 th percentile in household income . second , opponents argue that federal judges and the "perks" of being a federal judge ( prestige , job security , opportunity to select and work with law clerks , interesting work , retirement package that offers full salary upon qualification ) more than compensate for any shortcomings in judicial salary . third , some have argued that raising judicial salaries may not solve some of the problems thought to be associated with low and declining judicial salary . as judge richard posner , a judge on the seventh circuit court of appeals who has written extensively on judicial salary , argues: raising salaries would not do a great deal to attract commercial lawyers to judgeships . the lawyer who doesn't want to exchange a $1 million income for a $175,000 income is unlikely to exchange it for a $225,000 income — [chief justice] roberts doesn't name a figure to which he thinks judicial salaries should be raised , but he can hardly expect congress to raise salaries by more than 30 percent , and that only intermittently , so that inflation will eat away at the salary until the next jump . 3753 and s. 1638 also include two changes to retirement ( as opposed to senior status ) . while federal judges will still be able to take senior status under the rule of 80 , eligibility to retire will be governed by a new rule of 84 , where age and years of service , starting with 67 years old and 17 years of service , must add to 84 for a federal judge to retire and receive an annuity equal to their salary at time of retirement . judges who retire and whose earned income after retirement exceeds the amount of their retirement annuity would find that annuity reduced by $1 for every $2 they earn above the level of their annuity . this reduction could affect no more than 67% of their annuity , and the calculation is made annually , so the annuity could be restored to its full value if a retired judge stops earning outside income in excess of his or her annuity .