one of the employer requirements is a fair share requirement . there has been speculation over whether this requirement of the massachusetts act could be preempted by erisa . under the act , employers with more than 11 full - time equivalent employees that do not make a "fair and reasonable" contribution to a group health plan for their employees' health coverage must pay a "fair - share contribution" into a state trust fund in order to help cover costs of health care provided to uninsured massachusetts residents . regulations set forth two alternative tests to determine whether an employer has made a fair and reasonable contribution . under the "primary test," an employer has made a fair and reasonable contribution if 25% or more of its employees who are employed at massachusetts locations are enrolled in the employer's health plan . under the "secondary test," an employer who fails the primary test , but offers to pay at least 33% of the cost of premiums of a group health plan offered to full - time employees employed over a certain time period , meets the contribution requirements . the washington law at issue in egelhoff v. egelhoff provided that the designation of a spouse as the beneficiary of a nonprobate asset would be revoked automatically upon divorce . under the law , plan administrators were required to alter the terms of a plan to indicate that the plan would not follow the law . it was argued that the law not only avoided the regulation of plan administration , but also did not apply so long as the plan documents expressly provided otherwise . the court determined that the washington law had an impermissible connection with erisa plans because it interfered with nationally uniform plan administration . the court explained that one of the principal goals of erisa is to enable employers to establish a uniform administrative scheme that provides standard procedures for the processing of claims and disbursement of benefits . the court maintained that uniformity is impossible if plans are subject to different legal obligations in different states . moreover , the court declined to find the law saved from preemption because of its "opt out" option: it is not enough for plan administrators to opt out of this particular statute . instead , they must maintain a familiarity with the laws of all 50 states so that they can update their plans as necessary to satisfy the opt - out requirements of other , similar statutes .. . this 'tailoring of plans and employer conduct to the peculiarities of the law of each jurisdiction' is exactly the burden erisa seeks to eliminate . the fair share laws discussed in this report present similar questions about preemption and the impact of a plan or plan sponsor's ability to choose from various compliance options . courts have evaluated fair share laws enacted in maryland , suffolk county , new york , and san francisco , with varying results . in 2006 , massachusetts enacted "an act providing access to affordable , quality , accountable health care," considered to be the most comprehensive health care reform legislation ever enacted by a state .