unilateralism. in may 8 letters to the other jcpoa participant governments , iran announced that , as of that day , tehran had stopped "some of its measures under the jcpoa," though the government emphasized that it was not withdrawing from the agreement . specifically , iran will not transfer leu or heavy water out of the country in order to maintain those stockpiles below the jcpoa - mandated limits described above . the iranian government has stated that it will resume full compliance with the jcpoa if the remaining jcpoa participants agree during a 60-day period following the may 8 announcement to meet tehran's "main demands , specifically in the banking and oil sectors. absent such an agreement , iran will cease to accept any constraints on the amount of uranium - 235 contained in any iranian - produced enriched uranium . iran may then also resume work on the arak reactor according to the jcpoa - mandated design . iran will "take other steps," should tehran fail to reach an agreement with the remaining jcpoa participants during a 60-day period to begin after iran takes this second set of steps . iran has also announced that tehran "will show a strong and immediate response" if the remaining jcpoa participants respond to the may 8 action by referring iran's case to the security council or imposing additional sanctions on iran . appendix d. trump administration joint cooperative plan of action policy on may 8 , 2018 , president donald trump announced that the united states would no longer participate in the joint cooperative plan of action ( jcpoa ) and would reimpose u.s. sanctions that had been suspended pursuant to the agreement . president trump ordered secretary of state michael pompeo to "take all appropriate steps to cease the participation of the united states in the jcpoa," and , along with secretary of the treasury steven mnuchin , to immediately "begin taking steps to reimpose all united states sanctions lifted or waived in connection" with the agreement . the united states has notified the other p5+1 states that it will no longer attend meetings of the joint commission , the working group concerning the arak reactor , or the procurement working group , all of which were established pursuant to the jcpoa . secretary pompeo detailed a new u.s. approach with respect to iran during a may 21 , 2018 , speech as applying "unprecedented financial pressure on the iranian regime," working "with the department of defense and our regional allies to deter iranian aggression," and advocating "tirelessly for the iranian people. he asserted that , in exchange for "major changes" in iran's behavior , the united states is "prepared to end the principal components of every one of our sanctions against the regime … , re - establish full diplomatic and commercial relationships with iran ... , [a]nd support the modernization and reintegration of the iranian economy into the international economic system. pompeo listed a number of essential elements for any new agreement: first , iran must declare to the iaea a full account of the prior military dimensions of its nuclear program , and permanently and verifiably abandon such work in perpetuity . second , iran must stop enrichment and never pursue plutonium reprocessing .