pretext calling for financial information has long been illegal . in 2006 , congress enacted the telephone records and privacy protection act , which makes pretexting for the acquisition of telephone records a federal offense . furthermore , several other federal statutes address illegal conduct associated with identity theft and pretext calling . the national cable and telecommunications association ( ncta ) challenged the requirement for carriers to obtain opt - in consent when sharing cpni with joint venture partners and independent contractors on both constitutional and procedural grounds . on february 13 , 2009 , the u.s. court of appeals for the dc circuit upheld the fcc's order . ncta did not challenge the constitutionality of section 222 of the communications act , therefore , it was assumed by both parties that some form of disclosure prevention is constitutionally permissible . the only question left for the court was whether the fcc's order implementing section 222 comported with the first amendment . the court held that it did because it advanced the government's substantial interest in protecting consumer privacy and did so in a way that was "no more expansive than necessary" to serve that interest . the court noted that , for first amendment purposes , opt - in is only marginally more intrusive than opt - out , and a scheme similar to the one at issue in this case was upheld in the consumer credit context . turning to the alleged procedural violations in the promulgation of the order , the court found that the fcc had based its decision to return to a limited opt - in regime on reasoned analysis and substantial evidence . therefore , the agency had not violated the administrative procedure act . certain sectors are currently subject to legal obligations to protect sensitive personal information . telephone companies are encouraging customers to receive electronic statements and to access customer accounts online . typically , online accounts are set up in advance , to be activated at a later date by the customer . if someone can figure out how to activate and access the online account of the customer , the call records can be obtained . in response to these concerns , congress , the federal communications commission ( fcc ) , and the federal trade commission ( ftc ) have acted to prevent the unauthorized disclosure of phone records . the federal government has moved to directly address the problem of "pretexting" and to more clearly define the protective framework that telecommunications carriers must implement . these obligations were created , in large part , through the enactment of federal privacy legislation in the financial services , health care , government , and internet sectors . federal regulations issued to carry out requirements of federal privacy laws impose obligations on covered entities to implement information security programs to protect personal information . for further information , see crs report rl34120 , federal information security and data breach notification laws , by [author name scrubbed] . the first method occurs when an employee of one of the phone companies sells the records to the data broker .