former u.s . senator patrick moynihan reportedly commented , "it didn't take spies or spy - masters simply to read what indian leaders said and to take it seriously. these and other observations suggest that if analysts had paid greater attention and attached more significance to some of the bjp's public statements about nuclear testing , the intelligence community might have more accurately assessed bjp intentions . a review of the public record prior to the indian tests , however , presents a mixed picture in this regard and arguably underscores some of the difficulties analysts confront when attempting to analyze open source information . during the election campaign in january 1998 , the bjp's foreign policy spokesman stated that his party had every intention of exercising the nuclear option if elected . but in february of that year the bjp issued a campaign manifesto that suggested to some indian analysts that the bjp might not be fully committed to conducting nuclear tests . some ask why shouldn't an "information collection and analysis" agency be established to deal with policy issues that may be of concern to other government agencies including those responsible for domestic issues ? such an effort would have to be justified on the basis of a widely perceived need and pervasive support throughout the federal government . this support , it seems , is not yet apparent , but advocates of a wider effort to acquire and analyze open source information may continue to make the case that it is needed to meet ongoing and emerging policy issues . it is also possible that the nosc will become more useful as times goes on , and that its contribution will be so widely recognized that it will become a model for a larger entity that can serve all federal organizations . although unclassified information has often been slighted by the intelligence community , a consensus now exists that open source information must be systematically collected and in fact constitutes an essential component of analytical products . this has been recognized by various commissions and by congress in statutory language . responding to legislative direction , the intelligence community has established the position of assistant director of national intelligence for open source and the national open source center . the goal is not only to perform open source acquisition and analysis functions ; but also , to create a center of excellence in open source collection and analysis that will support and encourage all agencies in the intelligence community in the effective use of open source . the challenge is to deploy all available information sources and technologies , including cutting edge approaches , to obtain and analyze information of national security importance that is available openly . the effort has been only underway since late 2005 but the nosc is up and running , and providing support , including training , to open source professionals throughout the intelligence community . it is less clear that administrative mechanisms are in place to ensure that there is a comprehensive community - wide open source effort .