it is a federal crime . in fact , federal obstruction of justice laws are legion ; too many for even passing reference to all of them in a single report . this is a brief description of some of the more prominent . the general federal obstruction of justice provisions are six: 18 u.s.c . 1512 ( tampering with federal witnesses ) , 1513 ( retaliating against federal witnesses ) , 1503 ( obstruction of pending federal court proceedings ) , 1505 ( obstruction of pending congressional or federal administrative proceedings ) , 371 ( conspiracy ) , and contempt . in addition to these , there are a host of other statutes that penalize obstruction by violence , corruption , destruction of evidence , or deceit . section 1512 applies to the obstruction of federal proceedings — judicial , congressional , or executive . it consists of four somewhat overlapping crimes: use of force or the threat of the use of force to prevent the production of evidence ( 18 u.s.c . 1512 ( a ) ) ; use of deception or corruption or intimidation to prevent the production of evidence ( 18 u.s.c . 1512 ( b ) ) ; destruction or concealment of evidence or attempts to do so ( 18 u.s.c . 1512 ( c ) ) ; and witness harassment to prevent the production of evidence ( 18 u.s.c . the offenses have similar , but not identical , objectives and distinctive elements of knowledge and intent . section 1512 also contains freestanding provisions that apply to one or more of the offenses within the section . these deal with affirmative defenses ( 18 u.s.c . 1512 ( e ) ) ; jurisdictional issues ( 18 u.s.c . 1512 ( f ) , ( g ) , ( h ) ) ; venue ( 18 u.s.c . 1512 ( i ) ) ; sentencing ( 18 u.s.c . 1512 ( j ) ) ; and conspiracy ( 18 u.s.c . however , it deals primarily with obstructing congressional or federal administrative proceedings , condemning: i. whoever ii . a. corruptly , or b. by threats or c. force , or d. by any threatening letter or communication iii . a. influences , b. obstructs , or c. impedes or d. endeavors to 1. influence , 2. obstruct , or 3. impede iv . 1. the due and proper administration of the law under which 2. any pending proceeding is being had 3. before any department or agency of the united states , or b . 1. the due and proper exercise of the power of inquiry under which 2. any inquiry or investigation is being had 3. by a. either house , or b. any committee of either house or c. any joint committee of the congress shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 5 years ( not more than 8 years if the offense involves domestic or international terrorism ) , or both . prosecutions under §1505 have been relatively few , at least until recently , and most of these arise as obstructions of administrative proceedings . "the crime of obstruction of [such] proceedings has three essential elements .