, adjusted for inflation ) . these figures exclude funding for the iraq and afghan wars and related activities . the bipartisan budget act ( p.l . this report mostly discusses trends in outlays . federal spending can be divided into three basic budget categories: discretionary spending ( $1.17 trillion in fy2014 outlays ) , mandatory spending ( $2.11 trillion in fy2014 outlays ) , and net interest costs ( about $230 billion in fy2014 ) , for a fy2014 total of $3,504 billion . mandatory spending , also known as direct spending , funds entitlement programs , such as the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ; formerly known as the food stamps program ) , and other spending controlled by laws other than appropriation acts . spending levels for mandatory programs generally depend on eligibility criteria , size of the eligible population , and participation rates . different types of mandatory programs are set up in diverse ways , reflecting historical influences , technical demands , and specific legislative authorities . while the term "entitlement" can be defined to coincide with the mandatory programs , many would distinguish programs providing benefits to large populations meeting set eligibility requirements from more special payments , such as salaries of judges covered by article iii of the constitution . in some cases , mandatory and discretionary spending support similar activities . for example , medicare health care benefits are classified as mandatory spending , while most health care benefits for veterans and military personnel are classified as discretionary spending . legislative procedures for funding discretionary programs differ from those for mandatory programs . congress provides discretionary funds ( ba ) each year through the annual appropriations process . other types of legislation , such as authorization measures , control mandatory spending . some mandatory programs , such as social security , are financed outside the annual appropriations process . other mandatory programs , such as medicaid , are funded through appropriations measures , while the level of spending reflects eligibility requirements and other provisions set in authorizing legislation , as well as the pool of potential beneficiaries and program participation rates . table 1 provides a simple division of federal spending ( i.e. the house appropriations committee set suballocations for its subcommittees that totaled $973.1 billion , slightly above total discretionary spending at bca lowered caps levels ( $967.5 billion ) for fy2014 . senate appropriations committee guidance for its subcommittees , however , indicated a total for fy2014 consistent with bca revised caps ( i.e. , a total of $1,058 billion split between a base defense subtotal of $552 billion and a non - defense total of $506 billion ) . the administration's fy2014 budget plan also includes $260 billion in unspecified reductions in discretionary spending , mostly slated for fy2015 through fy2023 . if those reductions were carried out , discretionary spending levels would have been less than those shown in figures below . 2775 ) on october 16 , 2013 , which was signed by the president the following morning ( continuing appropriations act , 2014 ; p.l . the measure provides funding on an annualized basis of $986.3 billion before adjustments . , mandatory and discretionary spending ) by contrasting the type of budget authority needed for specific purposes .