, depository institutions ) . but because the authority is broad and open - ended , the fed's actions under this authority are subject to few legal parameters . the authority allows lending to non - member banks , but some of the loans in the bear stearns and aig agreements were to llcs that the fed created and controls , and have been used to purchase bear stearns' and aig's assets . these actions raise an important issue — if financial institutions can receive some of the benefits of fed protection , in some cases because they are "too big to fail," should they also be subject to the costs that member banks bear in terms of safety and soundness regulations , imposed to limit the moral hazard that results from fed and fdic protections ? it has been observed that the most unusual aspect of the crisis is its persistence over time . over that time , the fed has aggressively reduced the federal funds rate and the discount rate in an attempt to calm the waters . when this proved not to be enough , the fed greatly expanded its direct lending to the financial sector through several new lending programs , some of which can be seen as adaptations of traditional tools and others which can be seen as more fundamental departures from the status quo . the fed's decision to assist specific troubled financial institutions sparked controversy . in march 2008 , the fed helped the investment bank bear stearns avoid bankruptcy , even though bear stearns was not a member bank of the federal reserve system ( because it was not a depository institution ) , and , therefore , not part of the regulatory regime that accompanies membership . at the same time , it created two lending facilities for other non - bank primary dealers . in september , the investment bank lehman brothers filed for bankruptcy ( it did not receive emergency government assistance ) , and the financial firm american international group ( aig ) , which was also not a member bank , received a credit line from the fed in order to meet its obligations . ( additional aid to aig was extended on three subsequent occasions. ) the fed then began directly assisting the markets for commercial paper and asset - backed securities . more recently , the fed and federal government has guaranteed losses on assets owned by citigroup . this marked the first time in more than 70 years that the fed had lent to non - members , and it did so using emergency statutory authority ( section 13 ( 3 ) of the federal reserve act ) . the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( h.r . 4173 ) adds conditions to the fed's emergency lending authority . 4173 was signed into law on july 21 , 2010 , as p.l . in september 2008 , the housing government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) fannie mae and freddie mac were taken into conservatorship by the government .