honduras struggles with high levels of crime and violence . more than 67% of hondurans live below the national poverty line . conditions are particularly difficult in rural honduras , where nearly 63% of the population lives in extreme poverty — unable to satisfy their basic nutritional needs . in recent years , many rural communities have struggled to contend with a coffee fungus outbreak and a series of droughts that have destroyed crops and reduced agricultural production and employment . households have reportedly been forced to engage in extreme coping strategies , such as taking on debt , selling off land , and migrating . honduras's medium - term economic performance is expected to mirror the u.s. business cycle , as the united states remains honduras's top export market and primary source of investment , tourism , and remittances . to boost the country's long - term growth potential , analysts maintain that honduras will have to improve education and infrastructure and address entrenched social ills , such as widespread crime and corruption and high levels of poverty . a number of interrelated factors appear to contribute to the poor security situation . they have also struggled with systemic corruption , with some sectors working on behalf of criminal organizations or private interests . president hernández campaigned on a hard - line security platform , repeatedly pledging to do whatever it takes to reduce crime and violence in honduras . upon taking office in 2014 , he immediately ordered the security forces into the streets to conduct intensive patrols of high - crime neighborhoods . widespread poverty , fragmented families , and a lack of education and employment opportunities leave many honduran youth susceptible to recruitment by gangs such as the mara salvatrucha ( ms - 13 ) and barrio 18 . these organizations engage in drug dealing and extortion , among other criminal activities , and appear to be responsible for a substantial portion of homicides and much of the crime that affects citizens on a day - to - day basis . honduras also serves as a significant drug - trafficking corridor as a result of its location between cocaine - producing countries in south america and the major consumer market in the united states . heavily armed and well - financed transnational criminal organizations have sought to secure control of honduran territory by battling one another and local affiliates and seeking to intimidate and infiltrate honduran institutions . the administration limited contact with the honduran government , suspended some foreign assistance , minimized cooperation with the honduran military , and revoked the visas of members and supporters of the interim government headed by roberto micheletti . in november 2009 , the administration shifted the emphasis of u.s. policy from reversing zelaya's removal to ensuring the legitimacy of previously scheduled elections . although some analysts argued that the policy shift allowed those behind the coup to consolidate their hold on power , administration officials maintained that elections had become the only realistic way to bring an end to the political crisis .