trafficking protocol . its global program against trafficking in human beings assists member states to implement the trafficking protocol and prevent human trafficking . it also aims to address domestic violence and human trafficking by developing policies to support women victims of violence , particularly those in prison . specifically , it works to integrate vaw and gender perspectives into its efforts to build the capacity of criminal justice systems . in october 2010 , for example , unodc developed an assessment tool which addresses the treatment of women victims of violence in prisons and criminal justice systems as a whole . the ilo promotes internationally recognized human and labor rights . it supports a number of programs that combat trafficking and forced and bonded labor , many of which include gender - specific components . through the international program to eliminate child labor ( ipec ) for instance , ilo works with participating governments to ( 1 ) prevent children from becoming child laborers ; ( 2 ) remove children from hazardous work , including exploitative work like forced prostitution ; and ( 3 ) offer children and their families education , income and employment opportunities . the ilo conditions of work and employment program researches violence in the workplace , including violence against women . the ilo labor standards department also conducts research on violence against migrant workers , particularly women , as well as violence against indigenous and tribal women workers . unaids works with international partners to identify and address the possible links between hiv / aids and violence against women . it promotes education and awareness of hiv within international peacekeeping operations , and national uniformed services through training and distribution of peer education kits , which include sections on gender issues and sexual violence . unaids has also worked in southern and eastern africa to determine how to improve health services for women who have experienced violence . it also supports regional task forces on vaw in emergency settings , collaborates with who to improve clinic services on sexual violence , and works with experts to develop cost estimates for integrating vaw awareness , prevention , and treatment into aids programs . response and policy issues . when considering u.s. efforts to address violence against women internationally , members of the 112 th congress may wish to take into account ongoing u.n. efforts to address the issue . were congress to decide to use u.n. mechanisms to combat vaw , a number of policy issues and u.n. system activities might be considered . the u.n. general assembly was the first international body to agree on a definition of violence against women . on december 20 , 1993 , the general assembly adopted the declaration on the elimination of violence against women ( devaw ) . the declaration , which was supported by the u.s. government , describes vaw as "any act of gender - based violence that results in , or is likely to result in , physical , sexual , or psychological harm or suffering to women , including threats of such acts , coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty , whether occurring in public or private life.