no such guidelines have been issued . some maintain that this reflects the fact that in asserting his existing authorities , the dni has not done so in a way that has caused dod or other agencies housing intelligence components to call for the issuance of the guidelines . the intelligence reform act assigns to the dni two of the three principal responsibilities formerly performed by the dci . the dni will provide intelligence to the president , other senior officials , and congress , and the dni will head the intelligence community . but , unlike dcis , the dni will not oversee the cia . rather , the act establishes the new position of director of the central intelligence agency ( dcia ) , who will report to the dni . the act also restates the major responsibilities of the dcia , which include ( 1 ) collecting intelligence through human sources and by other appropriate means ( but with no police , subpoena , or law enforcement powers or internal security functions ) ; ( 2 ) correlating and evaluating intelligence related to the national security and providing appropriate dissemination of such intelligence ; ( 3 ) providing overall direction for and coordination of collection by human sources outside the u.s. , in coordination with other government departments ; ( 4 ) performing other functions and duties related to intelligence affecting the national security as the president or dni may direct ( a formulation that , some observers believe , is intended to encompass the planning and carrying out of covert actions ) ; and ( 5 ) under the dni's direction , coordinating relationships between u.s. intelligence services and those of other countries . in april 2007 dni mcconnell reportedly told a conference of federal officials that he lacked sufficient authority to lead the 16-agency intelligence community , citing his lack of direct line management authority over every intelligence agency except cia , because each was a part of another cabinet - level department . the same month , the executive branch submitted an fy2008 intelligence authorization act that would have strengthened the dni's authorities . dni mcconnell also announced a "100 day plan," an initiative intended to improve integration and collaboration within the intelligence community by revising "existing statutes , regulations , and directives," as part of an effort to "delineate clearly the roles and responsibilities of the heads of intelligence community components , as well as to clarify dni authority regarding national intelligence agencies. in doing so , mcconnell conceded that the intelligence reform act had "significantly clarified and strengthened dni authorities," but that ic leadership had "not fully defined those authorities in guidance" to the intelligence community . to in part address this deficiency , in 2008 president george w. bush revised executive order ( eo ) 12333 , which generally defines the ic's roles and mission . during senate confirmation proceedings in january 2009 , dni blair said he would withhold judgment as to whether the dni's authorities were sufficient until he had been confirmed and been able to exercise his authorities . but he stated that he would exercise those authorities to the fullest and would advise the president and congress if he concluded that he needed more .