this report focuses on how automated calls are used during campaigns . from the outset , however , it is important to remember that not all automated calls containing political information are campaign - related . identifying those responsible for calls is also a concern . laws or regulations that would burden or prohibit such calls if they use automated dialers or prerecorded messages , therefore , must withstand so - called strict scrutiny in order to be considered constitutional . under a strict scrutiny analysis , if a governmental restriction is challenged in court , the government must demonstrate that the restriction on automated political calls serves a compelling government interest and is the least restrictive alternative to serve that interest . although empirical data are limited , estimates suggest that the calls reach at least a majority of american voters , occur frequently during federal campaigns , and could represent millions of dollars in spending by various political committees . despite media accounts of strong public disdain for automated political calls , the fec has received few formal complaints on the issue since 2003 . several bills introduced in the 111 th and 110 th congresses would ( or would have ) impose additional regulations on automated political calls , but would not necessarily apply to all circumstances in which the calls are used . congress has several policy options for restricting automated political calls , if it chooses to do so . aside from maintaining the status quo , a relatively cautious option might be gathering additional data before choosing a policy approach . federal agencies and the oversight process could provide additional information . another relatively limited approach would be to encourage voluntary changes by practitioners . by contrast , if congress chooses to require policy changes , it could add political calls to the do not call framework or restrict the timing or number of calls . finally , congress could place additional disclosure or disclaimer requirements on political calls . some of those options would likely involve sensitive questions about which groups and messages should be covered by campaign finance law . constitutional considerations could also be a factor . as this report discusses , publicly available data about automated political calls are virtually nonexistent . feca does not require detailed reporting about automated political calls . political committees also have few incentives to make information about automated calls public because doing so potentially alerts opposing candidates , groups , and the media to campaign strategy . in addition to this lack of data from regulators and practitioners , scholarly literature is limited . academic research that does exist tends to focus on campaign strategists , such as media consultants and pollsters , but not on vendors who provide technical services such as automated calls . automated calls as a campaign tactic have also received limited scholarly attention . given the limited publicly available information about automated political calls , crs employed a broad research strategy designed to gather as much information as possible .