soils and sediments can be reused . however , in agricultural areas , soil may be too contaminated with fertilizers or other chemicals to be used on residential or agricultural lands . federal agency response to debris removal after a disaster is generally done in accordance with provisions of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( the stafford act , 42 u.s.c . the stafford act authorizes the president to declare a "major disaster" or "emergency" which in turn enables federal agencies to provide assistance to state and local governments overwhelmed by catastrophes . the declaration may also authorize all federal agencies , as necessary , to provide assistance to respond to a disaster , including the "demolition of unsafe structures which endanger the public" ( § 5170b ) and debris removal activities ( § 5173 ) . the declaration will also specify geographic areas over which the declaration is made . the national response framework ( nrf or the framework ) is a guide to existing federal authorities applicable to all - hazard responders . developed by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , the nrf applies to situations in which the resources of state and local authorities are overwhelmed and authorities have requested federal assistance . the nrf does not confer new authorities upon the secretary of dhs or any other federal official . rather , the nrf establishes the coordinating structures , processes , and protocols required to integrate the specific statutory and policy authorities of various federal departments and agencies . the nrf identifies and groups the capabilities of federal departments and agencies into 15 emergency support functions ( esfs ) to provide the planning , support , resources , program implementation , and emergency services most likely to be needed . two esfs include debris removal missions: esf #3 , public works and engineering — this includes infrastructure protection and emergency repair , infrastructure restoration , engineering services , construction management , and critical infrastructure liaison . the corps is the lead agency to complete this esf . esf #10 , oil and hazardous materials response — this includes oil and hazardous materials response and environmental safety and short - and long - term cleanup . epa is the lead agency to complete this esf ; the corps provides support . there are many challenges to managing disaster debris , particularly if a region does not have a debris management plan in place . some of these challenges include issues associated with managing large volumes of waste , ensuring the ability of property owners to return to an area and assist with cleanup , separating hazardous and nonhazardous waste , and managing asbestos - contaminated wastes . following are selected guidance , fact sheets , and web pages produced by fema , epa , and the corps to assist applicants with the federal funding process , disaster debris planning , and debris removal operations: fema report fema - 325 , public assistance: debris management guide , july 2007 , available at http: / / www.fema.gov / government / grant / pa / demagde.shtm . epa web page "dealing with debris and damaged buildings," available at http: / / www.epa.gov / naturalevents / returnhomeadvisory.htm .