yes. ocean container lines , which rely on railroads extensively to move their containers between u.s. ports and distant inland points , reportedly experienced railroad rate increases of 30% to 40% in 2006 , before the economic downturn , with one shipping line executive noting that railroads have "immense bargaining power" because of their "virtual duopoly in each half of the country," while a container shipper notes that railroads "can almost dictate this [the rate increase]" because "we don't have anywhere else to go. the rationing of intermodal rail service at west coast ports in 2004 , in which two railroads limited the number of marine containers they would accept each day , also indicated railroads' market power . are we constructively captive ? yet tellingly , at the february 2011 stb hearing on traffic exemptions , two large intermodal customers of the railroads , j.b. hunt transport ( a trucking firm ) and hub group ( a freight arranger ) , strongly opposed revocation of the regulatory exemption for intermodal traffic . the railroads counter shipper criticism by arguing that their recent pricing and investment strategies are rational responses to changing economic circumstances . they argue the shift from a rail market with excess capacity to a rail market with excess demand dictates price increases and a preference by the railroads for shorter - term contracts or , in some cases , public pricing . the railroads explain that some shippers now face higher rates because many of the contracts that recently expired were negotiated many years ago , when the railroads had excess capacity and thus were eager to sign long - term contracts . railroads respond to complaints about inadequate service by pointing out that rail infrastructure is a fixed , long - term investment that must respond to long - term expectations rather than short - term surges of freight . recent coal delivery problems and the allocation of train service at west coast ports in 2004 were the results of unexpected surge in traffic , they contend . as for grain delivery issues , railroads view this market as especially volatile — not only in the size of the harvest each year but in the destinations that grain producers may want to ship to from year to year . during the george w. bush administration , dot supported the railroads' position , with one official stating: "the bottom line on any rail expansion is the requirement by investors for an adequate return on that investment . the industry appears to be making capacity - enhancing investments at a responsible pace , but is unlikely to invest to meet what it observes as surge demand. although the captive shipper debate has continued for over two decades , changing economic circumstances may have recast it . captive shippers assert that stb's interpretations of the staggers act are based on precedents established in an era of excess rail capacity . with segments of the rail network now experiencing congestion , captive shippers argue that , as a matter of public policy , shippers should be given greater latitude to reroute their traffic to less capacity - constrained routes , even if those are not owned by the same carrier that serves a particular factory or distribution center .