2900 , as described below . 105-115 ; reauthorized in p.l . 107-109 ) , and the pediatric research equity act ( prea ; p.l . in addition , the bills address a number of other issues of concern to congress and to the public . the fda , an agency within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , regulates the safety of most human foods , all animal feeds , and certain other products such as cosmetics . the agency also regulates the safety and effectiveness of human drugs , biologics ( eg , vaccines ) , medical devices , and animal drugs . those products regulated for effectiveness must be reviewed and approved by fda before they can be placed in commerce , a process called premarket approval . ( fda is tasked with postmarket surveillance for these products as well. ) products regulated only for safety may enter commerce with little fda oversight , though the agency may inspect production facilities and require that certain good manufacturing practices be carried out . fda has the statutory authority to withdraw from commerce any product it regulates that it determines to be unsafe . media coverage of issues related to the safety of food ( eg , spinach ) , drugs ( eg , vioxx ) , and medical devices ( eg , cardiac stents ) have brought congressional attention to fda's performance and the funding it has available to carry out its statutory responsibilities . for those products requiring premarket approval , a central issue for the 110 th congress is how best to balance the need for the agency to help speed the products it regulates to market if they are safe and effective , and correct them or keep or remove them from the market if they are not . for human foods , animal feeds , and other products not requiring premarket approval , key issues relate to fda's ability to assure product safety and protect public health by preventing health threats from occurring , or by identifying and responding to problems quickly . in order to bring revenue into fda to help speed products to market , congress has passed several measures authorizing fda to collect user fees from the products' manufacturers . some have questioned whether the agency's reliance on fees it collects from the companies that it regulates is appropriate , calling instead for greatly increased appropriations for the agency . nevertheless , efforts to reauthorize the two expiring user fee authorities ( pdufa and mdufma ) are already underway . income from pdufa and mdufma represents , by far , the largest proportion of fda's user fee revenue , and a significant proportion of the agency's overall budget . according to fda's fy2008 budget request , pdufa will generate $339,195,000 , and mdufma will generate $47,500,000 . combined , these fees would account for 87% of fda's user fee revenue , and 19% of its total program level budget in fy2008 . pdufa was first enacted in 1992 ( p.l . 102-571 ) , and has been reauthorized twice ; once by the food and drug administration modernization act of 1997 ( fdama , p.l .