some have argued that p.l . 112-10 is a tipping point in species protection — that politics and not science will dictate species protection in the future . however , section 1713 is not a blanket delisting , but a direction to re - release the april 2009 rule in which fws determined that the best available science supported delisting those wolves . as referenced above , however , a federal court found fws had violated the esa in making this determination . 112-10 bars judicial review of the rule , but still allows regulatory actions , such as delisting in wyoming , or relisting of the dps , should the wolf's status change . section 1713 states that it does not alter the november 2010 wyoming district court ruling that remanded wyoming's management plan to fws . fws reissued the 2009 rule on may 5 , 2011 . a challenge to section 1713 argued that it violated the separation of powers doctrine under the constitution by trying "to affect the outcome of a case , without amending the underlying statute. states have traditionally worked closely with the federal agencies that manage lands where hunting occurs to set harvest quotas , and forest service regulations also provide that wilderness designations do not change the state's right to control fish and game . it appears that the wyoming plan is to be a formal proposal to prohibit wolf hunting in those forest service wilderness areas under state law . the authority of private landowners to take wolves on their land has been an important issue in wyoming , particularly among the ranching community , but among others as well . south and east of the two parks , significant amounts of private lands are included in zone 2 . private landowners may object to their land's use ( i.e. , ability to take wolves ) being limited by the state's plan . finally , the map included in the proposed rule appears to contradict some of the narrative of the proposed rule . the map includes all of grand teton national park , john d. rockefeller jr. memorial parkway , and ner within the boundaries of the trophy hunting area , although the text states that hunting is to be prohibited in grand teton and ner , and is unclear whether it would be prohibited in the parkway . according to this map , the wind river reservation falls outside of the protected trophy hunting area , although the text ( cited above ) includes it in the trophy area . the district court of montana rejected the claim , and an appeal is pending . other bills still pending in the 112 th congress would restrict federal protection of the gray wolf . those addressing the wolves of the west may not be advanced in light of p.l . for example , congress apparently chose p.l . 112-10 , §1713 over the nearly identical version in s. 321 ( baucus ) , which would have given the 2009 rule the force of law rather than regulation . additionally , h.r . 510 ( rehberg ) , which allows state regulation of wolves in idaho and montana , appears mooted by that law . other bills do not appear moot .