an example of this ambiguity centers on tax refunds . as noted earlier , the internal revenue code generally does not distinguish between resident aliens who are lawfully present in the united states and those who are not ( with the exception of the eitc ) . it appears that the internal revenue service ( irs ) permits unauthorized resident aliens to claim the additional child tax credit . there is no indication , moreover , that the irs generally considers refundable tax credits to be federal public benefits that unauthorized migrants are barred from receiving . it is possible that refundable tax credits could fall within the types of benefits described by section 401 . under this interpretation , the refundable nature of a credit makes it equivalent to a "grant" or "payment or assistance" provided by a federal agency or appropriated funds . refundable tax credits , as some elaborate , are being "provided to an individual , family , or eligibility unit" and thus could be classified as a federal public benefit under section 401 of prwora . government officials sometimes face competing priorities when dealing with unauthorized aliens , and such dilemmas are especially evident during major disasters . when a major disaster occurs , two competing priorities come into play: access to emergency disaster relief and immigration enforcement . according to section 401 of prwora , unauthorized aliens are eligible for short - term , in - kind emergency disaster relief and services or assistance that deliver in - kind services at the community level , provide assistance without individual determinations of each recipient's needs , and are necessary for the protection of life and safety . the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act , the authority under which the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) conducts disaster assistance efforts , requires nondiscrimination and equitable treatment in disaster assistance . fema assistance provided under the stafford act includes ( but is not limited to ) grants for immediate temporary shelter , cash grants for uninsured emergency personal needs , temporary housing assistance , home repair grants , unemployment assistance due to the disaster , emergency food supplies , legal aid for low - income individuals , and crisis counseling . when a situation threatens human health and safety , and a disaster is imminent but not yet declared , the secretary of dhs may pre - position employees and supplies and provide precautionary evacuation measures . as part of a mock evacuation in may 2008 in the rio grande valley of texas , dhs border patrol officials in that region announced that border patrol agents would pre - screen residents for citizenship documents before allowing them to board evacuation buses in the event of a hurricane . dhs border patrol spokesperson dan doty stated that the border patrol will assist other federal , state , and local authorities in a safe evacuation but at the same time uphold its job of "border security , protecting the border , and establishing alienage.