finally , p.l . 110-329 ( the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 ) provided $910.0 million in emergency wildfire appropriations for fy2008 — $775.0 million for the fs and $135.0 million for doi . see table 25 . this funding was in addition to $50.0 million provided to the corps for fy2009 . mod waters is designed to improve water deliveries to everglades national park , and to the extent possible , restore the natural hydrological conditions within the park . the completion of this project is required prior to the construction of certain projects under cerp . funding and planning for the tamiami trail portion of the project is being conducted by the corps . the fy2009 omnibus appropriations law provided that funding in the law , as well as any prior acts , for the implementation of mod waters shall be made available to the corps to implement a project regarding the tamiami trail , as described in the limited reevaluation report with integrated environmental assessment and addendum ( lrr ) . this report details a project to increase water flows southward to everglades national park by creating a 1-mile bridge on tamiami trail and increasing the height of a canal by one foot . the project is expected to cost $227 million . the fy2009 omnibus appropriations law also directed the secretary of the interior , acting through the national park service , to evaluate the feasibility of additional bridge length ( i.e. , additional bridges and longer bridges ) beyond what is to be constructed under the lrr , to restore natural flows of water to everglades national park . the feasibility study and recommendation for additional bridge length are to be submitted to congress no later than march 11 , 2010 . the level of commitment by the federal government to implement restoration activities in the everglades continues to receive attention . some observers measure commitment by the frequency and number of projects authorized under cerp , and the appropriations they receive . because only two restoration projects have been authorized since wrda 2000 , these observers are concerned that federal commitment to cerp implementation is waning . others assert that the federal commitment will be measurable by the amount of federal funding for construction , expected when the first projects break ground in the next few years . some state and federal officials contend that federal funding will increase compared to state funding as cerp projects move beyond design into construction . still others question whether the federal government should maintain the current level of funding , or increase its commitment , because of escalating costs and project delays . phosphorus is one of the primary water pollutants in the everglades and a primary cause for ecosystem degradation . the fy2009 omnibus appropriations law did not contain a provision regarding phosphorus mitigation that had been included in recent appropriations laws . specifically , from fy2004-fy2008 , interior appropriations laws conditioned funding for the modified water deliveries project based on meeting state water quality standards .