appendix a . significant disruptions in deliveries of coal to power generators since 1990 appendix b . it's that simple. congress's view of the restructuring proposals may depend in part on an evaluation of the financial condition of the railroads ; in particular , whether they have achieved the regulatory goal of revenue adequacy . a financially robust industry may be able to respond to enhanced competition with the innovation and service improvements suggested by proponents . a weaker industry may contract in response to more intense competition , and service could deteriorate . there are other perspectives: if the railroads have achieved revenue adequacy then it might be unwise to make major changes ; if it has not , then more competition may be needed to jump - start the industry . a predicate for reaching any of these conclusions is a rigorous analysis of the financial state of the railroads , and this does not currently appear to be available . would the restructuring proposals actually achieve substantial service improvements ? rcsia leaves implementation details undefined , making the outcomes from the law uncertain . these implementation issues include , for example , the fees for bottleneck service , how a cost of service rate appeal process could be economically managed , and operation of the remedies proposed for areas of inadequate competition . service focus : as an alternative to extensive revision of the current regulatory regime , could more limited changes result in material improvements in coal rail service ? if otherwise desirable , a more limited agenda might include elements of current proposals , including giving rail service problems and their resolution greater public visibility ; creation of a rail public advocate ; and new requirements in the law for reliable rail service . as of mid - 2007 the stb plans to conduct a study of rail competition and rates , but this will apparently be a one - time analysis . what is the actual financial state of the railroad industry ? costs and other consequences of the 2005-2006 disruption in rail transportation of coa . existing data on service , capacity , rates , and the degree to which captive coal and other shippers are subject to market power are incomplete at best . should the executive agencies be directed to gather and analyze additional data in these areas on an ongoing basis ? coal shippers have characterized the rate increases as unreasonable . they have also criticized the stb's rate appeals process as an ineffective deterrent to or remedy for unreasonable rate increases , a concern shared by gao . thus , even retained earnings will not be invested in the company if they cannot earn a rate of return equal to the cost of capital. whether this trend will continue is unknown . the increase in rates extends beyond coal traffic . the railroads are subject to other aspects of the antitrust laws and extensive regulation by the stb . the limited exemptions that apply to the railroads are "narrowly applied," are intended to avoid dual jurisdiction between the stb and other parts of the government , and in some cases reflect special circumstances .