110-234 ) was enacted . farm legislation has important implications for the level and timing of funding for several areas related to the u.s.'s ability to respond to domestic and international food concerns . for example , these include provisions related to u.s. domestic nutrition programs , u.s. foreign food aid and agricultural assistance , the on - going debate over food versus fuel , agricultural land use incentives , and agricultural productivity issues . note , this and the next section briefly summarize some of the more salient events related to the international communities attempts at responding to the perceived food crisis . for more detail , see crs report rl34478 , rising food prices and global food needs: the u.s . response , by [author name scrubbed] . on april 29 , 2008 , u.n. secretary - general ban ki - moon announced that he will lead a task force to coordinate the efforts of the u.n. system in addressing the global crisis arising from the surge in food prices . the task force on the global food crisis will bring together the heads of u.n. agencies , funds and programs , and the world bank and international monetary fund , as well as experts within the un and leading authorities from the international community . the two principal agencies within the united nations ( u.n. ) responsible for international agricultural development and food aid are the food and agricultural organization ( fao ) and the world food program ( wfp ) . wfp is the u.n.'s front - line agency in the fight against global hunger via emergency operations in response to natural and man - made disasters , relief and rehabilitation projects , development projects where food aid is used for social and economic development , and special operations involving logistics to speed up the movement of food aid . in contrast , fao has a longer - term focus . fao is mandated to raise levels of nutrition , improve agricultural productivity , better the lives of rural populations and contribute to the growth of the world economy . fao accomplishes this through in - country agricultural research and extension support , information dissemination , international workshops and conferences , etc . in order to help developing countries modernize and improve their agriculture , forestry and fisheries practices and ensure good nutrition for all . on december 17 , 2007 , the u.n.'s fao launched its initiative on soaring food prices ( isfp ) as a focal point for technical and policy assistance to those countries identified as the hardest hit by the sharp increase in food prices — referred to as low - income food - deficit countries ( lifdcs ) . the international community is seeking to coordinate on - going work by the world bank , the international fund for agriculture development ( ifad ) , wfp , regional development banks ( eg , the asian development bank and the african development bank ) , and private foundations to integrate new projects and interventions . first , the wfp , fao , and ifad are scheduled to present their strategies for coping with the food - price crisis at a u.n. executive board meeting in geneva .