part 1201 . although an alj's pay may only be reduced for good cause , as mentioned above , the 2007 opm final rule allows the employing agency to reduce the basic pay of an alj if the alj "submits to the employing agency a written request for a voluntary reduction due to personal reasons" and opm approves . additionally , aljs may be subject to an agency reduction in force , which may occur "when there is a surplus of employees at a particular location in a particular line of work. an alj who is part of a reduction in force may have his or her name placed on opm's alj priority referral list as well as the agency's own reemployment priority list . in general , aljs hear cases that fall into four different categories: ( 1 ) enforcement cases ; ( 2 ) entitlement cases ; ( 3 ) regulatory cases ; and ( 4 ) contract cases . enforcement cases typically involve claims that federal agencies bring against individuals and companies in order to enforce federal law . entitlement cases usually involve adjudication of an individual's claim that he or she is eligible to receive certain federal benefits . regulatory cases generally involve decisions about rates , licenses , or other requirements that govern certain industries . contract cases typically involve claims against the government for contractual breaches . not all executive branch agencies use aljs to adjudicate disputes before the agency . for example , immigration judges in the executive office of immigration review are not required to be aljs ; nor are hearing officers at the veterans administration who review certain benefits cases . there are numerous non - alj hearing officers who review similar administrative appeals throughout the federal government . in fact , when the apa was enacted , the statute did not require agencies to use aljs because congress "intended to leave the decision to employ aljs to agency - specific legislation by stating that aljs would only be required where statutes called for 'on the record' hearings. thus , upon enactment of the apa , the alj provisions became applicable only to those agencies that were required to conduct "on the record" hearings or that subsequently were subject to such a requirement . agencies that are not required to conduct hearings on the record may also use hearing examiners to preside over various agency proceedings , but the decision - making independence of these non - aljs is generally less protected than that of their alj counterparts . although there is ample precedent for using non - aljs to conduct administrative adjudication in the federal agencies , there are significant differences between aljs and non - aljs in terms of independence , training , experience , and compensation that may affect how these two types of hearing officers review administrative appeals . indeed , despite the fact that aljs are agency employees and are located within and paid by the agency , they are not subject to agency management . certain requirements operate to preserve the aljs integrity , independence , and insulation from agency influence .