house: legislative director , and administrative assistant . house: office manager , district office coordinator , district representative / scheduler . senate: constituent services representative / caseworker , executive assistant , field representative , grants and projects coordinator , office manager , systems administrator . an incumbent in this position typically acts as liaison for the member with the member's personal office staff , committee staff , other members and their staffs , and the public . an incumbent may also serve as the member's confidential assistant with respect to all matters affecting the member's performance of his or her official responsibilities . position duties may also include maintaining the member's files , including notes , correspondence , and all information related to travel ; logging and monitoring the member's incoming telephone calls , taking messages , and placing outgoing calls for the member ; and ensuring that the member is provided with briefing materials for various activities in which the member participates . house: scheduler , administrative assistant , administrative secretary , congressional aide , executive / legislative assistant . the united states congress conducts several types of activities for which it employs staff . congressional employees are retained to perform public duties that include assisting members in official responsibilities in personal , committee , leadership , or administrative office settings . organized to support members of congress in their various duties and functions in washington , dc , and constituency offices around the united states , staff are involved in virtually all elements of the work of congress . individuals in congressional staff positions may come from a wide range of training or professional backgrounds . these might include the law , business , medicine , political campaigns , engineering , the social sciences , or fine arts . nevertheless , congressional staff are seen by some as a professional cohort . congressional career tracks generally mirror common stages of other professional careers , but with adaptations to the congressional workplace . these adaptations include relatively short career ladders on which staff may acquire substantial responsibilities in a relatively short period of time , and close support of a member's legislative and representational responsibilities . senate: counsel , district scheduler , district director , executive assistant , field representative , grants and projects coordinator , legislative director , office manager , press secretary / communications director , scheduler ( washington , dc ) , systems administrator , legislative aide , senior legislative aide . other duties may include developing and implementing media and communications strategies for the member , acting as the formal spokesperson and media liaison for the member , and writing speeches for the member . an incumbent in this position typically acts as a liaison with federal , state , and / or local agencies on behalf of constituents . in the course of employment , an incumbent may respond to casework inquiries from constituents , act as the grassroots representative for the member within assigned areas of responsibility , and monitor and update the member and district director on district and local issues . house: casework manager , constituent advocate , district aide , district representative .