avoid jargon . what are its chances for success ? the initial review of the request should also involve an assessment of the applicant . a formal grant proposal will require an applicant to establish credibility . individuals connected with a proposal might mention education , training , and professional credentials . credibility for an organization may be established by giving its history , goals , activities , and primary accomplishments , as well as by letters of support , including by local governments . by reviewing such information , an office may avoid the hazard of offering support for a questionable applicant and may be in a better position to make decisions about support when several communities or organizations are applying for the same program — will all be treated equally or will support be given to selected applicants ? a written request from a constituent should always be acknowledged . if the request is a fairly common one , the office may be able to respond with a prepared packet of materials on available programs . for large grants - in - aid projects , the congressional office may contact the federal or state agency congressional liaison and ask to speak to a grants specialist for a particular program or funding need . this procedure is generally more time consuming for a congressional staffer than a simple referral , but it is often more informative . the agency may provide facts about budget levels , authorizations and appropriations , the amount of money available for the program , the total amount requested in applications on file , the number of applications received , and the number likely to be approved , agency priorities , categories of competition or targets by region , key dates and deadlines , and information on who makes recommendations and decisions . if your constituent decides to submit a formal grant application for a particular program , the congressional office may recommend or arrange a meeting with agency offices in the district or state . another way to get input from the agency early in the process is a pre - review of the application . some agencies provide procedural review of proposals one or two months before the application deadline . such a review , while not dealing with the substance of the proposal , allows an agency to inform the applicant of any technical problems or omissions to be corrected before the proposal is formally submitted . when a constituent notifies the congressional office that a proposal has been submitted , the office can send a letter to the agency expressing the member's interest in being kept informed of developments relating to the application . in addition , the letter may also request a list of all applicants for the particular grant from the member's state or district . this enables the office to consider initiating letters of support from the member to those applicants in his or her state or district who did not approach the office prior to submission of their application . whether the member chooses to support an applicant or extends support to all applicants from the state or district , the office should maintain contact with all interested parties as it is notified of progress reports from agency contacts .