appendix a . continuing its series on the future of the u.s. relationship with iraq , the house subcommittee on international organizations , human rights , and oversight held this hearing on february 28 , 2008 . focusing on the purpose and scope of sofas in general , the hearing produced statements from committee members that congress needs to play a significant role in reviewing and approving the iraq sofa , even if it does not include a commitment to defend iraq , due to the importance of iraq to u.s. foreign policy overall . professor michael j. matheson , one of the experts on the hearing panel , suggested that congress should engage in defining the scope of authority for military operations in iraq going forward . declaration and principles: future u.s. commitments to iraq this hearing took place before a joint session of the house subcommittee on international organizations , human rights , and oversight and the subcommittee on the middle east and south asia on march 4 , 2008 . the fourth hearing in a series , it was the first that collected testimony from administration officials . ambassador david satterfield , who leads the negotiations with iraq , answered numerous questions from members concerning the iraq agreements , making the following statements , among others: the iraq agreements will not include a binding commitment to defend iraq or any other security commitment that would warrant senate advice and consent ; the iraq agreements will not create permanent u.s. bases in iraq , and will not specify numbers of u.s. troops to be stationed there ; any arrangement fulfilling the pledges of the declaration of principles between the administration and iraq will be made public and will not remain secret ; the administration does not contemplate the strategic framework as a legally binding agreement ; the administration has made clear to prime minister al maliki and other iraqi officials that the agreements will not include an obligation to enter into combat if iraq is attacked ; the iraq agreements will not contain a commitment for u.s. forces to remain present in iraq ; and the administration relies on the congressional authority in the 2002 authorization to invade iraq as the basis for maintaining u.s. forces in iraq past the end of the u.n. mandate . when asked whether the administration would present the iraq agreements to congress for approval , ambassador satterfield held to the administration's position that the agreements did not need congressional approval , but stated that the administration would comply with all constitutional requirements . he stated that background briefings had already taken place between the administration and members of congress , and that they would continue , but that the administration would not publicly disclose its negotiating positions . international affairs budget for fiscal year 2009 the house appropriations subcommittee on state , foreign operations and related programs held this hearing on march 12 , 2008 . secretary rice appeared before the subcommittee during this hearing and was asked several questions concerning the iraq agreements .