gina , p.l . 110-233 , prohibits discrimination based on genetic information by health insurers and employers . while title ii does not include the exception regarding manifested diseases contained in title i , it does contain section 210 , which states , an employer , employment agency , labor organization , or joint labor - management committee shall not be considered to be in violation of this title based on the use , acquisition , or disclosure of medical information that is not genetic information about a manifested disease , disorder , or pathological condition of an employee or member , including a manifested disease , disorder , or pathological condition that has or may have a genetic basis . the interim final regulations follow the statutory language with respect to the definition of genetic test except that they provide specific examples of genetic and non - genetic tests to illustrate the definition's scope . the eeoc's final regulations also mirror the statutory language except that the regulations provide specific examples of genetic tests and of tests or procedures that are not genetic tests . for example , a genetic test includes a test to determine whether an individual has a brca1 or brca2 variant , which would indicate a predisposition to breast cancer , and would also include preimplantation genetic diagnosis on embryos . part 46 , which provides for protection of human research subjects ; in response to a court order except that only the genetic information expressly authorized by the order shall be disclosed ; if the court order was obtained without the knowledge of the employee or member to whom the information refers , the employee or member shall be informed of the court order and the information may be disclosed ; to government officials who are investigating compliance with title ii of gina , if the information is relevant ; where such disclosure is made in connection with the certification provisions of the family and medical leave act or state family and medical leave laws ; or to a federal , state , or local public health agency regarding a contagious disease that presents an imminent hazard of death or life - threatening illness , and there is notification . gina also contains a provision concerning the relationship of the confidentiality provisions with the hipaa privacy rule . gina does not prohibit an entity covered under hipaa "from any use or disclosure of health information that is authorized for the covered entity under such regulations. the eeoc final regulations track the legislative language . the eeoc in its discussion of the final regulations addresses several concerns raised by commenters . for example , the eeoc states that genetic information that had been placed in a personnel file prior to the effective date of gina , need not be removed and its existence does not create a violation of gina . however , disclosing such information to a third party would violate the law .