each is discussed in this report . before turning to them , however , the report discusses the scope and origins of the exclusion , both of which are more complex than is generally recognized . the income tax exclusion has been in the tax code for more than 50 years , and its repeal could have unintended consequences unless policy makers understand what transactions it covers and what role it has had in the development of employment - based insurance . a discussion of the scope and origins will also reveal some of the uncertainties repeal would raise for both tax and health care policy . limited to these topics , the report does not address all issues that might be raised about the exclusion . a comprehensive analysis would be difficult because of limited knowledge about who actually pays for employer - provided health insurance and how workers value insurance at different ages and income levels . while there is general understanding about these matters — it is reasonable to assume that much of the employer contribution is actually borne by workers through reduced wages — that is unlikely to be sufficient , and could be misleading , for drawing conclusions applicable to the diversity of employment arrangements throughout the country . for legislation , differences among types of employers ( by size and industry , for example ) and types of workers ( by gender , family status , and income ) often are important . the statutory provision allowing an income tax exclusion for employer - provided health insurance is short but complex . it covers more than health insurance ( and health plans that often are described as insurance ) and applies to most but not all workers , including members of the workers' families . how other forms of coverage would be affected by repeal of the exclusion for health insurance might be considered . in order to understand the tax issue the exclusion resolves , it should be considered along with another exclusion applying to benefits . when employees receive something of value from their employer , the general presumption under an income tax is that it will be taxable . whether taxes will actually be paid depends on the deductions and credits a taxpayer might claim , but at least the starting position is that whatever is received should be taken into account for the purpose of determining an employee's tax liability . this rule is reflected in section 61 ( a ) of the internal revenue code , which provides that all forms of income from whatever source are taxable unless there is an express exception . with respect to employer - provided health insurance , there are two exceptions that are relevant , an exclusion for coverage and an exclusion for benefits received . these exceptions reflect two different tax questions that arise with this insurance , whether the provision of coverage by itself should be taxable ( regardless of whether the taxpayer actually uses insurance benefits ) and whether the insurance benefits used should be taxable ( regardless of whether the taxpayer paid for the coverage ) .