committee with h.rept . 101-569 , part i . reported 7 / 16 / 1990 by the committee on foreign affairs , h.rept . 101-569 , part ii . where there is permanent law , would the design and funding have changed ? the 2002 omnibus farm bill ( p.l . 107-171 ) included a wide range of program authorities , some of which were mandatory and others discretionary . mandatory , in this context , means that the authority to spend necessary funds is provided by statute . this mandatory category includes the commodity support programs , export programs , some conservation programs , and food stamps . discretionary programs are authorized , but annual funding is subject to congressionally approved appropriations . discretionary programs in the farm bill include some conservation programs , federal farm loan programs , rural development programs , agricultural research , and some foreign food aid , among others . in nearly all cases , a farm bill supersedes permanent authorizing law for a period of four to six years . the farm bill is important because it may substantially change program design from what is in the permanent law , as is the case with commodity support programs . typically , with regard to appropriated programs , the farm bill sets policy parameters and upper limits on program activity levels and appropriations authority . without an extension , most appropriated programs ( also referred to as discretionary programs ) in the 2002 farm bill and some mandatory programs , such as food stamps , would have faced the prospect of not having statutory authority for the appropriations committees to provide funding in fy2008 and subsequent years . the lack of authority to appropriate funds for authorized programs ( and even for some programs not authorized ) has not been a barrier for appropriations in past congresses . the mandatory commodity support programs authorized in the 2002 farm bill cover the 2007 crops . so , all subsidy obligations related to 2007 crop production are covered by the law , even if spending occurs in fy2008 . for commodity support programs , there was little reason to enact a farm bill before the end of calendar year 2007 . in fact , past farm bills generally have been enacted late in the year , after the end of the fiscal year . the 1981 and 1985 farm bills were enacted in late december , and the 1990 farm bill was enacted in late november . what might have happened if a new farm bill were not enacted in early 2008 ? would programs authorized by the expiring legislation have ceased to operate , or would they have continued under non - expiring provisions of permanent law ? what was expected to be a 1995 farm bill was not enacted until april 4 , 1996 , another case of belated action . even in that case , payments were made on the 1995 crops and farmers went ahead with planting operations for their 1996 crops . policy officials and the agriculture community expected a 2007 farm bill to be enacted before the end of calendar year 2007 .