on december 6 , 2007 , h.r . justice scalia has stated that "[s]tatutory construction ... is a holistic endeavor . a provision that may seem ambiguous in isolation is often clarified by the remainder of the statutory scheme — because the same terminology is used elsewhere in a context that makes its meaning clear , or because only one of the permissible meanings produces a substantive effect that is compatible with the rest of the law. it seems , therefore , that when an agency's interpretation of the scope of its authority is at issue , a reviewing court will look first to the statutory context in which the provision granting the authority appears ( i.e. , the intent of the statute as a whole , the structure of the statute , and inferences that can be drawn from the placement of the provision under review ) to determine the precise scope of the power congress has delegated . with these principles in mind , it seems likely that a court would begin its analysis of the authority congress granted under subsection 612 ( g ) by noting the subsection's broad language . on its face the subsection appears to grant broad authority to promulgate any rule that would ensure a diversity of information sources once the statutory test has been satisfied . however , because statutory construction "is a holistic endeavor," the court likely would analyze the broad language of subsection 612 ( g ) within the context of the entire statute in which the subsection resides . subsection ( g ) appears within section 612 , which applies solely to leased access to cable systems . congress has provided other avenues of access to cable systems in the statute , beyond leased access , such as the provision requiring carriage of local television channels ( "must - carry" ) , the provision requiring carriage of non - commercial educational channels , and the provision requiring carriage of public education and government ( peg ) channels . the court would then weigh a narrow interpretation against legal arguments for a broader one . it should also be noted that congress in the 1984 cable act stated its intent to ease regulatory burdens on the cable industry . if 612 ( g ) grants broad authority , as some commenters argued , it would allow the fcc to regulate many different areas related to the provision of video programming . this result would arguably run contrary to the deregulatory intent of the statute . although not beyond question , it appears that a court likely would adopt the narrow interpretation of subsection 612 ( g ) , because the narrow reading appears to "produce a substantive effect that is compatible with the rest of the law. a narrow reading appears to comport with the entire statute's overarching theme of avoiding unnecessary regulation , and seems consistent with the placement of the subsection within the section dealing exclusively with leased access . the fcc previously had determined that the first prong of the so - called "70 / 70" test had been met .