these include h.r . 302 ( ackerman , introduced january 8 , 2009 ) , which would require the sec to reinstate the uptick rule on short sales of securities ; and s. 605 ( kaufman , introduced march 16 , 2009 ) , which would require the sec to prohibit short sales of the securities of any financial institution , unless that trade is effected at a price ( in minimum lots , as specified by the agency ) that is at least $0.05 higher than the immediately preceding transaction . greater market efficiency . efficient markets require that prices fully reflect all buy and sell interests in traded securities . investors who think that a given stock is overvalued may conduct short sales in an attempt to profit from a perceived divergence of stock prices from their actual values . these short sellers add to stock pricing efficiency because their transactions inform the market of their evaluation of future stock price performance , an evaluation that is reflected in the resulting market price . arbitrageurs also contribute to pricing efficiency by utilizing short sales to profit from price disparities between a stock and a derivative security like a convertible security or an option on that stock . although it found some changes in the displayed liquidity , all the tested securities showed about the same level of liquidity and pricing efficiency with or without the tick test . when the differences between larger and smaller cap stocks were examined , one of the most counter - intuitive discoveries was that the short selling restrictions appeared to increase volatility in the larger capitalized securities while dampening it in the smaller ones . overall , the sec found little evidence suggesting that removal of the short selling restrictions would have a negative impact on market volatility , price efficiency , or liquidity . on december 7 , 2006 , the sec commissioners voted to issue a policy proposal that , among other things , would eliminate rule 10a - 1's tick test . prior to that decision , chairman cox observed: the core provisions of rule 10a - 1 have remained virtually unchanged since the 1930s . but a great deal else has changed in the marketplace over that very long time . over the years , decimalization and changes in trading strategies have undermined the effectiveness of the price test . and at the same time , increased transparency and better means of surveillance appear to have lessened the need for the price test... . through the pilot program , we sought to understand the effect of this particular regulation on our markets . the evidence gathered from the pilot suggests little empirical justification for maintaining short sale price test restrictions , at least for the exchange - traded stocks in the pilot... . in light of the results of the pilot program and the market developments that have occurred in the securities industry since rule 10a - 1 was first adopted , we will today consider proposals to remove the tick test of rule 10a - 1 , and to prohibit the sros from maintaining their existing price tests or adopting any new ones... .