the principal or target countries of such efforts are china and iran . the broadcasting board of governors supports counter - censorship technologies that help enable internet users in china , iran , and other countries to access voice of america and other censored u.s. governmental and non - governmental websites . in march 2010 , representatives chris smith and david wu launched the global internet freedom caucus to promote online freedom of information and expression , followed by the founding of the senate global internet freedom caucus , chaired by senators ted kaufman and sam brownback . on april 6 , 2011 , the global online freedom act of 2011 ( h.r . 1389 ) was introduced , "to prevent united states businesses from cooperating with repressive governments in transforming the internet into a tool of censorship and surveillance , to fulfill the responsibility of the united states government to promote freedom of expression on the internet , to restore public confidence in the integrity of united states businesses , and for other purposes. u.s. public diplomacy programs expose chinese educated elites and youth to u.s. politics , society , culture , and academia ; sponsor exchanges ; and promote mutual understanding . the u.s. government has encouraged prc adherence to international labor standards . u.s. officials monitor prc compliance with the 1992 u.s. - china memorandum of understanding and 1994 statement of cooperation on safeguarding against the export of products made by prison labor . the government officially disapproves of religious groups that are not incorporated into official bodies . although in many localities , unsanctioned religious congregations receive little state interference , they still are vulnerable to arbitrary restrictions and possible shutdown by authorities . the prc government imposes especially draconian policies and measures upon many unofficial christian churches , tibetan buddhists , uighur muslims , and falun gong practitioners , largely due to the potential for these groups to become independent social forces and cultivate foreign support . the department of state has identified china as a "country of particular concern" ( cpc ) for "particularly severe violations of religious freedom" for 12 consecutive years ( 2000-2011 ) . in the past two decades , successive u.s. administrations have developed a comprehensive array of tactics and programs aimed toward promoting democracy , human rights , and the rule of law in china , but their effects have been felt primarily along the margins of the prc political system . the u.s. government has pressured china from without through monitoring and openly criticizing the country's human rights record and calling upon the prc leadership to honor the rights guaranteed in its constitution , bring its policies in line with international standards , release prisoners of conscience , and undertake political reforms . washington also has supported programs within china that aim to strengthen the rule of law , civil society , government accountability , and labor rights . foreign operations appropriations measures have prohibited assistance to the united nations population fund from being used to support related programs in china . some analysts argue that the u.s. government should take principled stands against china's human rights abuses more frequently , openly , and forcefully , while others believe that such methods can undermine human rights efforts .