energy investment tax credit . tax credits under this program are available to certain renewable energy systems , including solar and geothermal electricity generation , and some other innovative energy technologies . wind energy systems do not qualify . the credit is 10% for systems installed after january 1 , 2009 . should the congress establish a national renewable portfolio standard ( rps ) ? as discussed in the report , the economics of wind are competitive , but not always compelling , compared to fossil and nuclear energy options , and because wind power is dependent on the vagaries of the weather it is not as reliable as conventional sources . some benefits of wind power cited by proponents , such as a long - term reduction in demand for fossil fuels , are not easily quantified . to jump - start wind power development past these hurdles , many states have instituted rps programs that require power companies to meet minimum renewable generation goals . a national rps requirement has been considered and , to date , rejected by congress . other policy questions , such as federal funding for wind research and development , and siting and permitting requirements , are also outlined . the modern wind industry began in the early 1980s when the first utility - scale turbines were installed in california and denmark . wind power then , as today , was driven by high energy prices , energy insecurity , and concern about environmental degradation . early wind turbines , installed primarily at altamont pass outside of san francisco in california , were primitive compared to today's machines , and suffered from poor reliability and high costs . like most new technology , early wind turbines had to go through a process of "learning by doing," where shortcomings were discovered , components were redesigned , and new machines were installed in a continuing cycle . today's wind industry is notably different from that in the early 1980s . wind turbines now are typically 100 times more powerful than early versions and employ sophisticated materials , electronics , and aerodynamics . costs have declined , making wind more competitive with other power generation options . large companies and investment banks now drive most wind power activity compared to the early days of collaborating scientists , inventors , and entrepreneurs . from the mid - 1980s to the late 1990s the u.s. wind industry stagnated due to low energy prices and the technology's reputation for high cost and low reliability . but researchers continued to make improvements in the technology , driving down costs and improving reliability . new federal and state incentives encouraged developers to focus on the production of electricity at wind plants ( also known as wind farms ) and not just installing the equipment . in 1999 , the u.s. industry began a period of rapid expansion , slowed occasionally by expiring federal incentives . strong growth continues to this day , but whether that growth will continue in the face of the current financial crisis is unclear . this section begins with a description of how wind turbines work . it then provides information on wind resources in the united states , both on and offshore .