specifically , h.r . 1018 had passed the house and was referred to a senate committee , while s. 1579 was introduced in the senate and referred to committee . §§1331 et seq. ) the 1971 act seeks to preserve wild horses and burros on federal lands as "living symbols of the historic and pioneer spirit of the west. the law covers wild horses and burros on lands of the bureau of land management ( blm ) in the department of the interior and the forest service ( fs ) in the department of agriculture , and assigns management responsibility to these agencies . the animals are to be managed "to achieve and maintain a thriving natural ecological balance on the public lands," according to the 1971 act . the law imposes criminal penalties for removing , converting to private use , killing , harassing , selling , or processing into commercial products wild horses and burros ( with some exceptions ) under federal jurisdiction unless given federal authority . a nine - member wild horse and burro advisory board of private citizens advises the secretaries . under the 1971 act , the agencies conduct inventories of horse and burro populations on federal land to determine appropriate management levels ( amls ) . they are authorized to remove animals exceeding the range's carrying capacity to restore a natural ecological balance and to protect the range from deterioration associated with an overpopulation of wild horses and burros . first , the agencies are to destroy old , sick , or lame animals by the most humane means available . second , they are to remove healthy animals for private adoption . blm takes the lead in gathering animals and holding adoptions for both agencies . third , if adoption demand is insufficient , the remaining healthy animals are to be destroyed ; however , the agencies have not used this authority since 1982 . the 108 th congress enacted changes to the 1971 act regarding wild horse and burro management on federal lands ( p.l . 108-447 , §142 ) to provide an additional tool for reducing wild horse and burro populations . they would have limited the removal of wild horses and burros from the range to certain circumstances: ( 1 ) the immediate health or safety of the animals is threatened ; ( 2 ) the health and well - being of native plants or wildlife is threatened ; or ( 3 ) the secretary "has exhausted all practicable options" of maintaining the animals on the range , has determined that there is an "adoption demand" for the animals , and can "ensure humane treatment and care" through specified requirements . other provisions were intended to expand the area available for wild horses and burros . to the extent practicable , the acreage was not to be less than the acreage where the animals roamed in 1971 — 53.8 million acres ; currently , wild horses and burros roam on 31.6 million acres . the prohibition on relocating wild horses and burros to public lands where they did not exist in 1971 would have been stricken .