the conference report accompanying p.l . 111-83 provided additional direction regarding the asp program . the conference report stated that dhs should ensure that certification decisions are made with the best possible test information , that nas recommendations related to development and certification should be followed as discussed in the senate report ( see below ) , that these nas recommendations should be implemented prior to the certification decision or asp procurement ; and that dhs should brief the appropriations committees if the nas recommendations are not followed . the conference report also advocated an independent cost - benefit analysis and supported the language of the house and senate reports regarding the deployment of low rate initial production asp systems to obtain data and inform future decisions . the house and senate appropriations committee reports on fy2010 appropriations both contained limitations on the expenditure of funds for full - scale procurement of asp systems . the house report directed dhs to submit a reprogramming proposal for the procurement of existing radiation portal monitors to meet any remaining requirements if the secretarial certification was delayed beyond the first quarter of fy2010 ( as it was ) . the house report also urged the department to base its decision on adequate test information , including modeling , and robust cost - benefit analysis . this process is called secondary screening . the current approach to radiation detection at the border is thus a two - step process using two different types of equipment . in contrast , the asp is designed to both detect radiation and identify its source . an increase in system efficacy might provide both security and economic benefits . more effective detection could increase the likelihood of preventing a nuclear threat from entering the united states . more effective source identification could reduce the costs and delays associated with "nuisance alarms" from innocuous radiation sources , such as cat litter or ceramic tiles . the asp program was begun in 2004 by the dhs directorate of science and technology , which funded initial research and development through two broad agency announcements ( baas ) . when dndo was established in april 2005 , responsibility for the asp program was transferred to dndo . in 2005 , under dndo auspices , asp advanced technology prototypes were tested at the nevada test site . subsequent to this testing , dndo issued a request for proposals regarding procurement of asp systems . in march 2006 , the government accountability office ( gao ) expressed concern that "in tests performed during 2005 , the detection capabilities of the advanced technology prototypes demonstrated mixed results — in some cases they worked better , but in other cases , they worked about the same as already deployed systems. the gao recommended that the secretary of homeland security work with the director of dndo to prepare a cost - benefit analysis for the deployment of asps . in may 2006 , dndo reported on a cost - benefit analysis that it said supported the proposed asp procurement . in july 2006 , it awarded contracts to three companies — raytheon company , thermo electron corporation ( now known as thermo fisher scientific ) , and canberra industries — to further develop and manufacture asp systems .