the house - passed h.r . both the house and senate version of h.r . 2095 allow fra to regulate hours of service , but not to increase the on - duty time or reduce the off - duty requirements prescribed in the bill ( except for commuter and intercity passenger rail train employees ) . in a statement of administration policy , the administration opposed the hours of service provision of the house - passed h.r . 2095 as being overly prescriptive , and expressed concern that the new limits on hours of service , in combination with the limits on limbo time also included in the bill , would tend to increase railroads' need to hire additional operating employees at a time when retirements and resignations are making it increasingly difficult for railroads to have a full complement of workers , thereby aggravating potential service disruptions and the safety problems that can come with large numbers of new , relatively inexperienced employees . aar supported a revision of the hours of service law to reflect current scientific understanding of fatigue . aar contended that rail companies do not want workers who are too tired to properly perform their duties , and are making efforts to address fatigue . aar testified that , generally speaking , railroads do not object to the provision of these bills that increase the minimum rest time from 8 to 10 hours , and that bar nonemergency communications from rail companies during the minimum rest period . however , aar did object to the provision requiring that employees subject to hours of service limits have at least 24 consecutive hours off duty every seven days as being inconsistent with railroad work schedules . aar requested that period be extended by one day , to require that employees receive 24 consecutive hours off duty every eight days ( with an exception for signal employees ) . again , no penalty is provided for noncompliance . the bill also creates a safety technology grant program , which provides a 50% match for the implementation of train control technologies ; the program would be funded at $10 million annually . the administration has objected that mandating implementation of ptc by an "arbitrary" deadline is premature , contending that the safety benefits have not yet been shown to justify the costs , and that the technology is not yet proven . if congress decides to mandate the implementation , the administration requested that the secretary of transportation be given greater flexibility to guide implementation to promote safety and avoid disruptions to commerce . several bills have been introduced and are under consideration in both houses . an administration proposal to reauthorize fra has been introduced , by request , as the federal railroad safety accountability and improvement act ( h.r . no action has been taken on this legislation in either in the house or the senate . representative james oberstar , chairman of the house transportation and infrastructure committee , has introduced a reauthorization proposal , the federal railroad safety improvement act of 2007 ( h.r .