appendix a . with the enactment of p.l . 99-272 in 1986 , congress authorized the va to collect payments from third - party health insurers for the treatment of veterans with nonservice - connected disabilities ; it also established copayments from veterans for this care . under current law , the va is authorized to collect from third - party health insurers to offset the cost of medical care furnished to a veteran for the treatment of a nonservice - connected condition . if the va treats an insured veteran for a nonservice - connected disability , and the veteran is also determined by the va to have copayment responsibilities , the va will apply the payment collected from the insurer to satisfy the veteran's copayment debt related to that treatment . under the current copayment billing process , in cases where the cost of a veteran's medical care for a nonservice - connected condition appears to qualify for billing under reimbursable insurance and copayment , the va medical facilities sends the bill to the insurance provider . the veteran's copayment obligation is placed on hold for 90 days pending payment from the third - party payer . if no payment is received from the third - party payer within 90 days , a bill is sent to the veteran for the full copayment amount . however , when insurers reimburse the va after the 90-day period , the va must absorb the cost of additional staff time for processing a refund if the veteran has already paid the bill . on all insurance policies , the entire amount of the claim payment is applied first to the copayment . the veteran is then billed only for the portion of the copayment not covered by the insurance reimbursement and the portion of the copayment for services not covered by the veteran's insurance plan ( see figure 2 ) . under the administration's proposal , veterans receiving medical care services for treatment of nonservice - connected disabilities will receive a bill for their entire copayment , and the copayment will not be reduced by collection recoveries from third - party health plans . this proposal would apply to all veterans who make copayments . according to va estimates , this proposal will increase revenue by $44 million in fy2009 and $415 million over 10 years . the house and senate appropriations committees have not addressed this issue because it is an issue in the purview of the authorizing committees . priority groups and their eligibility criteria appendix b. copayments for health care services: 2008 oef / oif combat veterans enhanced eligibility for health care benefits : combat veterans discharged from active duty on or after january 28 , 2003 , are eligible for enrollment in priority group 6 for five years following discharge unless eligible for a higher enrollment priority . combat veterans discharged from active duty before january 28 , 2003 , who apply for enrollment on or after january 28 , 2008 , are eligible for enrollment in priority group 6 until january 27 , 2011 . after the special eligibility period ends , these veterans will be reassigned to the appropriate priority group and will be subject to copayments if applicable .