all five of the companies produce crude oil . over the period 2004-2007 , exxonmobil produced an average of 2.6 million barrels per day ( b / d ) , and was the leading producer among the five companies . few if any of these factors could be influenced by the five companies . crude oil prices began their rise toward the end of 2003 , and although volatile , have remained at , or near , historically high levels since then . shell averaged 2.0 million b / d , bp averaged 2.5 million b / d , chevron averaged 1.7 million b / d , and conocophillips averaged 1.0 million b / d . higher world prices for crude oil increased the revenue from this production in proportion to the increase in prices . in addition to the increasing price of crude oil , tightness in the refining industry contributed to the increase in petroleum product prices , notably gasoline . all five of the selected companies are active in the refining industry . in 2007 , these five companies accounted for approximately 38% of total u.s. refining capacity . it is likely that the increases in the price of oil that began in late 2003 and persist today were unexpected by the major integrated companies . the onset of the war in iraq and the rapid growth of oil demand in china , india , and even the united states , were not generally forecast . hurricanes katrina and rita were associated with even greater degrees of uncertainty than the war and demand growth . as a result , and especially in the context of 2002 being a relatively weak year for oil company financials , it is likely that no set plan existed for the use of the rapidly growing profits that began to accrue in 2004 . in the several years that have passed since 2003 , capital expenditures have begun to expand , investor returns have been enhanced , acquisitions have been made , and balance sheets have been strengthened , even though cash balance levels are still high and growing . in time , as corporate plans more reflect a crude oil market characterized by higher prices , long - term assets might be accumulated , supplies of both crude oil and petroleum products might be enhanced , and consumers might see a slacker market where prices may moderate from current levels . until that time , investors in the oil industry may continue to see high rates of dividend payout , stock repurchase plans , and the accumulation of short - term assets . this 148% increase in profit has attracted public attention and raised the issue of whether "windfall" profits had accrued to the firms . at the same time that these oil companies were earning increased profits , u.s. gasoline consumers were facing prices that rose above $3.30 per gallon , raising concerns that the increased profits might be tied to price gouging by the oil companies . this report analyzes the uses of accrued profits by the five major integrated oil companies from 2004 through 2007 .