they were both serving the united states . supporters of the foreign service personnel - only death gratuity provision in the legislation state that there is a difference between the civil service employee and the foreign service member who dies while detailed at an embassy . these can add significantly to the base salary level . providing locality pay for those serving abroad would increase the compensation levels . the lack of locality pay is no longer a matter of retirement benefits because the virtual locality pay for retirement computation in current law already takes care of the impact on an annuity . those who question the need for this change argue that the foreign service is already well taken care of when they serve abroad . those who support eliminating the pay differential contend that the allowances exist to address specific costs and hardships unique to working for long years overseas: danger pay compensates for the extreme risks of living in a country wracked by war , terrorism , political violence or endemic lawlessness . education allowances make it possible for foreign service members to cover their children's education when no viable public schools are available . cost - of - living allowances help defray the cost of food and other daily needs of life in countries where those things are vastly more expensive than in the united states . these were never meant to obviate the need for the basic locality pay adjustment that all other federal employees get . because one of the biggest benefits that members of the foreign service receive is free housing when posted abroad , many believe that this should compensate for any loss derived from the lack of locality pay . these critics point out that if foreign service personnel own a home in the united states , they would be able to rent it out while they are gone , and build equity while the government takes care of their living quarters for free . they ask if the locality pay adjustment is really necessary . for the foreign service officer , service abroad is a condition of employment . supporters of the change in the foreign service compensation system explain that while the housing abroad is free , members of the foreign service are not reaping a financial windfall even when they own a home in the united states . these supporters explain: "most of our members own a home in the u.s. on which they have to pay a mortgage , upkeep , insurance and property taxes — and renting it out ( often impossible ) rarely covers all of these expenses and is itself a costly proposition. these supporters for eliminating the pay difference also point out that there are often hidden costs to serving overseas that do offset any gain from free housing . among these is the fact that it is often impossible for the spouse to get employment and a salary equivalent to what could be earned in the united states . also there are numerous out - of - pocket costs for being overseas . these include travel not covered by authorized visitation basis from distant economically developing nations .