there is no similar senate requirement . 491 into house rule xxi , clause 9 . in the senate , rule xliv was adopted through the honest leadership and open government act of 2007 ( p.l . the house originally established its procedures through adoption of two house resolutions . on january 5 , 2007 , the house completed action on h.res . they provide for public disclosure of approved earmarks and the identification of their congressional sponsors . in addition , they require disclosure of further information from each congressional sponsor , such as a certification that the sponsor has no financial interest in the earmark . house rule xxi , clause 9 ( b ) , and senate rule xliv , paragraph 8 , both address certain spending earmarks , sometimes referred to as "air - drops," added in a conference report ( and joint explanatory statement under the house rule ) that were not specified in the house - or senate - passed versions of the applicable bill ( or in the accompanying house or senate committee reports in the house rule ) . the house rule provides a public disclosure requirement for such earmark add - ons similar to the transparency requirement affecting earmarks , in general , associated with conference reports discussed above ( see " house rule xxi , clause 9 " section ) . the senate rule , by contrast , provides a procedure to strike certain spending add - ons , including applicable spending earmarks . the house rule prohibits a member from conditioning the inclusion of an earmark in a measure , conference report , or report language on any vote cast by another member . each house has also established procedures regarding new spending earmarks added to conference reports . 6 ( 110 th congress ) , adopting the 110 th congress rules package , including new provisions in house rule xxi to require public disclosure of approved earmarks , their sponsors , and the additional information . on june 18 , 2007 , the house adopted a standing order , h.res . 491 ( 110 th congress ) , to require transparency for new spending earmarks added to conference reports on the 12 annual regular appropriations bills . on january 6 , 2009 , the house adopted the rules package for the 111 th congress , h.res . 5 ( 111 th congress ) , which incorporated the provisions of h.res . 110-81 ) , which became law on september 14 , 2007 . the new rule provides for public disclosure of each "congressionally directed spending item," its sponsors , and "no financial interest" certifications . it also includes a procedure to strike certain new items of spending added to conference reports . this report describes and compares the procedures and requirements in house and senate rules , including the house requirement regarding the use of earmarks as leverage for votes . in addition , individual house and senate committees may have additional requirements for earmarks submitted for their consideration , but these are not covered in this report .