these categories are not necessarily mutually exclusive . for example , some assistance provided to states and local governments can in turn be used to provide various types of housing finance or homeownership assistance . rental assistance is provided primarily through rent vouchers that families can use in the private market ; below - market rental units owned by phas or private landlords under contract with the federal government ; and , to a limited extent , construction of new below - market rental units . assistance to state and local governments comes in several forms , including broad , flexible block grants that can be used for rental , homeownership , or community development purposes ; special purpose block grants ; and programs based in the tax system . housing finance and homeownership assistance can include direct assistance to defray home buying costs , tax incentives , and mortgage insurance programs to help provide incentives for the private market to meet the needs of underserved segments of the population . such assistance may help finance single - family housing , which can assist eligible homebuyers in obtaining mortgages to purchase homes , or multifamily housing , which can assist housing developers in obtaining financing to develop affordable rental housing . this section provides a description of the major housing assistance programs that fall into the three aforementioned categories . the following tables present data on federal spending ( outlays ) on selected housing assistance programs as well as data on the number of rent - assisted units , since 1980 . table 15 presents spending , or outlays , for selected housing assistance programs , in both real and nominal dollars . this table does not include any spending information related to loan commitments or obligations , nor does it include tax expenditures or expenditures from non - appropriated sources ( such as the national housing trust fund ) . as can be seen in table 15 , outlays for the selected programs have increased , in both real and nominal dollars ( a 449% increase in nominal dollars , a 108% increase in real dollars ) , over the more than three decades presented . table 16 and figure 1 present the total number of units eligible for payment / households served under selected rental assistance programs from fy1980 to fy2016 . the rental assistance programs reflected in these data are a subset of a group of housing assistance programs for which spending data are presented in table 15 . as shown , units / households in the rental assistance programs has grown by 66% over the more than three decades presented . most of that growth happened in the 1980s and early 1990s . since the early 1990s , the number of units eligible for payment has gone up and down from year to year , with an overall decline in units from fy2001 to fy2009 . hud stopped publishing "units eligible for payment" data after fy2009 . beginning with fy2010 , the data shown reflect hud's report of the number of households served by various hud programs , taken from their annual performance reports .