uscis reportedly has problems of its own . the dhs inspector general found problems in the background checks of applicants for which uscis is now responsible . among other findings , the ig report concluded that uscis' security checks are overly reliant on the integrity of names and documents that applicants submit and that "uscis has not developed a measurable , risk - based plan to define how uscis will improve the scope of security checks. it further stated that "uscis' management controls are not comprehensive enough to provide assurance that background checks are correctly completed. most recently , gao expanded on the concerns the dhs inspector general expressed in its report on uscis . the extent to which uscis should have an enforcement arm to investigate benefit fraud and other adjudications - related violations has become a policy issue . although title iv of the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l . 107-296 ) tasked ice with immigration enforcement responsibilities , some maintain ice's efforts are not sufficient . pursuing single cases of benefit fraud is not a priority , yet it is possible that some of these single cases may be linked together in larger fraud schemes that are overlooked without a coordinated "big picture" approach . this linkage has been characterized as critically important in the context of discerning terrorist travel . the observable decline in investigator work years allocated to document and benefit fraud has led some to question the federal government's commitment to the enforcement of immigration laws . among those who would reform immigration law and policy , the question arises as to whether current law is adequate but the dedication of resources is not . this debate grows in importance when weighing the role bogus documents and benefit fraud play in facilitating other violations of law . some argue that it is critical to investigate the black market in counterfeit documents and benefit fraud because it is especially important to international terrorists , organized crime syndicates , and alien smuggling rings — all of whom rely on fraudulent documents to minimize detection . they point out that document and benefit fraud are criminal violations of immigration law and criminal law , and — as a result — merit rigorous enforcement and prosecution . others argue that limited enforcement resources should not be spent going after unauthorized aliens who present false documents so they can work . they assert that the preponderance of counterfeit documents is used to obtain employment in the united states . these critics agree that ice should prioritize the investigation of international terrorists , organized crime syndicates , and alien smuggling rings rather than shifting more resources to investigating what they consider to be the lesser threat of immigration fraud , presumably that is solely to obtain employment . many observers look to emerging technologies to enhance document integrity and stymie immigration fraud . the basic concept is that a card with personal identifiers embedded in it would be less vulnerable to counterfeiting , identity theft , and immigration fraud . a current issue is the integration of the competing biometric — and in some instances radio frequency identification ( rfi ) — technologies and databases .