, comorbidities ) . since nearly 60% of hospitalizations have at least one comorbidity ( i.e. , two diseases ) and over 33% have two or more ( i.e. for example , the timing of the research could influence the impact of the research , since the amount of information that is known about a treatment differs at different time periods . on the one hand , waiting for perfect information on a treatment before conducting any analyses would help curb modifications , but any resulting conclusions may have a limited impact on improving clinical decision making . on the other hand , analyzing areas with imperfect information would be more likely to have a large impact on clinical decision making , but the conclusions may change once more information becomes available . a middle , but imperfect , option would be to re - evaluate conclusions as more information becomes available ; while this option would allow all information to be incorporated into decisions in a timely manner , it would also increase the overall costs of technology assessments . a new entity might need to grapple with these types of decisions . initiatives academy of managed care pharmacy in 2001 , academy of managed care pharmacy ( amcp ) promulgated guidelines , known as the amcp format for formulary submissions , for conducting formulary assessments , including economic evaluations . the purpose of the guidelines was to help ensure that any increased utilization of pharmaceuticals and vaccines was based on good scientific evidence and value . the guidelines encouraged pharmaceutical manufacturers to submit a dossier with clinical and economic data from published and unpublished studies , along with an economic model that predicts the costs and health outcomes with the product in the health plan . the dossier also includes a section on the comparative pharmacokinetic and pharmacologic data for other agents commonly used to treat the condition . the dossiers have become an industry standard , and are used by pharmacy and therapeutics ( p&t ) committees of managed care organizations and health insurers . a recent survey found that managed care organizations had dossiers for 40% of drugs under review for coverage . fifty - three percent of the dossiers received included budget - impact models and 39.3% included cost - effectiveness or cost - benefit analyses . less than half of the economic models were deemed adequate by the p&t committees . nearly two - thirds of survey respondents indicated that p&t committees modified the economic model on the dossier because pharmaceutical manufacturers did not make models directly applicable to the health plan's population . agency for healthcare research and quality the agency , formerly known as the agency health care policy and research ( ahcpr ) , was established in 1989 as an agency within the department of hhs . the agency's statutory responsibilities included outcomes research and clinical practice guidelines development . the medical treatment effectiveness program ( medtep ) was established in 1989 as part of ahcpr . medtep funded effectiveness research , guideline development , database development , and methods of disseminating information . in 1992 , congress directed the ahcpr to incorporate cost - effectiveness information in its technology assessments and clinical practice guidelines .