search . while many of the bush administration's e - government initiatives are separate from , and pre - date , the e - government act , some of the goals of these initiatives are statutorily affirmed by the act's provisions . for example , section 216 addresses the development of common protocols for geographic information systems , which is also one of the objectives of the geospatial one - stop project . section 206 directs agencies to use electronic dockets in their rulemaking process , which represents a more distributed alternative to the centralized docket being implemented under the regulations.gov initiative . there are relatively few mechanisms to facilitate cross - agency collaboration , regarding the spending of funds . although the e - government act authorized a significant sum that can be spent on e - government initiatives in the form of the e - government fund ( a cumulative minimum of $345 million from fy2003-fy2007 ) , concerns regarding oversight have prompted congress to appropriate no more than $5 million in any given fiscal year since the passage of the e - government act . congress has also repeatedly declined to approve bush administration's alternative proposals to allow omb to tap the $40 million surplus fund of gsa's general supply fund . as the number of cross - agency initiatives continues to grow , solutions that adequately address the needs of such collaborative initiatives , while ensuring appropriate oversight , may be needed . as a blueprint of the business functions of an organization , and the technology used to carry out these functions , the fea is the means to develop government - wide initiatives . as such , it is also the means to address the problem of interoperability , the ability of a computer system or data to work with other systems or data using common standards or processes . interoperability is an important part of the larger effort to improve interagency collaboration and information sharing . it also represents a significant challenge as the federal government implements cross - agency initiatives , such as the e - payroll , govbenefits.gov , and lines of business projects , to eliminate redundant systems and facilitate a "one - stop service delivery" approach to e - government . decisions made in the development of the federal enterprise architecture can have significant implications for future it projects , suggesting that regular assessments of this process may be necessary to help minimize any potential complications . with the upcoming transition of presidential administrations , questions arise regarding the continuity and sustainability of it investments made over the past several years . in many cases , the anticipated cost savings and efficiency gains of these investments is predicated on their ongoing operation . each new administration brings its own prerogatives and priorities . in anticipation of program and funding requests of a new administration , congress may wish to hold hearings and conduct a systematic analysis of e - government activities in order to better inform its oversight and funding decisions . the allocation of resources and the oversight of activities are likewise jurisdictionally defined . congressional authorizing committees and appropriations subcommittees are organized by program and / or agency . section 203 directs agencies to adopt electronic signature methods .