a few of the better known initiatives are described below . the ieee ( formerly the institute of electrical and electronics engineers ) is developing standard methods needed to mass produce and market electronics and photonics products while protecting workers and addressing environmental concerns . intel , dupont , and other large companies voluntarily adhere to responsible principles that have served in the past to minimize ehs problems associated with production of materials that are not nanoscale . they complain , however , that the adequacy of such practices with respect to nanotechnologies is unknown , and urge the federal government to sponsor additional research to "shed more light on what the best approach to protecting health and safety should be. does nanotechnology pose risks to human health or the environment that are not being adequately controlled ? if so , how will consumers here and abroad react if possible hazards are identified ? should commerce in nanomaterials or associated products be subjected to some level of government regulation ? if so , do federal agencies have sufficient statutory authority , expertise , and resources to regulate potential ehs risks of engineered nanoscale materials and derivative products ? the answers to such questions may determine the nature , timing , distribution , and extent of the social and economic costs and benefits associated with nanotechnology . some groups are calling on congress to regulate engineered nanoscale materials and derivative products to control potential ehs risks , arguing that lack of federal regulation might increase the risks of unanticipated adverse consequences . the cost of such consequences would depend on their actual , as well as publicly perceived , severity , frequency , and reversibility . questions about the need for , and ideal form of , regulation for nanotechnology are exceedingly difficult to address , given the current state of scientific understanding of engineered nanoscale materials . the purpose of this report is to consider certain challenges faced by federal ehs risk assessors , risk managers , and policy makers , and to discuss possible legislative approaches to address those challenges . the cost to the nanotechnology industry also could be great , if consumers responded by indiscriminately rejecting all products of nanotechnology , rather than the offending nanomaterial or an individual application . others oppose federal regulatory requirements , arguing that they might unnecessarily delay the environmental , health , and economic rewards expected from nanotechnology . for more information about the national nanotechnology research agenda , appropriations , and authorizing legislation , see crs report rl34401 , the national nanotechnology initiative: overview , reauthorization , and appropriations issues , by [author name scrubbed . they face many challenges , including those discussed below . as agencies consider the possible need for and shape of regulations , some stakeholders are voluntarily engaging in what is called "responsible development" of nanotechnologies . professional organizations , industries , universities , environmental organizations , and government have been involved in such efforts . the national institute for occupational safety and health ( niosh ) is working with industry to gather data on exposure and worker health that should help guide the design of studies in occupational settings .