no report is required from 2007 onward . the hksar is an executive - led government , with much of the power in the hands of the chief executive and his or her appointed department secretaries . the two most important department secretaries are the chief secretary for administration and the financial secretary . hong kong's legislature , legco , has comparatively limited powers ; it can effectively veto legislation proposed by the chief executive , approves or disapproves of the annual budget , and has some oversight over the operations of the executive branch . hong kong's courts have the exclusive power to adjudicate hksar legal cases , with the exception of matters related to national defense , foreign policy and the interpretation of the basic law . legal cases involving these three topics are handled by the standing committee of china's npc . since the handover , there has been serious political debate over the details of hong kong's independent executive , legislative , and judicial powers . there have been controversies over the selection process for the chief executive , as well as the chief executive's term in office . regarding the hksar's legislative powers , the key issues have centered about the composition of legco and the manner by which its members are selected . as for hong kong's judicial powers , the main area of concern has been the scope of its powers , particularly with respect to the interpretation of the basic law , hong kong's de facto constitution . besides these general "constitutional" issues , there also has been a notable change in hong kong's political parties and the level of political involvement of the hong kong people . hong kong's political parties have changed in both name and character over the last 10 years , indicating the possible development of broad - based parties . concurrent with the change in the political parties , the people of hong kong appear more interested , informed and involved in politics than before the handover . the politicization of the hong kong population in part can be attributed to an increase in their opportunities to be involved in political activities , such as elections . it is also in part due to a widely - held perception that the hksar government was somewhat dysfunctional during the first few years after the handover , forcing people to pay more attention to political issues than they did when hong kong was a british colony . under the terms of both the joint declaration and the basic law , hong kong residents are supposed to continue to enjoy the same civil liberties they did prior to the handover . according to the joint declaration , "rights and freedoms , including those of the person , of speech , of the press , of assembly , of association , of travel , of movement , of correspondence , of strike , of choice of occupation , of academic research and of religious belief will be ensured by law in the hong kong special administrative region. in turn , these rights are enumerated in detail in chapter iii ( articles 25 to 42 ) of the basic law .