the administration did not satisfy any group in turkey . the akp's advocates sought a stronger statement opposed to the possible banning of a party that had won a decisive election so recently . they believed that the eu's threat to suspend membership talks if the akp were banned was more in line with democratic principles . others contend that the eu had to take a stronger stand because turkey is a candidate for membership . the secularists believe that the bush administration supports the akp as a model for muslim democracies and want it to continue in office . they are suspicious of any positive comment u.s. officials might make about the party . but , few in turkey considered this a change in approach . it also has been the principle that has led to considerable domestic political tension . the united states is concerned for stability in turkey because it is a strategic partner , nato ally , and candidate for membership in the european union ( eu ) . over the years , political parties have emerged that appeared to challenge that principle and to seek to restore the centrality of religion to the state . each time , the party has eventually been banned from the political stage . the justice and development party ( akp ) formed in 2001 , has islamist roots , but claims a conservative democratic place in the political spectrum . the akp won the 2002national election by a wide margin and the 2007 election by a wider one , but its victories have not ended the secular - religious tensions in the country . today , the turkish domestic political scene is in turmoil , with two coincidental , perhaps related , dramas unfolding simultaneously . the public prosecutor initiated a lawsuit to have the ruling justice and development party ( akp ) banned for being a "focal point of anti - secular activities. prior to this action and after it , in stages , the authorities arrested prominent secularists / ultranationalists ( ulusalcilar ) on suspicion of plotting and instigating actions to create chaos in the country and provoke the military to overthrow the government . both dramas highlight a severely polarized political climate and a continuing crisis over power and identity in turkey . the akp and the secularists each have champions and opponents who disseminate conflicting narratives and interpretations of events . in some instances , the schism is blurred , as some secularists argue for akp's survival in the name of democracy , and some akp members and followers question their leaders' actions . nonetheless , the national rift is real and as yet unhealed . the bush administration may be concerned about the survival of turkey's democracy because turkey is one of the few predominantly muslim democratic countries in the world and administration officials refer to it as an inspiration for other muslims even as they appear to have lessened emphasis on democratization elsewhere . during the recent governmental crisis in ankara , the administration adopted what appeared to some to be a stance of studied neutrality , with u.s. officials calling on turks to find a solution based on democracy and rule of law .