sec . 9301 increases the authorization to $146.2 million , and subjects the remainder of the funds after the $85 million has been appropriated to the 35% nonfederal matching requirement . sec . 9301 also limits the total appropriations that can be made available to the central basin water quality project to be no more than $21.2 million . the executive branch indicates that it has not budgeted for the san gabriel basin restoration fund in the past , and that it does not support an increased cost ceiling . in testimony before the senate energy and natural resources committee's subcommittee on water and power , reclamation commissioner robert johnson stated that he believes resources should be allocated to other priorities . he indicated that reclamation's role should be limited to assisting concerned parties , when possible and within its mission scope and budget , to advance the goal of groundwater cleanup in the san gabriel basin . subtitle e concerns the lower colorado multi - species conservation program ( mscp ) , a multi - stakeholder initiative to conserve 26 species along the lower colorado river while maintaining water and power supplies for farmers , tribes , industries , and urban residents . the mscp took effect in 2005 and has a 50-year term . the expected total cost of the program is estimated at $626 million ( in 2003 dollars ) , to be split 50-50 between federal and nonfederal entities . 5662 would authorize appropriations to cover the federal share of costs , authorize the secretary of the interior to implement mscp in accordance with the program documents , and waive sovereign immunity of the u.s. government to allow non - federal parties to enforce program documents . the issue of whether the united states should waive its sovereign immunity so that the other parties to the mscp can sue to enforce it has been controversial since the legislation was first proposed . the implementing agreement of the mscp contains no express waiver of sovereign immunity by the federal government . without the waiver , it appears likely that nonfederal parties would not be able to pursue specific performance or declaratory judgment actions against the federal parties to get them to comply with the agreement . notably , the mscp affects states all located in the ninth circuit , which has held that those types of actions cannot be brought in any court without an express waiver of sovereign immunity . this provision would allow the nonfederal parties to sue to enforce the agreement , but not to obtain monetary damages . many contend that this legislation is an important legislative authorization for an administratively approved program to ensure water supplies and deliveries from the lower colorado river while maintaining compliance with the endangered species act . some express concerns that this legislation might be unnecessary since the project is already underway and the authority for federal participation in the project already exists . subtitle f of title ix is quite broad in the issues it covers on the effect of climate change on hydropower , threatened and endangered species , and stream flow data collection , and more .