1585 , sec . this commission , with 12 members appointed by the chairmen and ranking members of the house and senate armed services committees , was charged with assessing "the benefits and risks associated with the current strategic posture and nuclear weapons policies of the united states. some analysts have argued that such precision is not a key to credibility . some have argued that no threats to use nuclear weapons , no matter how specific or limited , would be credible because such an attack would produce "disproportionate and unacceptable collateral destruction and severe political fallout. because such use would be so horrific , no adversary would believe the united states would be willing to launch a nuclear attack unless its very national survival were at stake . others have argued that such precision is unnecessary because the mere existence of nuclear weapons and the means to deliver them could serve as a sufficient deterrent . adversaries do not need to understand the specifics of u.s. nuclear policy to understand that they might be on the receiving end of an attack with nuclear weapons . while u.s. military and civilian leaders might be more willing to use nuclear weapons if they believe the specific plans and weapons in the u.s. arsenal are less likely to produce catastrophic levels of destruction , it is not clear that this would be the only , or even primary , factor in their decision - making process . some u.s. leaders might be deterred from launching such an attack because they feel constrained by a generally accepted "nuclear taboo. others may , in contrast , be more inclined to use nuclear weapons if , knowing not only that such use would not lead to global nuclear war , but also that the adversary could not retaliate against the u.s. with nuclear weapons , they believe the effects of an adversary's attack on the united states would be worse than the effects of the limited use of u.s. nuclear weapons . therefore , the outcome , in any particular contingency , could depend not only on the specifics of the u.s. war plans and weapons characteristics , but also on the belief system of the leadership involved in making the decision . officials speaking for the bush administration indicated that , as the united states tailored its nuclear attack plans and weapons capabilities to address the challenges and capabilities of potential adversaries , it would need a nuclear force structure that differed in many ways from the cold war - era arsenal . they noted that the united states would need weapons with the capabilities to attack and destroy hardened or deeply buried targets and that it may need warheads that could produce tailored effects , perhaps to destroy stocks of chemical or biological weapons . they also noted that the united states might need a greater number of lower - yield weapons , so that it could minimize collateral damage while destroying these types of targets . but they offered few , if any descriptions of how a concept of tailored deterrence would affect the required numbers of warheads in the u.s. arsenal .