under this provision , a state had two choices . montana , for example , appears to have adopted the strongest non - compliance law , which directs the montana department of justice and the motor vehicle administration not to participate in the federal real id act and to report to the governor any attempts by dhs to secure implementation of real id . in other examples , the idaho legislature appropriated $0 for implementation in 2008 , whereas the georgia legislature authorized the governor to delay implementation unless certain conditions are met . in addition to the statutes directly prohibiting compliance , the legislative chambers in 15 states have adopted non - binding resolutions or memorials that urge congress to either amend or repeal real id , and / or that indicate the state's intent to not comply . all told , 24 states have passed legislation that either prohibits state compliance with the act or urges congress to amend or repeal real id . in addition to those states that have enacted either statutory commands or non - binding resolutions , there are a number of states that have such matters pending before their state lawmakers . currently , it appears that 11 states have bills that would prohibit compliance pending before their legislatures , whereas another 20 states and the district of columbia have non - binding resolutions or memorials awaiting action . the ramifications of having several states that do not opt to comply with the terms of real id are far from clear . as previously discussed , the act itself is voluntary , binding only on federal agencies , not on the states . thus , the statute contains no penalty for non - compliance . to the extent that there is a penalty for non - compliance by a state , it appears to be borne by the citizens of the non - compliant state . for example , after may , 11 , 2008 , the citizens of a state such as montana — which has passed a law prohibiting compliance and has refused to file for an extension — will not be able to use their state - issued drivers' licenses or personal identification cards for official purposes . therefore , after may 11 , montana citizens will not be able to show their montana licenses to board a federally regulated aircraft or enter a federal building . although this does not mean that citizens of the non - compliant states cannot engage in interstate travel via airplane — as many other forms of identification are acceptable by the transportation security administration ( tsa ) ( i.e. , passport , military id , other forms of state or federally issued identification ) — or enter a federal court house or other federal building , it arguably does impose an additional burden on the citizen because the state has chosen not to comply . in addition , non - compliant states would apparently create holes in the scheme of state - to - state data sharing that is an integral part of real id . presumably , non - compliant states will not participate in the database creation or information - sharing system envisioned by the real id regulations .