the sections below summarize the recommendations of these commissions . 10 th qrmc recommendations in the 10 th quadrennial review of military compensation ( qrmc ) , one of the directed areas of assessment was "the implications of changing expectations of present and potential members of the uniformed services relating to retirement. retirees could opt to receive the retirement annuity immediately upon retirement but the annuity would be reduced by 5% for each year under age 57 . combined with the above defined benefit plan would be a defined contribution plan that would require the services to contribute up to 5% of annual base pay into a retirement account for each servicemember . the contribution would start at 2% for those with two years of service and increase incrementally until it reached 5% for those with five or more years of service . this plan would also vest at 10 years of service but withdrawals could not begin until age 60 . a system of gate pays would be established at specified career points to retain selected personnel in specified skill areas . separation pay would be used to encourage personnel in over - manned skills to separate prior to vesting at the 10-year point or becoming eligible for an immediate annuity at 20 years . 11 th qrmc recommendations dod submitted the 11 th qrmc final report in 2012 . while this qrmc did not have the same focus on the entire retirement system as the previous qrmc , dod recommended more closely aligning active and reserve retirement systems with the goal of eventually transitioning to a total force single - system approach for both the active and reserve components . the report recommended the following modification to the reserve retirement system: reserve component members who have attained 20 qualifying years for retirement benefits could begin receiving retired pay on the 30 th anniversary of their service start date or at age 60 , whichever comes first . reserve members would receive one retirement point for each day of service , and the points needed for a qualifying year would be reduced from the current 50-point requirement to 35 . military compensation and retirement modernization commission ( mcrmc ) the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fy2013 ( p.l . 112-239 ) established a military compensation and retirement modernization commission ( mcrmc ) to provide the president and congress with specific recommendations to modernize pay and benefits for the armed services . colas for 2007 to 2017 are shown in table 5 . some advocacy groups and servicemembers have expressed concerns about the implementation of the blended retirement system , in particular in relation to the reduced multiplier for the defined benefit ( monthly annuity ) and the lump sum payment option . these include the potential impacts of the brs on recruitment and retention , as well as on the financial well - being of military personnel . for example , there is some uncertainty as to whether the reduced multiplier for the defined benefit remains a strong enough retention incentive for mid - career personnel . a recent study for the marine corps that modeled potential retention outcomes found relatively small effects on force profiles , with officer retention being somewhat more sensitive than enlisted retention .