recalls rarely recover all products . although product samples from various days of production were all negative for the bacteria , environmental sampling in the plant itself matched the strain of listeria found in the october 9 recalled product , according to fsis . operations had been suspended at the plant but resumed on november 14 , 2002 . this recall was terminated on july 11 , 2003 , after the reported recovery of more than 5.5 million pounds ( much of the rest was likely consumed or discarded by consumers ) , and fsis declared it effective . however , oig found that fsis's oversight was ineffective , finding "an overwhelming number of significant discrepancies on the agency's effectiveness check forms that call [fsis's] conclusion into question. recall 015-1997 , frozen ground beef patties on august 12 , 1997 , fsis announced that hudson foods of rogers , ar , was recalling approximately 20,000 pounds of frozen ground beef patties distributed nationwide because the product might be contaminated with e. coli o157:h7 . this occurred after several colorado consumers were reported to have become ill from the bacterium after consuming the hudson product , and subsequent testing found the same strain in a hudson patty . the recall was expanded to over 1.2 million pounds on august 15 and reached 25 million pounds by the time it was officially ended on february 9 , 1999 . the plant that produced the patties in columbus , ne , was closed . approximately 10.1 million pounds of beef were eventually recovered . the initial recall was limited to 20,000 pounds even though the plant produced 400,000 pounds per shift — and though meat from one day was being reworked into hamburger being produced on subsequent days , which led to the greatly expanded recall . ( this was the same problem that re - emerged 10 years later in the topps recall. ) "the hudson recall was viewed as an example of the breakdown of the voluntary food recall system . or , rather , does it signify that industry and the federal government have heightened testing , improved their ability to find the sources of more foodborne illness outbreaks , and have otherwise become more vigilant in their oversight , even after the products leave the plants ? in arguing that their own inspection programs provide at least as much safety at the federal program , states have long made the claim that they experience far fewer recalls of their inspected products than does fsis . however , might it be argued that states conduct fewer recalls because they maintain a different level of vigilance than fsis ? one consumer advocate told crs that most recalls of federally inspected products are announced after routine fsis or plant testing finds instances of bacterial contamination or potential contamination — not necessarily in response to a foodborne illness outbreak . by contrast , she asserted , neither states nor state - inspected plants have done as much testing . a representative of the state agencies , on the other hand , speculated that states tend to hold products until testing is completed and verified , so that contamination may more likely be discovered before a product enters commerce .