appropriations for legislative branch agencies are contained in title i . 108-7 , contained funds for the john c. stennis center for public service training and development and for the congressional award act . on occasion the bill may contain a third title for other provisions . crs report rl33379 , legislative branch: fy2007 appropriations , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] . crs report rl32819 , legislative branch: fy2006 appropriations , by [author name scrubbed] . these sites contain information on the fy2007 and fy2008 legislative branch appropriations requests and legislation , and the appropriations process . house committee on appropriations http: / / appropriations.house.gov / senate committee on appropriations http: / / appropriations.senate.gov / crs appropriations products guide http: / / www.crs.gov / products / appropriations / apppage.shtml congressional budget office http: / / www.cbo.gov government accountability office http: / / www.gao.gov office of management & budget http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb / . these laws also provided gratuity payments to the survivors of a total of four deceased members . prior to the consideration of the consolidated appropriations measure , both the senate and house of representatives considered separate legislation funding the legislative branch for fy2008 . s. 1686 , the senate version of the fy2008 legislative branch appropriations bill , was reported to the senate on june 25 , 2007 . the bill , which proposed nearly $2.78 billion in new budget authority ( not including house items ) , had been marked up by the senate committee on appropriations on june 21 . at the markup , the committee voted unanimously to report the bill without amendment . 2771 , the house version of the fy2008 legislative branch appropriations bill , was introduced on june 19 , 2007 , following the house committee on appropriations markup on june 12 and the subcommittee markup on june 6 . the house bill would have provided $3.1 billion in new budget authority ( not including senate items ) . the bill , with two amendments , passed the house on june 22 with a roll call vote of 216-176 . since fy2003 , the annual legislative branch appropriations bill has usually contained two titles . these entities , as they have appeared in the annual appropriations bill , are the senate ; house of representatives ; joint items ; capitol police ; office of compliance ; congressional budget office ; architect of the capitol , including the capitol visitor center ; library of congress , including the congressional research service ; government printing office ; government accountability office ; and open world leadership program . title ii contains general administrative provisions and , from time to time , appropriations for legislative branch entities . for example , title ii of the fy2003 act , p.l . for example , title iii of the fy2006 legislative branch appropriations act , p.l . 109-55 , contained language providing for the continuity of representation in the house of representatives in "extraordinary circumstances. this total includes an across - the - board rescission of 0.25% which was applied to accounts within the legislative branch division of the act . from the beginning of the fiscal year on october 1 , until the enactment of the consolidated bill ( h.r .