scholars and other observers have debated the merits of introducing a question system in congress . likewise , historical proposals in the united states have involved a range of question period procedures . the following sections of the report survey the use of question time in britain , question period in canada , question hour in germany , and oral and government questions in france . afterward , a variety of historical proposals for a question period in the united states are discussed . the question period is widely used in parliamentary systems as a means of informing mps about the effects of government policies . parliaments vary widely in the frequency with which question periods are held and in the number of questions submitted by members . the data suggest that establishing a question period is no guarantee that it will develop into an effective information tool of the legislature . although executive branch officials periodically appeared on the floor during the first congresses , by the late 1790s the practice had largely ceased . proposals for a question period for congress have been offered with relative regularity beginning in the mid - 19 th century . initially , the proposals were endorsed by scholars who sought to increase executive branch influence in congress at a time when the legislative branch was preeminent . in recent decades , the proposal has been offered as a means to assure greater executive branch accountability during periods of perceived executive dominance in the federal government . whether the question period would be successful in a system of separated powers depends in large part on the attitude of its participants and on the format the question period ultimately assumes . the question period has the potential of involving more rank - and - file members in the policy - making process , and improving the means of communication between executive departments and congress . it also could harden relations between congress and the executive , and might increase the level of partisan controversy in congress . in crafting a question period proposal for use in congress , attention would likely be given to balancing the interests of both parties and their leadership , the concerns of committees , the institutional interests of congress , and the wishes of the general membership of the chambers . advocates argue that a question period will improve the performance of executive departments , enhance congressional oversight capabilities , promote inter - branch dialogue , increase public knowledge and interest in government affairs , and strengthen the institutional position of congress within the government relative to the president . the two appearances by the president generated significant media attention , and a number of prominent observers called on both the president and congress to continue such interactions on a regular basis . although the question and answer sessions were not conducted as formal house or senate actions , some proponents of a question period may view this as an advantage . the unofficial nature of the interactions avoided the procedural issues associated with instituting a question period in the house or senate , and the apparent lack of strict rules or procedures regarding questions arguably improved the quality and candidness of the exchange .