the recently introduced h.r . 2419 provides for the continuation of the expiring farm programs , but may not prove to be in compliance with the results of any agreement coming out of the current doha round discussions . the 110 th congress is considering legislation pertaining to the operation of the committee on foreign investment in the united states , or cfius , an interagency committee that overseas the security implications of foreign investments in the united states . while u.s. laws governing fdi are generally viewed as being very liberal , there has been recent concern about the security implications of some proposed overseas investments , especially their implications for national defense and port security . proposed legislation would require cfius to investigate all foreign investment transactions in which the entity is owned or controlled by a foreign government , regardless of the nature of the business . given the recent increase in indian fdi in the united states , this could cause some tension with india , as well as weaken u.s. efforts to persuade india to lower its current barriers to fdi . the growth of outsourcing various services to india , as well as other nations , is a serious concern for many u.s. workers . current u.s. law provides some assistance to "displaced workers" via the trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) program authorized by the trade act of 1974 ( p.l . 93-618 ) , the worker adjustment and retraining notification ( warn ) act of 1988 ( p.l . 100-379 ) of 1988 , and the workforce investment act of 1998 ( p.l . however , various groups and individuals have called upon congress to revisit these programs , and strengthen the provisions protecting u.s. workers from job losses caused by outsourcing . there are currently two bills before congress that offer additional assistance and / or protection to displaced u.s. workers . the trade adjustment assistance reform act ( h.r . 1729 ) expands eligibility for displaced textile and apparel workers for trade adjustment assistance , arguably in response to the growth in clothing and textiles imports from india . the second bill , the worker empowerment act ( s. 1330 ) , would amend the social security act to provide for wage insurance for dislocated workers . these moves are widely viewed as gestures to the left front . while there are indications that both prime minister singh and party chief gandhi remain fairly popular figures in india , february 2007 state elections in punjab and uttaranchal saw inc candidates decisively defeated by the main opposition bjp and its allies , causing some pundits to suggest that national economic policies and rising inflation may be damaging the ruling coalition's standing . some analysts saw the "neoliberal policies" of the upa as harming its electoral position . in june , eight regional parties formally launched a new "third front" that might emerge as a national alternative to the upa and nda . well - known tamil nadu leader jayalalithaa is likely to lead .