gain calculation example . the basis of property depends on how it was acquired . this man has now discovered that this particular toy is considered rare and valuable and decides to sell it on an internet auction site . a taxpayer's basis in property may be increased or decreased after the property is acquired . this report is only a general overview of a very complex topic . tax basis is the amount that a taxpayer can use as the cost of property that is sold , abandoned , or given away . when property is sold , taxpayers must report gain if the amount received for the property is more than the property's tax basis . in some cases , property received as a gift may be sold with no resulting gain or loss . this occurs when the sale price is more than the property's fmv at the time of the gift , but less than the donor's basis . gain must be reported even if the property was only used for personal purposes . when the tax basis is more than the property's sales price , the result is a loss . however , the loss generally cannot be used on a tax return if the property was only used for personal purposes . when property is abandoned , a taxpayer who used the property to produce income may be able to deduct the basis of the property on the tax return for the year in which the property is abandoned . when property is given as a gift to another person , the donor's basis is important because it affects the recipient's basis in the property . there are basically three ways of acquiring property: purchase , inheritance , and gift . the most common situation in which the basis in property is decreased is when the taxpayer uses the property for work or business and is allowed to take a deduction for tax purposes . the most common situation in which the basis in property is increased is when the owner improves the property and incurs expenses in making the improvements . basis determines whether there is a gain or loss when property is sold . for business - use property , basis is one factor used to determine allowable depreciation . depreciation for business - use property is based on the property's basis and its "class - life. if improvements are made to the property , those improvements are depreciated separately from the original property , but the adjusted basis of the improvements increases the adjusted basis in the property when it is sold . when property is sold , the gain or loss is determined by subtracting the adjusted basis of the property from the sales price . if the difference is greater than zero , there is a taxable gain . if less than zero , there is a loss , but its deductibility for tax purposes will depend upon whether the property was used for business , investment , or personal purposes . the taxable gain generally is the difference between the sales price and the adjusted basis , but the gain can be reduced by expenses incurred in selling the property .