appendix a . list of manufacturers in the kaesong industrial comple . many have withdrawn from that market . the kic is viewed as essential for survival by some of these companies . the experience of some of the early investors in kaesong may be indicative of the economic viability of the project . shinwon ( clothing ) established operations in the kic to take advantage of the dexterity and lower cost of north korean workers , favorable logistics , and to avoid nontariff barriers in china and southeast asia . by manufacturing about 16% of five of its clothing lines there , it expects to accrue considerable savings in production costs . it considers its kaesong factory to be optimal when compared with those it has in china , indonesia , vietnam , and guatemala . samduk trading company produces high - quality shoes in the kic . start - up costs were high because of the need to train workers . it took eight months for some production lines to reach 60% of the productivity level of south korean companies . the romanson company ( watches ) finds the kic superior to production in china because of the common language and low labor costs . it reportedly plans to move 75% of its watch production to the kic . the moonchang company ( uniforms , seat covers , leisure clothes ) faced a rough start in dealing with its north korean workers but feels it is now on the right track . the woori bank is in a difficult situation because of the limited customer base and low demand for personal or business loans . its main business is currency exchange . it provides zero interest rates on deposits because there are no means to make profits by investing deposits elsewhere in north korea . the kic has raised several issues with u.s. policy makers . these include labor conditions , financial benefits for pyongyang , the kic in the korus fta , and the control of u.s. exports to kaesong . the kaesong industrial complex sits at the hub of spreading concentric sets of economic and geopolitical interests and concerns . at its narrowest sense , the kic is a business venture in which participants are seeking profits and business advantages . on the south korean side , the kic provides small and medium - sized companies with a manufacturing platform and opportunity to access low - cost labor without having to go overseas to establish subsidiaries or to outsource the assembly of their products to china or other markets . on the dprk side , the kic provides jobs for workers who can earn relatively higher wages without crossing their borders illegally or working under contract in labor - scarce countries such as those in the russian far east or in middle eastern countries . at a somewhat wider set of interests , the kic provides a channel for rapprochement between the dprk and south korea . kaesong developed partly from south korea's sunshine policy of economic engagement with the north . it can be viewed as a confidence - building measure between two countries whose hostility toward each other has lingered since the 1950-52 korean war .