sec . 501 , et seq. ) the bill also amends existing law to restrict imports of illegally logged wood . a separate subtitle — cultural and heritage cooperation authority — provides for tribal - forest service cooperative relations and assistance . the bill authorizes a competitive grant program to hispanic - serving institutions to increase diversity in forestry and related fields , and allows contract modification options for certain forest service timber sales . the enacted bill includes forestry - related provisions other than in the forestry title . in title ii ( conservation ) , numerous programs were modified to include forestry among approved conservation activities . in title iii ( trade ) , it requires usda to required to establish a softwood lumber importer declaration program , for import data to be collected , verified , and reconciled to assure implementation of the u.s. - canada softwood lumber agreement . in title ix ( energy ) , two programs were created to use woody biomass for energy production . in title xv ( tax provisions ) , the agreement authorizes a new type of tax - exempt private bond whose proceeds are used to finance forest conservation . it also modifies income tax deductions for qualified timber gains , and includes several provisions to modernize and clarify the tax treatment of timber real estate investment trusts ( reits ) . see also crs report rl33917 , forestry in the 2008 farm bill , by [author name scrubbed] . interest in renewable energy has grown rapidly since late 2005 due , in large part , to a strong rise in domestic and international fuel prices and a dramatic acceleration in domestic biofuel production ( mostly ethanol ) . many policymakers view agriculture - based biofuels as both a catalyst for rural economic development and a response to growing energy import dependence . renewable energy's role in the 2002 farm bill was contained in the farm bill's energy title ( title ix ) , which concentrated on grants , loan , and loan guarantees to foster research on agriculture - based renewable energy , to share development risk , and to promote the adoption of renewable energy systems . usda's bioenergy program ( sec . 107-171 ) — funding for which expired in fy2006 — had been the primary exception in that it provided incentives to expand actual production of bioenergy . the enacted 2008 farm bill expands and extends the provisions in the energy section of the 2002 farm bill , and provides additional funding . the bill makes numerous changes to the programs in the energy title . for example , the bill combines the so - called section 9006 program with the energy audit and renewable energy development program under the new renewable energy for america program . the bill also creates new programs , including a biomass crop assistance program to provide financial assistance to producers for growing biomass crops and developing conversion facilities , and the agricultural bioenergy feedstock and energy efficiency research and extension initiative to provide for competitive grants to fund projects with a focus on supporting on - farm biomass crop research and extension .