a goal of the reforms is to reduce overconsumption . many analysts contend that high subsidies do not give iranians an incentive to conserve . while many economists assert that a reduction of iran's subsidies are necessary for iran's long - term economic sustainability , there are concerns that subsidy cuts may lead to a sharp increase in inflation of basic goods and gasoline and , based on past experience , lead to political unrest . in june 2007 , the government implemented a gasoline rationing system to reduce gasoline consumption . although this policy was extremely unpopular and even led to public riots , it resulted in a drop in gasoline consumption . iran's supreme leader has offered support to president ahmadinejad in his efforts to implement the subsidy reform . however , some analysts speculate that the political unrest following the june 2009 presidential elections may compel ahmadinejad to return to more populist policies in an effort to maintain his political base . monetary policy also has been expansionary under ahmadinejad . the government has provided low - interest loans for agriculture , tourism , and industry and has instituted loan forgiveness policies . other activities include the creation of a number of social programs to assist farmer and rural residents . ahmadinejad's cabinet established the $1.3 billion imam reza mehr fund ( imam reza compassion fund ) to assist youth with marriage , housing , and education in 2006 . as in other middle eastern countries , the rising cost of marriage is financially prohibitive to many young iranians . interest - free loans are available to youth for marriage through the fund . some economists contend that ahmadinejad's efforts to lower the interest rate have led to excessive liquidity and inflation . the government has used oil export revenues from the oil stabilization fund ( osf ) to support expansionary fiscal and monetary policies . the osf was created by the bank markazi , in 2001 to store surplus oil revenue and to smooth economic vulnerabilities associated with oil price fluctuations . iran has been drawing down on its osf to finance discretionary spending , such as for public subsidies , cash handouts to the poor , and low - interest loans . of primary concern to the united states and the international community is the purported use of oil export revenues to finance iran's nuclear program and alleged support for terrorist groups . while estimates vary about the size of the osf , many observers express concern it no longer contains sufficient funds to cushion against the global economic turndown . iran's economy is heavily dominated by the state , which is the recipient of revenues from crude oil exports , and quasi - state actors , such as the bonyads and the commercial entities of the islamic revolutionary guard corp ( irgc ) . private sector activity is limited , although the government is engaged in some privatization efforts . iran's economy has a number of key sectors . in 2008 , industry – which includes oil and gas , petrochemicals , steel , textile , and automotive manufacturing – accounted for an estimated 45% of the iran's gdp . the services sector , including financial services , represented about 44% of iran's economy .