sovereign immunity means that the government cannot be sued . congress , however , may waive sovereign immunity and allow the federal government to be sued in specific circumstances . the plaintiff bears the burden of proving that it has the right to sue the government . the ftca and the fca govern when lawsuits may be filed against the federal government for flood damages . therefore , some background regarding hurricane katrina's flooding of new orleans is necessary to analyze the legal issues . beginning in april 2011 , a series of severe storm systems combined with increased water levels due to snowmelt caused some of the largest floods in the mississippi river basin area in the last century . simultaneous flooding of the mississippi and ohio rivers in late april threatened the safety of cairo , il , a town located at the confluence of the two rivers . as river levels continued to rise , the corps prepared to activate the floodway system of the mississippi river and tributaries project ( mrtp ) . the floodway system allows the corps to artificially crevasse or open certain levees along the mississippi river to flood areas normally protected by the levees in order to alleviate flood damage to other areas . after activating the birds point - new madrid floodway near cairo , the corps subsequently activated floodways downstream as the river's crest travelled south , raising questions of the corps' liability and potential remedies for affected landowners . congress authorized the mrtp pursuant to the fca in response to a flood that devastated the mississippi river basin in 1927 . in order to prevent such damage in the future , the mrtp was designed as a system of civil works to protect against flooding and to maintain navigation of the river channel . the mrtp included a series of floodways that were designed to divert floodwaters in order to provide relief to other segments of the levee system when the river's waters reached certain levels . the mrtp includes four floodways: the birds point - new madrid floodway ( missouri ) ; the morganza floodway ( louisiana ) ; the west atchafalaya floodway ( louisiana ) ; and the bonnet carre floodway ( louisiana ) . in may 2011 , the corps intentionally breached the levee protecting the bird's point - new madrid floodway by detonating a hole in the levee to divert floodwaters to protect cairo , il , a town located at the confluence of the flooding mississippi and ohio rivers . the corps also opened floodgates on the morganza floodway to alleviate pressure on the levees protecting baton rouge and new orleans and opened the bonnet - carre floodway to prevent floodwaters from reaching new orleans . the corps' activation of the bird's point - new madrid and morganza floodways was only the second use of each since their respective completion in 1933 and 1953 , and the activation of the bonnet - carre floodway was the ninth use since its completion in 1932 . the corps' initial decision to activate the floodway system at bird's point - new madrid raised questions about the agency's authority to purposely flood some lands to save others .