for this time period , the annual percent growth was 4.3% . for example , for the past two fiscal years , fy2009 and fy2010 , congress has provided atf with program increases to address illegal gun trafficking from the united states to mexico under an initiative known as "project gunrunner. most of the program increases were provided to bolster atf's capabilities in the areas of gun trafficking and explosives . for fy2008 , congress also provided atf with a program increase for domestic gun trafficking , and the focus of this program increase was also largely on the southwest border . congress has also provided nearly $30 million for the construction of a national center for explosives training and research ( ncetr ) . for fy2010 , the arson and explosives allocation is $295.8 million , or 26% of the $1.121 billion appropriation . as discussed above , for fy2008 and fy2010 , congress appropriated a total of nearly $30 million for the construction of a atf - administered national center for explosives training and research . the atf alcohol and tobacco budget program covers expenses related to agency efforts to counter a rising trend in the illegal diversion of tobacco products , as well as the illegal movement of distilled alcohol products . according to the general accounting office ( now the government accountability office ) , the illegal diversion and smuggling of cigarettes in the united states results in an unknown but significant loss in tax revenues . atf's firearms budget program funds activities related to administering and enforcing federal laws related to the manufacture , importation , and distribution of firearms . among law enforcement agencies , the atf is recognized for its investigative expertise in responding to both arson and explosive incidents . the attorney general ( ag ) , for example , made the atf responsible for maintaining a consolidated database of all arson and explosive incidents that occur in the united states . reportedly , as part of the department's law enforcement information - sharing program , this and other databases are to be linked and made web - accessible , and first responders anywhere in the united states are to have access to critical information about arson and explosive cases nationwide . congress made atf responsible for more closely regulating the explosives industry in the united states under the safe explosives act . the act made atf responsible for fully investigating all explosive thefts and losses , as well as providing background checks for licensees and permittees to prevent prohibited persons from acquiring explosives . this act also requires atf to inspect explosive licensees and permittees every three years to ensure that all explosive materials are properly stored and accounted for . atf reports that there are about 12,000 licensees and permittees nationwide , so that to comply with the act , about 4,000 inspections would need to be conducted by atf annually . according to atf , 3,291 explosives compliance inspections were conducted in fy2007 , or about 28% of licensees / permittees . in addition , atf criminal intelligence indicates that cigarette bootlegging is a lucrative criminal venture that terrorist groups have used and would possibly use in the future to finance their activities .