a crosscut budget can be developed and organized in several ways . it could be a document that goes into considerable detail , or , alternatively , a crosscut budget could simply present budget and other information in a table or spreadsheet format . answers to these questions sometimes generate criticism from observers . they contend that some restoration initiatives are loosely coordinated and organized , and lack comprehensive plans and tools for measuring progress . to temper some of these criticisms and address congressional concerns , some agencies implementing ecosystem restoration initiatives have proposed and constructed what have been called crosscut budgets . federal laws have authorized crosscut budgets for ecosystem restoration initiatives , including the california bay - delta restoration initiative ( calfed ; p.l . 108-361 , ยง 106 ) and the great lakes restoration initiative ( p.l . 111-117 , division c , title vii , ยง 739 , extended by p.l . 112-10 , division b , title i , ยง 1101 ( a ) ( 6 ) ) . in the context of ecosystem restoration , a crosscut budget is typically a document that organizes and reports the activities and funding of several entities working within the same broad initiative in a way that "cuts across" organizational boundaries . the primary purpose of a crosscut budget is to characterize and organize funding for an initiative in one document in a timely manner that is useful for decision makers . for example , the crosscut budget for the florida everglades restoration initiative lists funding and provides a description of federal and state activities contributing toward restoration . characteristics of a more comprehensive crosscut budget might include , for example , how much has been spent ( and under what authority ) for projects , what has been accomplished with the funds , how much is left to be implemented and the cost of doing so , and proposed milestones for the next round of funding . conceivably , a crosscut budget could also track a restoration initiative's overall progress , provide transparency about coordination of the initiative's activities , and function as a coordinating and oversight document for congress , relevant federal , state , and local agencies , and other stakeholders . crosscut budgets do not answer all of the criticisms of how large - scale ecosystem restoration initiatives are planned and implemented . for example , although they are typically used to show budgetary allocations across organizational boundaries , crosscut budgets often do not present information about desired outcomes or programmatic impacts . they may provide stakeholders , however , with a tool for organizing , planning , and working with funds and goals for these initiatives , albeit at a cost in terms of requiring additional analytical work and executive attention by participating agencies , which are typically scarce commodities . this report discusses typical and potential elements of a crosscut budget , provides examples of enacted legislation that authorizes the use of crosscut budgets , and examines some crosscut budgeting issues that congress might consider . the everglades and calfed ecosystem restoration initiatives submit crosscut budgets annually . their crosscut budget documents share similarities , but differ with respect to the characteristics of their programs .