appendix a . what is a cap - and - trade system ? a cap - and - trade system would create an overall limit ( i.e. , a cap ) on ghg emissions from the emission sources covered by the program . the covered sources are likely to include major emitting sectors ( eg , power plants and carbon - intensive industries ) , fuel producers / processors ( eg , coal mines or petroleum refineries ) , or some combination of both . the emissions cap is partitioned into emission allowances . typically , one emission allowance represents the authority to emit one ( metric ) ton of carbon dioxide - equivalent ( tco 2 - e ) . the "equivalent" is necessary , because ghgs other than co 2 — methane , nitrous oxide , sulfur hexafluoride , hydrofluorocarbons , and perfluorocarbons — vary in their global warming potential ( gwp ) . thus , ghg emissions are presented in a standard form of measure ( co 2 - e ) . in general , policymakers may decide to distribute the emission allowances to covered entities at no cost ( based on , for example , previous years' emissions ) , sell the allowances through an auction , or use some combination of these strategies . this report examines issues associated with these allocation options . covered entities that face relatively low emission - reduction costs would have an incentive to make reductions beyond what is required , because these further reductions could be sold ( i.e. , traded ) as emission credits to entities that face higher emission - reduction costs . other mechanisms , such as banking or offsets , may be included to increase the flexibility of the program . at the end of each established compliance period ( eg , a calendar year ) , covered sources would be required to surrender emission allowances to cover the number of tons emitted . if a source did not have enough allowances to cover its emissions , the source would be subject to penalties . for more information , see u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) , office of air and radiation , tools of the trade: a guide to designing and operating a cap and trade program for pollution control ( 2003 ) ; crs report rl33799 , climate change: design approaches for a greenhouse gas reduction program , by [author name scrubbed] . appendix b. allowance allocation strategy under s. 2191 ( as reported ) . cap - and - trade programs can vary by the sources covered . this is followed by a discussion of policy considerations . a cap - and - trade program would impose costs: covered entities would comply by reducing their own emissions , purchasing emission reductions ( credits ) from other covered entities , or ( if allowed ) buying offsets from non - covered sources that have reduced , avoided , or sequestered emissions . the combined costs of these activities are the "compliance costs" of the cap - and - trade program . the compliance costs are different from the aggregate value of emission allowances .