the provisions of p.l . 112-239 specify a range of heightened compliance and certification requirements to ensure that grants , contracts , and cooperative agreements are performed free of human trafficking . 112-239 also enhances federal monitoring and investigation of by inspectors general agencies and expands the criminal penalties for fraud in foreign labor contracting to include attempted fraud and work outside the united states . appendix b . domestic and international tip funding u.s. anti - trafficking activities are primarily authorized by the tvpa , as amended , and separately appropriated to several departments and agencies that manage program implementation both domestically and internationally . the following appendix summarizes key sources of anti - trafficking funding and budget data , including tvpa authorizations and appropriations , domestic and overseas obligated funds , appropriations for grant programs for domestic tip victims , foreign aid budget estimates , and international anti - tip obligations . tvpa authorizations and appropriations table b - 1 lists trafficking authorization levels for fy2008-fy2017 . those authorizations are for tip operations and programs . since many u.s. government agencies do not include a line item in their budget requests for trafficking programs and / or tip - related operations , it is often difficult to calculate the exact level of funding that congress appropriated for trafficking activities ( programs and operations , including law enforcement activities ) by agency . despite the challenges , the office of management and budget ( omb ) tracks estimated tip appropriations levels by gathering agency estimations of tip - related spending for each fiscal year . see table b - 2 for tip authorizations versus appropriations . according to omb , funding for tvpa programs comes from appropriations to a number of u.s. departments and agencies , including the department of state ; the department of justice ( doj ) ; the department of labor ( dol ) ; the department of health and human services ( hhs ) ; and the department of homeland security ( dhs ) . domestic and overseas obligated funds overall , between fy2001 and fy2011 , u.s. agencies have obligated an estimated $853.5 million on domestic and international anti - tip assistance . fy2012 and fy2013 obligations by agency are not yet available for all agencies . in fy2011 , the u.s. government obligated an estimated $56.5 million for international anti - trafficking assistance programs . in fy2011 , the u.s. government obligated roughly $26 million for domestic anti - tip programs , an increase from $24.2 million obligated in fy2010 . the total for domestic obligations does not include the costs of administering tip operations or tip - related law enforcement investigations . appropriations for grant programs for domestic tip victims domestic anti - tip activities include both services to victims , as well as law enforcement operations . investigations into human trafficking are complex and as a result often require significant resources . see table b - 3 for authorizations and appropriations for grant programs to assist trafficking victims in the united states for fy2001-fy2014 .