the nifa director was to report directly to the secretary of agriculture ( not through the under secretary ) . both the house and senate bills drew heavily on the recommendations of usda and nasulgc . the senate bill provided $160 million in mandatory research funding over the five - year life of the farm bill . this bill reauthorized the organic research and extension initiative with $16 million in annual mandatory funds for fy2008-fy2012 . the house version called for creating , within the office of the under secretary for research , education , and economics , an overall coordinating organization known as the national agricultural research program office ( narpo ) with six specialized directors . narpo's six subject - area directors would work with the existing national agricultural research , extension , education , and economics advisory board to coordinate and plan both the capacity and competitive programs of the ree agencies . the directors of narpo would become the primary program leaders , incorporating the duties of the currently separate ars and csrees national program staffs . additionally , the house bill called for establishing a national institute of food and agriculture ( nifa ) within csrees that would oversee extramural competitive research grants only . the enacted 2008 farm bill ( food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 , p.l . the bill explicitly directed the under secretary to coordinate research between ars and nifa , and to recommend funding for all the programs within usda's research mission area . a new specialty crop research initiative received $16 million in annual mandatory funds for fy2008-fy2012 . mandatory funds for the initiative for future agricultural and food systems ( ifafs , which was to be a program within nifa ) were eliminated and replaced with annual appropriations of such sums as necessary . as with the house bill , discretionary programs were maintained largely as in the previous farm bill and most were authorized to receive appropriations of such sums as necessary . other new provisions in the both the house and senate bills included ( 1 ) a grant program to help non - land grant public colleges and universities improve their capacity for agricultural research , education , and outreach ; ( 2 ) establishment of an endowment fund , similar to that established for the tribal colleges , to provide a continuing base of support for hispanic - serving agricultural colleges ; ( 3 ) establishment of institutional capacity - building and competitive grant programs for the hispanic - serving colleges ; and ( 4 ) a larger commitment to bioenergy and biobased products . 110-246 ) reorganizes the department's research , education , and economics mission area , which currently comprises four agencies that separately administer intramural and extramural programs supporting agricultural research and development ( r&d ) . the enacted farm bill's research title ( title vii ) classifies all current research , extension , and education programs into two groups — capacity programs and competitive programs — based upon the way in which their funding is distributed to recipients .