appendix a . 27 and passed by the senate . the bills differed for reasons unrelated to the vr program and no conference committee was ever formed . a final version of these bills was never passed . reauthorization of the program was not considered in the 110 th congress , although supplemental vr grants were appropriated as part of the recovery act . if congress does consider reauthorization in 2010 , it may want to consider making changes to several parts of the vr program . possible areas for reform include the definition of disability used and the order of selection rules that give preference to persons with the most severe disabilities even though this group may be the least likely to return to work . in addition , congress may wish to consider some method for increasing the overall success rate of the vr program . this authorization expired at the end of fy2003 . the mandatory minimum increase in appropriations is based on the change in the cpi - u reported in october of each year . the october cpi - u report is released in november of each year , a month after the beginning of the federal fiscal year . therefore , the appropriation for a given fiscal year is based on the appropriation for the previous fiscal year increased by the change in the cpi - u reported for october of the second previous fiscal year . for example , the mandatory minimum appropriation for fy2003 was based on the appropriation for fy2002 increased by the change in the cpi - u between october 2000 and october 2001 . sections 8 and 110 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 provide a formula to be used by the rsa in determining each state and territory's allotment of appropriated vr funds . this allotment formula does not take into account a state or territory's population of individuals with disabilities , or the employment rate of a state or territory's vr clients . rather , the formula is based on the following three factors: the state or territory's vr allotment in fy1978 ; the state's current per capita income as compared to the national per capita income ; and , the state or territory's current population . a two - step process is used to determine each state and territory's vr allotment . in the first step , the allotment percentage is determined using the formula specified in section 8 of the act . in the second step , this allotment percentage is used in a formula specified in section 110 of the act to determine the final allotment for each state and territory . a state or territory's vr allotment is based on its allotment in 1978 , its per capita income , and its population . the size of a state or territory's population of individuals with disabilities , the varying costs of providing vr services , the ability of a state or territory to match allotted funds , and high population growth in certain states and territories are not fully factored into determining how much money a state or territory will have available for vr services .