of mass . at lowell , a dispute arose over a contract the university of massachusetts had entered into with baum research relating to the firm's patented device for testing baseball bats . the two parties formed a "confidential license agreement" for the use of the patented device , which included a governing law provision stating that all parties "agree to proper venue and hereby submit to jurisdiction in the appropriate state or federal courts. the court held this contract provision to be "a clear and unambiguous consent to the jurisdiction of a michigan federal court for disagreements arising from this licensing agreement. although general consent provisions are not sufficient to waive sovereign immunity , this provision was clear and unequivocal as to the obligation of the state to submit to the jurisdiction of the federal court in the case of a future dispute . however , a state that participates in the federal trademark system or that files a civil action in a federal court seeking review of a decision of the trademark trial and appeal board of the pto does not waive its sovereign immunity , according to the federal district court in board of regents of the univ . of wisconsin system v. phoenix software int ' l , inc . this opinion involved the trademark trial and appeal board's ( ttab's ) decision to cancel a federal trademark that had been registered by the board of regents of the university of wisconsin system . a software manufacturer had filed a petition with the ttab seeking the cancellation , asserting that the board of regents' mark was similar to the one that it used for its software for computers . the ttab granted the petition , prompting the board of regents to appeal the decision to the federal district court . after the software manufacturer filed a counterclaim against the board of regents for trademark infringement related to the university's use of the mark , the university moved to dismiss the counterclaim on the grounds that the university is a branch of the state of wisconsin and thus entitled to sovereign immunity . the federal court granted the motion and dismissed the software manufacturer's counterclaim . in reaching these decisions , the court first examined the validity of congress's attempt to abrogate state immunity from trademark infringement suits pursuant to the trademark remedy clarification act . noting that the supreme court's decision in college savings bank considered only the liability of states for claims brought under the false and misleading advertisement provisions of the federal lanham act , and not the statute's trademark infringement provisions , the district court concluded that "[i]t is unlikely the [supreme] court would reach a different conclusion in trademark litigation. citing that the trca's legislative history had not found a pattern of trademark infringement by the states and that it had not seriously discussed fourteenth amendment concerns to justify abrogation , the federal court ruled that the trca is not "congruent and proportional" to any fourteenth amendment injury and thus the trca was unconstitutional and fails to abrogate state immunity from trademark infringement suits . with respect to the waiver issue , the district court explained that the state of wisconsin has not "constructively waive[d]" its immunity by participating in the federal trademark system .