compared to appropriations for fy2008 , p.l . 111-8 increased discretionary funding by at least $100 million for ssa administrative expenses . the omnibus increased funding for ssa administrative expenses by $709 million to $10.5 billion , up from $9.7 billion for fy2008 . arra included a total of $1.2 billion for related agencies . mandatory dol programs included in p.l . 111-8 were funded at $2.9 billion and consist of the black lung disability trust fund ( $1,072 million ) , federal unemployment benefits and allowances ( $959 million ) , advances to the unemployment insurance and other trust funds ( $422 million ) , special benefits for disabled coal miners ( $244 million ) , employment standards administration ( esa ) special benefits ( $163 million ) , and administrative expenses for the energy employees occupational illness compensation fund ( $50 million ) . arra did not include additional funding for dol for mandatory programs . fy2008 discretionary appropriations for the department of health and human services ( hhs ) were $65.7 billion . discussions focus primarily on discretionary programs . the report does not follow specific funding issues related to mandatory l - hhs - ed programs — such as medicare or social security — nor does it follow any authorizing legislation related to the president's budget initiatives . for a glossary of budget terms and relevant websites , see the appendix , "terminology and web resources. the l - hhs - ed bill typically is one of the more controversial of the regular appropriations bills , not only because of the size of its funding total and the scope of its programs , but also because of the continuing importance of various related issues , such as restrictions on the use of federal funds for abortion and for human embryonic stem cell research . this bill provides discretionary and mandatory funds to three federal departments and 13 related agencies , including the social security administration ( ssa ) . discretionary funding represents only one - quarter of the total in the bill . among the various appropriations bills , l - hhs - ed is the largest single source of discretionary funds for domestic ( non - defense ) federal programs ( the department of defense bill is the largest source of discretionary funds among all federal programs ) . this section presents several overview tables on funding in the bill , particularly discretionary funding ; summarizes major funding changes proposed and enacted for l - hhs - ed ; and discusses related issues such as 302 ( b ) allocations and advance appropriations . later sections provide details on individual l - hhs - ed departments and agencies . fy2008 discretionary appropriations for the department of labor ( dol ) were $11.8 billion . for fy2009 , the george w. bush administration requested $10.5 billion , $1.3 billion ( 10.7% ) less than the fy2008 amount , as shown in table 7 . the draft bill marked up but not reported by the house appropriations committee included $12.2 billion in discretionary funding , an increase of $413 million ( 3.5% ) over fy2008 .