these production forecasts reflect three factors . first , flood - related acreage losses appear to be substantially less than initially projected . second , nearly ideal growing conditions that have persisted across the corn belt since late june have contributed to sharp increases in usda's yield outlook for corn , thus , offsetting flood - related area losses . third , despite a 17.6% increase in planted acreage in 2008 , soybean production is flat due to a diminished yield outlook—largely due to the lateness of the crop's planting and development , as well as dry conditions in the delta , the southeast , and the northern plains . usda's august crop production forecast appear to have calmed much of the market concern regarding crop losses due to flooding . however , a large portion of the 2008 corn and soybean crops were planted late and , as of early august , remain substantially behind historical development rates . as of august 11 , usda estimates that 30% of corn had reached the dough stage of development compared with the 5-year average of 50% , while only 6% had dented compared with an average of 16% the past five years . similarly , 60% of soybean plants had set pods compared with the 5-year average of 75% . as a result , market analysts suggest that weather problems could still emerge—such as an early freeze—that could lower yield and production prospects , especially in the more northerly regions where crop development remains behind normal . the potential weather - and flood - related production losses to this year's u.s. corn and soybean crops were unwelcome news to the market and , likely to contribute to higher commodity prices in june . because the united states plays a dominant role in global corn and soybean markets , u.s. price changes transmit directly to the international marketplace . in summary , good growing conditions during july and early august of 2008 appear to have moderated initial concerns over potential flood - related crop losses . however , a large portion of the 2008 corn and soybean crops were planted late and , as of early august , remain substantially behind historical development rates . as a result , market analysts suggest that weather problems such as an early freeze could still emerge to lower yield and production prospects . most long - term forecasts project prices for feed grains and oilseeds—as well as those crops that compete for area with feed grains and oilseeds—to remain at significantly higher levels than experienced during the recent 1998-2006 period . the united states plays a critical role in global markets for both feed grains and oilseeds . however , a rough approximation of flood - damaged acres can be obtained by comparing the implied state - level abandonment rates from usda's august forecasts with the recent eight - year average abandonment rates . the united states is the world's leading producer and exporter of both corn and soybeans . in 2007 the united states had 42% and 63% shares , respectively , of world corn production and trade , and 32% and 41% shares of world soybean production and trade .