direct compensation . provide some type of direct payment to existing fruit and vegetable growers who do not have base acres on which they plant their fruits and vegetables . the amount of the payment could be based on the level of direct payments received by program crop growers . research assistance . increase federal funding for university and government research on growing , processing , and distributing fruits and vegetables . implementation of research findings could lower production costs , increase quality or output , and / or increase demand . increase demand for fruits and vegetables . to the extent that eliminating the planting restriction increases fruit and vegetable production — which could depress prices and revenue as some existing growers fear — federal efforts to increase demand could offset potential revenue shortfalls . increasing demand could be accomplished in several ways: market promotion ( including healthy diet standards , and farmers markets ) , foreign trade assistance ( negotiating trade agreements to export u.s. produce ) , and government purchases of produce ( for feeding and nutrition assistance programs such as section 32 , school lunch programs , and fresh fruit and vegetable snacks for children ) . following is a side - by - side comparison of five academic and industry studies on the effects of removing the restriction on planting fruits and vegetables on base acres under the 2002 farm bill . the studies include: usda economic research service ( by demcey johnson , barry krissoff , edwin young , linwood hoffman , gary lucier , and vince breneman ) , eliminating fruit and vegetable planting restrictions: how would markets be affected ? err - 30 , november 2006 , at http: / / www.ers.usda.gov / publications / err30 ; michigan state university ( by suzanne thornsbury , lourdes martinez , and david schweikhardt ) , michigan: a state at the intersection of the debate over full planting flexibility , ccr - 29 , february 2007 , at http: / / www.ers.usda.gov / publications / ccr29 / ccr29.pdf ; arizona state university ( by paul patterson and timothy richards ) , farm bill flex acre provisions and fruit , vegetable , and nut production , july 2006 , at http: / / cissc.calpoly.edu / farmbill / farmbillflexacreprovisionsandfruit2.pdf ; texas a&m university ( by roland fumasi , james richardson , and joe outlaw ) , lifting the fruit and vegetable cropping restriction: potential impacts on cropping preference in the lower rio grade valley , texas , february 2006 , at http: / / agecon.lib.umn.edu / cgi - bin / pdf_view.pl ? paperid= 19484&ftype=.pdf ; and informa economics ( for the specialty crop farm bill alliance ) , an analysis of the effect of removing the planting restrictions on program crop base , february 2007 , at http: / / www.competitiveagriculture.org / images / finalreport2007.pdf . the studies reviewed in this report take very different approaches to measuring the potential effects of lifting the planting restriction . table 1 provides a comparison of some of the key differences between these five studies . a more detailed review of these studies is provided in appendixes a - e .