this report will be updated as developments warrant . the emergence of unaccompanied refugee minors as an issue has followed a pattern in the united states that dates back to at least world war ii . this pattern has historically emerged from two overlapping factors: ( 1 ) the generation of large refugee flows from a conflict or oppressive regime and ( 2 ) significant u.s. involvement , either militarily or diplomatically , with the conflict or regime . generally , these factors have contributed to both the creation of a notable supply of unaccompanied refugee children eligible to relocate to the united states , as well as a growth in public pressure on the federal government to provide assistance to these children . under regulation , an unaccompanied refugee minor ( urm ) is a child who is under the age of 18 , and "who entered the united states unaccompanied by and not destined to ( a ) a parent or ( b ) a close nonparental adult relative who is willing and able to care for the child or ( c ) an adult with a clear and court verifiable claim to custody of the minor ; and who has no parent ( s ) in the united states. moreover , to be placed in the urm program , children must be considered refugees , victims of trafficking , cuban / haitian entrants , or have been granted asylum . although urms are more commonly identified abroad by the department of state for u.s. resettlement , some children categorized as urms are already present in the united states when deemed eligible by authorities . in addition to handling urms , orr is tasked with caring for "unaccompanied alien children" ( uac ) . uacs are those children who are detained by immigration authorities in the united states for unauthorized presence in the united states and who are deemed to be unaccompanied . the main distinction between urms and uacs is that urms are considered legally present in the united states under the ina . moreover , uacs are statutorily defined under the homeland security act of 2002 , whereas regulations dictate the definition of urm . the urm program and the uac program are technically two distinct program administered by orr . in practice , however , they operate in a joint fashion , as the congressional intent was to model the uac program on its urm predecessor . occasionally , refugee children in the urm program will initially arrive in the united states accompanied by a parent or guardian . however , family circumstances may undergo drastic changes , resulting in requests for orr to reclassify a child as "unaccompanied" and place him or her in the urm program . according to agency guidelines , orr will reclassify a minor to unaccompanied status if a certain set of conditions are met . however , reclassification is considered on a case - by - case basis , and the orr director has discretion as to whether certain criteria may be waived to accommodate given circumstances . despite representing only a fraction of the immigrant and refugee populations in the united states , the vulnerability of unaccompanied refugee children makes their few numbers nonetheless notable .