3742 , as introduced . 3082 , the full - year continuing appropriations act , 2011 , which was passed by the house on december 8 , 2010 , but not acted upon by the senate thereafter . it contained provisions directed at ratifying past land - into - trust acquisitions by the secretary and clarifying how the ira amendment interacted with other laws . in the 112 th congress , none of the bills relating to carcieri were enacted . three bills were introduced to extend authority to the secretary to take land into trust for all federally recognized tribes: h.r . one , s. 676 , was amended and reported out of committee — by the senate committee on indian affairs on april 7 , 2011 . it contains language which parallels that of section 2727 of h.r . 3082 of the 111 th congress . like that bill , it retroactively amends the ira to cover "any federally recognized indian tribe," and contains provisions directed at ratifying past land - into - trust acquisitions by the secretary as well as language designed to clarify its interaction with other law . in the 112 th congress , there was also legislation to compensate local governments for lost revenue associated with taking land into trust: s. 988 , h.r . these bills share the same title: the land - in - trust schools and local governments equitable compensation act . under these bills , when lands are taken into trust for an indian tribe or an individual indian after october 1 , 2008 , there would be compensation from the u.s. treasury's general fund for lost tax revenue unless the secretary of the interior negotiates waiver agreements . eligible entities included local education agencies or units of local government and states that suffer loss of tax revenue as a result of the trust acquisition . payment of compensation would require no further appropriation . in the 113 th congress , one bill , s. 1603 , the gun lake trust land reaffirmation act , was enacted into law . it reaffirms the doi's may 15 , 2005 , trust acquisition of the land at issue in the supreme court's decision in match - e - be - nash - she - wish band of pottawatomi indians v. patchak and requires that any federal court action relating to that land be dismissed . there was an indian affairs committee hearing , " carcieri: bringing certainty to trust land acquisitions. at that hearing , kevin k. washburn , assistant secretary of the interior for indian affairs , stated that the obama administration's "practical solution" for this issue is language , included in the president's budget request , that would amend the ira as follows: effective beginning on june 18 , 1934 , the term "indian" as used in this act shall include all persons of indian descent who are members of any federally recognized indian tribe , and all persons who are descendants of such members who were , on june 1 , 1934 , residing within the present boundaries of any indian reservation , and shall further include all other persons of one - half or more indian blood .