480 food aid ) . funding for health - related assistance in africa has grown dramatically through usaid and special presidential initiatives to fight hiv / aids , tb , and malaria . congressional earmarks , the partnership says , limit the flexibility of agricultural development assistance at the country level . compacts under the mcc have been entered into with 8 african countries: madagascar , cape verde , benin , ghana , mali , mozambique , lesotho , and tanzania . agriculture is a key sector for mcc funding . the mcc looks to the eligible developing country to develop its own mca proposal , but informs countries that increasing economic growth and reducing poverty requires them to emphasize investments that raise the productive potential of a county's citizens and firms and help integrate its economy into the global product and capital markets . one of six key areas of focus for mcas is agricultural development . other key areas are education , enterprise and private sector development , governance , health , and trade capacity building . the mcc website reports that almost all of the mca country proposals submitted include an agriculture component . although as noted above , most u.s. food aid to africa goes to address emergency food needs , a smaller portion of such aid is used in development projects , many of which aim to enhance food security . in fy2007 , of $1.2 billion of u.s. commodity food aid provided to africa , just over $1 billion was provided as emergency food aid , while $167 million was allocated to development projects , many of which focus on agriculture . non - emergency food aid financed projects are the largest amount of funding devoted to promoting food security in the usaid portfolio of projects in africa . observers have noted problems of scale of activity funded with food aid and also lack of coordination with other development assistance . however , usaid's food security strategy emphasizes that it will reduce the number of countries in which it carries out food aid development projects and that it will integrate p.l . 480 development projects into a country's overall agricultural development assistance program . to address problems of food security in poor countries resulting from high food prices , the president of the world bank , robert zoellick , recently called for a "new deal for global food policy. in his view , not only would such a new deal require a higher priority to food security especially in poor countries , but also attention to the interrelated challenges of energy , yields , and climate change . zoellick said that immediate food needs such as those identified by the wfp should be met , but attention also should be paid to meeting the millennium development goal ( mdg ) which calls for reducing by half global hunger and malnutrition by 2015 . zoellick called for "a shift from traditional food aid to a broader concept of food and nutrition assistance...." cash or vouchers , he suggested , as opposed to commodity support , would be appropriate and enable the assistance to build local food markets and farm production . if commodities were needed , he said , they should be purchased from local farmers .