a number of proposals have been issued . the clinton administration put forth a unilateral approach with its fy2001 budget proposal . the basis of the plan was to be a list of jurisdictions identified by the department of the treasury as tax havens . foreign tax credits and the deferral benefit would be restricted for taxpayers using the identified tax havens . more narrow unilateral approaches proposed in the past have primarily involved increasing information reporting requirements . this provision was also in the fy2016 budget . this provision was projected to raise $2.6 billion in fy2016 and $64.2 billion over 10 years . in addition , the fy2015 and fy2016 proposals contained a provision to disallow inversions ( shifting from u.s. to foreign headquarters ) by merging with a smaller company , projected to raise $0.3 billion in fy2016 and $12.8 billion over 10 years . how might revisions in the tax system exacerbate or address these tax shelter issues ? the current u.s. system is a hybrid construct , embodying a mix of opposing jurisdictional principles . not surprisingly , the mixed system — in conjunction with foreign host - country taxes — poses a patchwork of incentive effects for u.s. firms and their global operations , in some cases taxing foreign operations favorably and creating an incentive to invest abroad , and in other cases imposing high tax burdens and posing a disincentive to overseas investment . in still other cases , the system presents a rough tax neutrality toward overseas investment . it is perhaps the hybrid nature of the system that has led to calls for reform . prescriptions for a "good" tax system vary , and the hybrid system satisfies none of them fully . this report describes and assesses the principal prescriptions that have been offered for broad reform of the international system . it begins with an overview of current law and possible revisions . it then sets the framework for considering economic efficiency as well as tax shelter activities . finally , it reviews alternative approaches to revision in light of those issues . the term competitiveness has often been invoked in the debate about u.s. policy in a global economy , including discussions of u.s. tax policy . in economic analysis , however , it is not countries that are competitive ; it is companies that are . a company generally thinks of itself as competitive if it can produce at the same cost as , or a lower cost than , other firms . but a country's firms cannot be competitive in all areas . indeed , even if firms in a country are more productive than firms in all other countries in every respect , a country would still tend to produce those goods in which its relative advantage is greatest . if it were not for foreign taxes , deferral's repeal would move the system to the brink of capital export neutrality ( except for the portfolio investment concern ) : the tax burden on foreign investment would roughly equal the tax rate on domestic investment . the other countries need to produce goods with their resources as well . this notion is called comparative advantage , and it is an important concept in economic theory .