nepal also suffers from widespread corruption . nepal ranked 146 out of 178 countries in the 2010 global corruption perceptions index by transparency international . the tibetan community in nepal has , according to human rights watch , been subject to numerous abuses at the hands of nepali authorities as nepal has reportedly come under pressure from china to quell any protests in nepal over chinese rule in tibet . nepali authorities reportedly made an estimated 8,350 arrests of tibetans , out of an estimated total population of some 20,000 tibetan refugees , exiles , and asylum seekers , during the period between march 10 and july 18 , 2008 . nepal is a key transit route for tibetans seeking to reach india . this incident did much to undermine the legitimacy of the monarchy . king gyanendra , the former king's brother , was crowned on june 4 , 2001 , and he appointed a commission to investigate the assassinations . by mid - june , the country began returning to normal following rioting and widespread refusal to believe official accounts of the massacre . in july 2001 , prime minister girija prasad koirala stepped down amid fears of continuing instability and his government's failure to deal with the growing maoist insurgency . he was replaced by nc leader sher bahadur deuba , who then became the head of nepal's 11 th government in as many years . over the years both the maoists and security forces have committed numerous human rights violations . that said , some progress in the areas of human rights and political freedoms have been achieved since the early 1990s . the king's dismissal of government in 2005 led to many abuses and curtailments of civil rights . this setback was reversed by the reinstatement of parliament in 2006 . trafficking in women and children and indentured domestic work remain problems in nepal . human rights watch accused the government of nepal of unnecessary and excessive use of force , arbitrary arrest , sexual assault of women during arrest , arbitrary and preventative detention and beatings of tibetans in detention , and unlawful threats to deport tibetans to china . nepal home ministry spokesman modraj dotel stated in march 2008 that "we have given the tibetans refugee status and allow them to carry out culture events . however , they do not have the right for political activities ... we will not allow any anti - china activities in nepal and will stop it. nepal is one of the world's poorest nations . average per capita income in nepal is $427 with 55% of the population living on $1.25 per day or less . inflation is estimated to be 8.4% and an estimated 75% of the people are engaged in agriculture . this insulates nepal to a large degree from international economic factors , though tourism remains vulnerable to global economic downturns . major crops include rice , wheat , maize , jute , sugarcane , and potatoes . nearly a quarter of the national budget is externally funded through foreign aid . nepal's gdp is expected to grow by 3.5% to 4% in 2011 . political instability and insurgency - related violence of recent years has undermined the country's economy .