how dangerous are sex offenders ? is sex offender treatment effective ? a review of the literature on the efficacy of sex offender treatment indicates that no consensus exists regarding whether treatment can reduce recidivism among sex offenders . questions persist regarding whether "dangerousness" can be accurately predicted . generally speaking , people can be civilly committed when they are a danger to others . when a person's symptoms begin to remit , the individual is discharged and typically referred to aftercare services . if sex offenders cannot be treated , is civil commitment a viable method for managing sex offenders ? hospital stays for individuals under a civil commitment order for mental illness rarely exceed 30 days . are there more cost - effective measures for managing sex offenders that also protect communities from repeat sex crimes ? it concludes with an evaluation of some of the issues surrounding civil commitment . this section describes the history of civil commitment laws in the united states , two supreme court rulings on the constitutionality of civil commitment programs , and a description of the federal civil commitment program . the common perception of sex offenders is that they are more dangerous than other criminals . for some , it is not a matter of if sex offenders will re - offend , but when they will re - offend . the civil commitment of sex offenders hinges on the belief that sex offenders are more likely to recidivate . this section evaluates the threat that sex offenders pose to the public by reviewing four studies of sex offender recidivism . one of the key tenets of civil commitment is the belief that sex offenders can be treated ; for if they cannot , it is likely that there will be a burgeoning population of civilly committed sex offenders that will never be released . however , questions linger about the efficacy of sex offender treatment . recent research provides evidence that sex offender treatments might reduce recidivism , but the degree to which the treatments are effective is uncertain . notwithstanding the supreme court's rulings that addressed constitutional issues , there are issues that could influence the long - term viability of civil commitment laws . these issues include ( 1 ) the ability of the government to determine which offenders should be civilly committed , ( 2 ) the use of less restrictive alternatives to civil commitment , ( 3 ) the use of indeterminate sentences to punish sex offenders , and ( 4 ) the cost of civil commitment programs . the public outrage towards sex crimes , especially sex crimes against children , has resulted in demands for harsher penalties for sex offenders and better methods for managing them in the community . recent media coverage of high - profile sex crimes may have increased the public's fear that all sex offenders are dangerous . elected officials in 19 states and the federal government have turned to civil commitment as a means of trying to ensure the public's safety from sex offenders . yet , there is a growing controversy about whether civil commitment is the best policy for protecting the public from sex offenders .