110-418 , which accompanies h.r . these include ( 1 ) unevenly applied sanctions against burma by other countries and international organizations , including the european union and japan ; ( 2 ) a booming natural gas production and export industry that provides the spdc with significant revenue ; ( 3 ) continued unwillingness of burma's fellow members in the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) to impose economic sanctions against burma ; ( 4 ) burma's historical isolation from the global economy ; and ( 5 ) china's continued economic and military assistance to burma . in addition , some analysts suggest that sanctions are , in part , culpable for the flourishing black markets in burma , including trafficking in humans , gems , and drugs , because legal exports are barred . several analysts indicate that many burmese women who lost their jobs in the textile industry as a result of western sanctions are among the victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation . the united states is assisting neighboring countries with stemming the flow of trafficked contraband from burma into their territories . although most u.s. assistance to combat transnational crime in burma remains in suspension , the united states is working to train law enforcement and border control officials in neighboring countries through anti - crime assistance programs . currently , the bulk of funding to burma's neighbors remains concentrated in counter - narcotics and anti - human trafficking projects ; no funding is allocated to the state department for combating "organized and gang - related crime" in the region . overall funding to combat trafficking has been in decline for several years ; the administration's fy2008 appropriations request for foreign operations in the region represents a 24.2% decrease from fy2006 actual funding . despite burma's recent progress in reducing opium poppy cultivation , most experts believe u.s. policies have not yielded substantial leverage in combating transnational crime emanating from burma . in light of the most recent displays of junta violence against political demonstrators in september 2007 , however , there are indications of increasing political interest in re - evaluating u.s. policy toward burma . among the considerations that policy makers have recently raised are ( 1 ) whether the united states should increase the amount of humanitarian aid sent to burma ; ( 2 ) what role asean and other multilateral vehicles for dialogue could play in increasing political pressure on the junta regime ; ( 3 ) what role the united states sees india , as the world's largest democracy and burma's neighbor , playing in ensuring that burma does not become a source of regional instability ; and ( 4 ) how the united states can further work with china and thailand , as the largest destinations of trafficked goods from burma , to address transnational crime along burma's borders . 3890 ) , however , would prohibit the importation of gems and hardwoods from burma , among other restrictions . after more than a decade of applying sanctions against burma , however , many analysts have concluded that the sanctions have done little to change the situation . the effectiveness of u.s. sanctions is limited by several factors . the 110 th congress sought to strengthen unilateral sanctions against burma .