information about the subject and form of these measures is presented in appendix . no feasible means appeared of comprehensively identifying similar measures for the period preceding the availability of electronically searchable data . accordingly , available information can permit no definite assertion whether a vote of no confidence fully similar to that proposed , for example , by s.j.res . 14 has ever previously occurred in american history . it might be considered unlikely , however , that resolutions critical of officials during earlier periods of history would have been couched solely in terms of "no confidence," because proponents would likely have understood that these terms have a technical meaning only in a parliamentary system of government . although there has been discussion in both houses of congress of the appropriateness of such actions , resolutions have been introduced and considered in each house of congress in the past , and on occasion have been adopted , wherein the house or the senate has expressed the "sense" of the institution that an official in the executive branch has engaged in conduct worthy of censure , condemnation , or other expression of disapprobation ; should resign or be removed by the president ; and , in a few circumstances , expressly stating in the preamble or the operative portion of the resolution that the public or the particular house of congress has lost "confidence" in the official . such actions and proposals would appear to be in the nature of "sense of congress" or "sense of the senate" ( or house ) resolutions in which it has been the practice for the senate or the house to address certain nonlegislative matters , such as to express the opinion or the sense of congress or of one house of congress on a public matter . aside from obvious symbolic , political , or publicity implications , there are no specific legal consequences in the passage of such a resolution , nor is there any legal significance or consequence for the senate or the house to choose one phrase of disapprobation or condemnation over another , or to include or not to include the concept or expression of a loss of "confidence" in an official . to the extent that a resolution containing a "vote of no confidence" purports to present a proposition functionally similar to a vote of no confidence in a parliamentary system , present knowledge does not permit identifying any similar proposition as having been offered in the past . on the other hand , to the extent that such resolution purports to present such a proposition , it cannot , under the american constitutional system , succeed in doing so . instead , the proposition actually presented by a resolution of this nature can only be that of expressing congressional disapproval of a federal official , and in that general respect the resolution is not dissimilar from a number of others that have been offered , from time to time , throughout american history .