a companion bill , h.r . 5904 , did not receive further action . conspiracy , according to the d.c . the tort exception would also have been amended to clarify that there is no rule holding that the "entire tort" must occur within the united states , but rather that such claims are covered "regardless of where the underlying tortious act or omission occurs. additionally , the bills would have expanded liability for foreign government officials in civil actions for terrorist acts no matter where they occur by amending 18 u.s.c . section 2337 , which currently exempts all government officials . the amended version of section 2337 would have exempted only u.s. officials . plaintiffs in the case were victims of the september 11 terrorist attacks . they alleged that the saudi defendants had supported al qaeda's financial backers prior to the attacks and were therefore civilly liable for plaintiffs' injuries . however , the court of appeals did not reach the merits of these allegations . aliens as well as u.s. nationals would likely be able to bring lawsuits under causes of action other than the ata if jurisdiction is available under the new fsia exception . instead , the court held that u.s. courts lack jurisdiction over the claims against the saudi defendants . the legal bases for this holding were lack of subject matter jurisdiction under the fsia and lack of personal jurisdiction . the most significant aspects of the court of appeals' opinion were interpretations of the fsia , namely ( 1 ) its interpretation of "agency or instrumentality" under the fsia as extending both to the saudi charity and to individuals sued in their official capacities , and ( 2 ) its interpretation of the commercial activities and tort exceptions under the fsia as having a narrower scope than plaintiffs had advocated . the supreme court later abrogated the first of these holdings , and the second circuit reversed its own position with respect to the tort exception to foreign sovereign immunity . in december 2013 , the second circuit ordered these claims against saudi arabia and its agencies or instrumentalities be reinstated in the interest of justice to determine whether the tort exception applies . the district court again dismissed the claims based on foreign sovereign immunity , and the case is on appeal at the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit . on remand to the district court , judge daniels of the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york dismissed the claims against the kingdom of saudi arabia and the shc , holding the fsia tort exception does not apply because of the "entire tort" rule , and suggested that the discretionary act exception to the tort exception might otherwise apply to preclude jurisdiction . in a separate decision in in re terrorist attacks on september 11 , 2001 , the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit affirmed the dismissal of claims against five defendants whose cases had been dismissed by the district court for failure to state a claim on which relief could be granted .