the house ( h.r . the final amount in p.l . 110-161 was $496 million . also in the od account for the first time in fy2007 was $69 million for the national children's study . this long - term ( 25+ year ) environmental health study was proposed for cancellation in the fy2007 request . the multi - agency study , mandated by the children's health act of 2000 ( p.l . 106-310 ) , plans to examine the effects of environmental influences on the health and development of more than 100,000 children across the united states , following them from before birth until age 21 . the overall projected cost for the whole study is about $2.7 billion . for fy2007 , both appropriations committees directed nih to continue with the study , and the cr provided the $69 million . the fy2008 request again included no funding for the study , but the final appropriation provided $110.9 million to od for its continued support . the nih's two major concerns in the face of tight budgets are maintaining support of investigator - initiated research through research project grants ( rpgs ) , and continuing to nourish the pipeline of new investigators . the fy2008 request concentrated resources on supporting research grants , planning to fund 10,188 competing rpgs , one of the highest numbers ever . however , the expected "success rate" of applications receiving funding would have remained at about 20% , and scientists with non - competing ( continuation ) grants would not have received inflationary increases for their costs . both committee reports indicated that their funding would have supported a larger number of grants than the request and would have funded some increases in the average costs of grants . the explanatory statement for p.l . 100-161 says that it "provides funding for a low percent increase in the average cost of new as well as non - competing grants. several efforts were focused on supporting new investigators , to encourage young scientists to undertake careers in research despite the discouraging financial climate , and to help them speed their transition from training to independent research . the request and the bills included increases for new types of awards such as the pathway to independence , the directors' bridge awards , and new innovator awards in the common fund . the director's pioneer awards to encourage high risk research were also supported , as were clinical research training and the new clinical and translational science awards . in the final appropriation , the explanatory statement indicates that the pioneer , new innovator , and bridge awards were funded at fy2007 levels , and that the pathways to independence program received funding at the level of the president's request . the biodefense research portfolio was slated in the request to increase slightly by cycling one - time extramural construction costs into other research areas . the senate bill as reported included legislative language on human embryonic stem cell research , expanding access to stem cell lines and tightening ethical guidelines for their use . to avoid controversy , however , the provisions were dropped before the bill went to the floor .