there will undoubtedly be more cases involving the ada amendments act . the eeoc announced on september 9 , 2010 , that it was filing suit in three cases using the new definition of disability . these cases involved individuals with diabetes , cancer , and severe arthritis . the court reasoned that since the plaintiff was seeking prospective relief ( i.e. , accommodations for an examination in the future ) , there was no injustice to the defendant . the case was remanded for consideration and provides no guidance on the substantive interpretation of the adaaa . although the vast majority of ada amendments act cases still turn on the issue of retroactivity , there are a few district court cases addressing the merits of an ada amendments act issue . the eleventh circuit examined what are major life activities in littleton v. wal - mart . the plaintiff , a 29-year - old man who was diagnosed with mental retardation as a child , was not hired for a position as a cart - push associate with wal - mart . the court found that "[i]t was unclear whether thinking , communicating and social interaction are 'major life activities' under the ada" and noted that even if thinking , communicating , and social interaction were found to be major life activities , the plaintiff did not show that he was substantially limited in these activities . since the ada amendments act became effective january 1 , 2009 , there have been a number of judicial decisions which have sought to allege violations of the ada as it is amended by the adaaa . these cases usually have involved fact patterns that took place prior to the adaaa's effective date , and courts have followed the general rule that , absent clear congressional intent , a statute enacted after the events at issue in a suit does not apply . however , in jenkins v. national board of medical examiners , the plaintiff sought accommodations on the u.s. medical licensing examination and the sixth circuit found that the adaaa did apply . in hoffman v. carefirst of fort wayne , inc. , the district court stated that it had "tried in vain" to find relevant case law , noting that this was one of the first cases of its kind . the central issue in hoffman was whether an individual whose cancer is in remission is an individual with a disability under the ada as amended . sutton v. united air lines involved sisters who were rejected from employment as pilots with united air lines because they wore eyeglasses . the supreme court in sutton examined the definition of disability used in the original ada and found that the determination of whether an individual has a disability should be made with reference to measures that mitigate the individual's impairment . the sutton court stated , "'a disability' exists only where an impairment 'substantially limits' a major life activity , not where it 'might,' 'could,' or 'would' be substantially limiting if mitigating measures were not taken.