the nspd e.o . established the nspd program for "professionals in national security positions. in 2010 , during the aborted revision of the nspd strategy and e.o. , program officials signaled their intention to narrow the substantive focus of the program from all national security matters to interagency collaboration on national security matters . the new rules would require , officials noted , that designated "interagency" nsp positions involve not only a substantive focus on national security - related issues , but also regular , practical collaboration with partners from other agencies . the nspd national strategy tasked departments and agencies to "reform employment practices to encourage the hiring of personnel with a variety of experiences from within and outside the federal government," but the original nspd program apparently took little action on that front . one proposed approach would be further developing programs at the college - level , including providing support for national security studies programs , and creating opportunities for student internships in national security fields . other tools might include allowing greater flexibility for mid - career recruitment of specialists from outside the u.s. government , and facilitating transfers in and out of government jobs including providing incentives for valuable experience gained . while that thinking would have changed the program's substantive focus , it would have left intact the premise of using designated billets to define participation in the program . some stakeholders reportedly found this billet - based approach attractive because , in its apparent simplicity , it might require fewer resources for personnel management , and it might require less of participants , who are "in" by virtue of the seats they occupy . others argued , however , that the original nspd program's use of billets to identify individual participants made the program extremely static and self - contained: other than occupying a designated billet , the program established no accession mechanism . it did not make use of any broader "pool" of potential participants . and it included no mechanism to leverage service in its designated billets to bring greater interagency awareness to broader communities in home agencies . the early experience of the original nspd program with billet designation illustrates another potential source of confusion — the use of billets for two different purposes , identifying program participants and providing interagency rotational opportunities . the nsdp e.o . gave the secretary of defense , the secretary of state , and the director of national intelligence the responsibility to issue separate sets of guidance for each of these communities , and then "to coordinate such programs to the maximum extent practicable with the [nspd] steering committee. in practice , this language was widely interpreted to mean that the three communities were welcome , but not obliged , to participate in nspd activities . the argument for avoiding a formal mandate for these three communities to participate is the possible time conflict it might create with their respective , existing career development programs , which already include various forms of training , education , and rotational service . for the military , for example , the requirements for joint professional military education ( jpme ) are robust , leaving little time in a career for additional education or rotational tours .