this report does not discuss or analyze current legislative proposals . part three outlines the policy toolbox seen as being available to policymakers to address the challenge as they define the emerging legislative agenda . rather , it introduces the reader to fundamentals of the climate change issue . part one summarizes current understandings and controversies concerning the science , economics , international cooperation , and other aspects of the climate change policy problem . part two is a brief update on the status of domestic and international policies . the stage for upcoming policy deliberations is set by the existing frameworks internationally and domestically . in considering the alternatives , policy makers may wish to answer for themselves such questions as whether the risks of human - induced climate change are sufficiently certain to call for policy actions to mitigate the causes and / or adapt to perceived inevitable change ; how a domestic policy package can be designed that balances the risks of climate change with costs that are accepted as reasonable and fairly distributed ; how domestic policy would interact with international negotiations to avoid unacceptable climate risks while distributing the effort equitably among countries and sectors ; and when and how to promote appropriate adaptation by private and public decision - makers to the uncertain climate ahead . reports for members of congress , providing more detailed information on topics introduced in this report , can be found on the crs website , on the climate change issues in focus pages , or by calling 707-5700 . states and localities have moved forward with their own plans and regulations in lieu of a strong national framework . primary concerns are the costs , which could reach trillions of dollars over coming decades , depending on policy choices ; the distribution of those costs ; and the effectiveness of policies , with the knowledge that u.s. greenhouse gas reductions would achieve success only if sufficient international cooperation can be achieved as well . debate internationally has revived over how nations may commit to mitigation , adaptation , and technology actions beyond 2012 , the end of the current commitment period of the kyoto protocol to the united nations framework convention on climate change . negotiations are aiming to produce a post - 2012 decision by the end of 2009 . u.s. domestic policy development could influence and support international cooperation or introduce impediments , depending on how the interplay is managed . the stakes are potentially high: the effectiveness of mitigating human - induced climate change depends on action by all major emitters , while the costs of delay , deferral or ineffectiveness have been projected by some analysts to reach many trillions of dollars over coming decades . the developing countries now contribute the major , and most rapidly increasing , share of ghg emissions globally . effectively abating climate change would require ghg reductions in all major countries . available for others who are considering additional actions is an assortment of policy tools that they see as stimulating further reductions of ghg emissions and reducing risks to the economy , specific populations , and natural systems .