if so , what are the policy implications ? would such activities become this century's "sputnik moment" that would spur further investment in u.s. space exploration activities ? virgin galactic , currently based in california with a spaceport under construction in new mexico , has plans for spaceshiptwo , a six - passenger spaceliner . in europe , eads - astrium is developing a four - person spacecraft to make suborbital trips . according to press reports , a number of venture capitalists are also planning to build spaceships or develop private space programs . this , in turn , might potentially help congress determine the most appropriate balance of funding available among nasa's programs during its authorization and appropriation process . for example , if congress believes that national prestige should be the highest priority , they may choose to emphasize nasa's human exploration activities , such as establishing a moon base and landing a human on mars . on the other hand , americans are interested in space exploration . if international relations are a high priority , congress might encourage other nations to become equal partners in actions related to the international space station . if spinoff effects , including the creation of new jobs and markets and its catalytic effect on math and science education , are congress' priorities , then they may focus nasa's activities on technological development and linking to the needs of business and industry , and expanding its role in science and mathematics education . space programs led the list ( 51% ) , followed by welfare programs ( 28% ) , defense spending ( 28% ) , and farm subsidies ( 24% ) . according to a may 2008 gallup poll , sponsored by the coalition for space exploration , most americans ( 69% ) believe that the space program benefits the nation's economy by inspiring young people to consider stem education , and believe that the benefits of space exploration outweigh the risks of human space flight ( 68% ) . the poll also found that most americans ( 67% ) indicated that they would not be concerned if the united states loses its leadership in space exploration to china , while almost half ( 47% ) of the public surveyed expressed concern regarding the five - year gap between the end of the space shuttle program and the first scheduled launch of the constellation program . just over half ( 52% ) of those surveyed in the gallup poll said they would support increasing nasa's budget from 0.6% to 1.0% of the federal budget ; however , when the public was asked how willing they would be to support an increase in taxes if the money was to go to nasa to help close the budget deficit , more than half ( 57% ) reported they would not be willing . nasa's office of strategic communication funded several analyses of the public's attitude toward space exploration based on focus groups and a survey , the results of which were presented in june 2007 . according to an analysis conducted for nasa , the focus group participants were ambivalent about going to the moon and mars and wanted to know why these missions were important .