restitution is a creature of statute . a court may order reimbursement only for those losses authorized by statute . sections 3663 and 3663a recognize three categories of reimbursable losses: property losses , losses relating to bodily injuries , and losses relating to participation in the investigation or prosecution of the victimizing offense . their challenges came to naught . the supreme court held that the seventh amendment extends only to civil actions similar to those tried before a jury when the amendment was ratified in 1791 . as originally cast , ยง3663 ( vwpa ) authorized restitution for "any victim" of any crime proscribed in title 18 of the united states code , but did not define the term "victim. the lower courts rejected the seventh amendment challenges either because they concluded that restitution was a criminal rather than a civil sanction or because , at common law , restitution was not a matter presented to a jury ; in some cases , the challenges were rejected for both reasons . however , if restitution is a criminal sanction , must it observe the constitutional restrictions on sanctions , such as the proscriptions on ex post facto laws , excessive fines , and cruel and unusual punishments ? if the seventh amendment right to a jury trial in civil cases has no bearing , what of the sixth amendment right to a jury trial in criminal cases ? sections 3663 and 3663a authorize restitution orders for the benefit of the victims of the crime of conviction , and expressly define the term "victim" ( i.e. , "a person directly and proximately harmed as a result of the commission of an offense for which restitution may be ordered" ) . a victim is also someone harmed by a scheme , conspiracy , or pattern of activity that is an element of the crime of conviction . and , a victim may be someone whom the government and the defendant agree in a plea bargain is entitled to restitution . harm is directly caused by the defendant's offense of conviction when the harm would not have occurred but for that misconduct . on the question of retroactive application of new laws and the ex post facto clause , there is no consensus among the lower federal appellate courts , although a majority take the position that the clause applies and , consequently , exposure to increased restitution liability may not be applied retroactively . the scant case law available on the issue indicates that the eighth amendment's excessive fines clause , as well as its cruel and unusual punishment clause , mark the outer bounds of the courts' restitution authority . these limitations , however , impose no real impediments . they condemn fines and punishments that are grossly disproportionate ; restitution , by definition under federal law , must be precisely proportionate to the harm caused by the offense .