the provisions of h.r . 393 also were included as a separate title in three budget reform bills . the spending reform act of 2009 ( h.r . 311 , title ii ) , to cap discretionary spending , eliminate wasteful and duplicative agencies , reform entitlement programs , and reform the congressional earmark process , was introduced by representative brady and 16 original cosponsors on january 8 , 2009 . the bill was referred to the committee on the budget , and , in addition , to the committees on rules , and oversight and government reform , for consideration of those provisions falling within their respective jurisdictions , and for a period to be determined by the speaker . the responsible government empowerment act of 2009 ( h.r . 534 , title i ) , to improve the ability of congress to set spending priorities and enforce spending limits , was introduced by representative randy neugebauer on january 14 , 2009 . the bill was referred jointly to the committees on house budget , house rules , and house oversight and government reform , and subsequently to the subcommittee on government management , organization , and procurement . the spending , deficit , and debt control act of 2009 ( h.r . 3964 , title iv , subsection a ) , to reform federal budget procedures , to impose spending and deficit limits , to provide for sustainable fiscal future , and for other purposes , was introduced on october 29 , 2009 , by representative hensarling along with 20 cosponsors . the bill was referred to the committee on the budget , and , in addition , to the committees on rules , appropriations , oversight and government reform , and ways and means , for consideration of those provisions falling within their respective jurisdictions , and for a period to be determined by the speaker . senator cornyn and four cosponsors introduced s. 926 , the united states authorization and sunset commission act of 2009 , on april 29 , 2009 ; the bill was referred to the senate committee on homeland security and governmental reform . in remarks accompanying the introduction of the bill , senator cornyn stated that the bill represented an important step to making sure that congress gets back to the hard work of oversight to determine if programs actually fulfill their stated purposes or yield some unintended or counterproductive results . periodic assessments are essential to good government and this is what the commission will provide to congress and to taxpayers across the country . in the first session of the 111 th congress , the congressional budget resolution for fy2010 , s.con.res . 13 , as passed by the senate provided for the establishment of a deficit - reduction reserve fund for the bipartisan congressional sunset commission . such a reserve fund was not among those included in the house - passed version , however , nor was it retained in the conference version of s.con.res . 13 , as approved by both chambers . the following discussion highlights some similarities and differences between three bills introduced in the 111 th congress to establish a sunset commission , h.r .