hoepa has been extended to cover more loans . since 2002 , coverage has been extended by lowering the price trigger from 10 to the current 8 percentage points above a comparable treasury security . the federal reserve board has also amended regulation z to apply hoepa rules to all mortgage lenders ( and not just those supervised and examined by the federal reserve ) . the amended rule added four key protections . finally , escrow accounts for property taxes and homeowners' insurance must be established for all first lien mortgages . additional protections covered in the rule are described in the federal reserve announcement . hoepa loans may have been considered a subset of the larger set of hmda loans when both rate spread calculations relied upon comparable u.s. treasury securities for the benchmark rates . now that the federal reserve has modified the benchmark rates used to compute hmda rate spreads , hmda and hoepa rate spreads will be calculated under separate methods . the benchmark rate for computing hoepa loans is defined by federal statute , and modification of the benchmark rate for hoepa loans would be left for congress to decide . loans meeting the existing hoepa thresholds may still simultaneously meet the newly adopted hmda thresholds . hoepa rate spreads , however , will now be more sensitive to treasury yield curve movements than hmda rate spreads . mortgage insurance is usually required for borrowers lacking either a downpayment or home equity of at least 20% of the property value . prime ( or conventional ) as well as subprime homebuyers may purchase private mortgage insurance . the federal housing administration ( fha ) is a federally operated mortgage insurance program that primarily serves first - time and less creditworthy borrowers . should the borrower default on a fha - insured mortgage loan obligation , the lender will be reimbursed for the loss . the fha is a self - financing program under which premiums must be sufficient to cover its costs and expected losses . fha fees are collected via an upfront premium charge when the loan is originated and an annual premium charge thereafter . after passage of the housing and economic act of 2008 , fha received the statutory authority to charge up to 3% in its upfront premium and 0.55% annually . consequently , the bulk of the total mortgage insurance premium must be collected upfront , and fha has little flexibility to collect a larger portion of the insurance fees via the annual premium mechanism . fha - insured mortgage loans , therefore , run the risk of hitting the 1.5% threshold of reportable hmda rate - spread loans . the fha upfront premium charges would likely be calculated in the apr of the mortgage loan , which would cause the rate - spread to be higher . the flexibility to shift how the fha insurance fees are collected or , more specifically , to make greater use of the annual premium mechanism , arguably has at least three advantages . first , annual premium collections would reduce the risk of fha loans being incorrectly identified as higher - priced loans under hmda reporting requirements .