relatedly , h.r . 2339 ( the family income to respond to significant transitions act ) would initiate a grant program to assist states interested in supplementing the income of parents who take leave for such reasons as the birth or adoption of a child , or to care for a newly born or adopted child , or who leave their jobs to care for a seriously ill infant . while "[d]uring the past two decades , the generosity of paid parental leave has increased in all oecd countries , with the exceptions of ireland , the united kingdom and several countries with no legislation mandating paid leave [such as the united states]," the organization remains focused on leave and other policies thought to ameliorate work - family conflict . the continuing interest of these governments in encouraging more women to participate in the labor force is partly motivated by concern about the impact of population aging on the future labor supply , and hence , the future rate of economic growth , in member nations . the economic rationale underlying paid family leave is that it will increase the amount of labor supplied by women with child care ( and increasingly elder care ) obligations and thereby mitigate the slowdown in overall labor force growth . in the united states , concern about an impending labor shortfall because of an aging population also contributes to interest in greater involvement of the federal government in the provision of paid family - related leave . leave benefits — which represent 7% of total compensation — receive short shrift compared to the information on some other supplements to wages voluntarily provided by employers . as a result , there is limited publicly available data on gender , age , and other demographic characteristics of workers by employer provision of paid leave . bls more often looks to employers for information on benefits because they "typically furnish more reliable information than households do on the details of employer - provided benefit plans and the employers' costs for providing those benefits. the national compensation survey ( ncs ) collects information from companies on benefit incidence as well as compensation cost levels and trends . for example , the government's primary survey of the labor force — the current population survey ( cps ) — does not ask households about time off from work , while it does ask about health and retirement benefits . ( these benefits respectively account for about 8% and almost 5% of total compensation ) . firm size , as measured by the number of employees , is one of the company characteristics for which the ncs obtains data . again , employer rather than household surveys are a better source of size information . although the ncs lacks demographic information on employees receiving benefits , it does afford data by job characteristics ( eg , occupation , industry , and earnings ) . some private firms conduct compensation surveys , but the results may be proprietary , very expensive to access , or not representative of typical business practices ( eg , if the survey covers primarily large corporations ) .