haiti's poverty is massive and deep . the four elements of this program include ( 1 ) investment in primary schools to achieve equitable access to quality basic education ; ( 2 ) supporting the social integration of adolescents through vocational / technical education ; ( 3 ) strengthening the capacity of the ministry of education ; and ( 4 ) increasing government oversight of education at the local level . the proposed fy2007 funding for this program is $4.6 million in development assistance ( da ) , and $6 million in economic support funds ( esf ) . overall , the bush administration requested $198 million for haiti for fy2007 . levels for child survival and health , development assistance , and counternarcotics assistance funds decreased . hiv / aids funding increased as part of the president's emergency plan for aids relief . the administration's fy2008 request of $223 million represents increases in economic support funds and hiv / aids funding , but decreases in all other categories of aid to haiti from fy2006 and proposed fy2007 levels . comparing fy2006 levels to fy2008 requested levels of aid to haiti , esf would increase from $49.5 million to $63.5 million ; global hiv / aids initiative funding would increase from $47.3 million $83 million . child survival and health would decrease from $19.8 million to $18.0 million ; development assistance would decrease from $29.7 million to $14.8 million ; foreign military financing from $98,000 to $0 ; international military education and training from $213,000 to $200,000 ; international narcotics control and law enforcement would decrease from $17.5 million to $9 million , and p.l . 480 food assistance would decrease from $39.5 million to $34.5 million . according to the imf mission chief for haiti , the préval administration has made concerted efforts to continue the strong macroeconomic performance initiated by the interim government , maintaining fiscal discipline and continuing structural economic reforms , such as passing a new organic budget law . most analysts agree , however , that even strong macroeconomic performance will not be enough to reduce poverty in haiti . the imf points out that enormous political , technical , and institutional challenges must also be overcome before poverty reduction objectives can be achieved . the world bank and others say that it is highly unlikely that economic growth will reduce poverty as long as haiti's income inequality remains as high as it is — and by 2030 the income gap is expected to grow . three factors contributing to income inequality are: a large disparity in the capacity to generate income , with the rural areas having the least capacity ; access to education , which only half the population has ; and whether or not a household receives remittances from abroad . analysts say that policy aimed at reducing income inequality in haiti should address decentralization , to provide more and better infrastructure and services throughout the country . according to the world bank , public spending on education that is targeted toward the poor can reduce poverty in both the short - and long - term .