congo . note that while the united states has been reducing its direct investments in the country , china has been increasing its assets there . neither country , however , has more than $100 million invested there . figure 29 compares the amounts of u.s. and chinese direct investments in sudan . this is another african country undergoing political turmoil . again , there appear to be inconsistencies between annual flows and cumulative stocks in china's reported data , but the data indicate that while u.s. fdi there has virtually disappeared , china's stock was approaching $500 million . much of this investment has been in the oil and gas industry . figure 30 shows various oil and gas concessions in sudan . the china national petroleum corporation has been active in partnering with the sudanese government's sudapet and other multinational oil companies in developing sudan's oil industry , funding the building of upstream resources , constructing industry infrastructure including the export pipeline and downstream facilities . china's concessions include block no . 1 ( greater nile petroleum operating company , a consortium that includes the china national petroleum corporation ) ; block no . 3 ( petronas carigali ( malaysia ) , sudapet ( sudan ) and china national petroleum corporation ( cnpc ) ; block no . 6 ( china national petroleum corporation ) ; and block no . 7 ( sudapet and china national petroleum corporation ) . in latin america , china's outbound direct investment has been relatively small . the data in figure 31 exclude investments in offshore tax havens ( cayman islands and the british virgin islands ) because that investment often is directed elsewhere — even back to china . in 1999 , china's fdi to latin america peaked at $206 million . in 2006 , the total was less than $100 million . as seen in figure 32 ( denominated in billions of dollars ) , latin america is a major destination for u.s. direct investment that dwarfs that of china . in the middle east ( including egypt ) , china has been actively seeking secure supplies of petroleum . as shown in figures 33 and 34 , even though chinese investments have been rising in recent years , they still are small compared with those from the united states . china established its major sovereign wealth fund , the china investment corporation ( cic ) on september 29 , 2007 — six months after it first announced its intention to create such a fund . financed with $200 billion in initial capital , the cic is the sixth largest sovereign wealth fund ( swf ) in the world , according to one assessment . china's sovereign wealth fund potentially could provide beijing with another instrument to project its soft power around the world . whether or not china's political leaders created the cic with this in mind is difficult to determine . similarly , it is uncertain if china's state council is willing and able to use the cic as an instrument of soft power .