annual appropriations will be a key venue in this debate . some have argued that it would be a better public policy choice to continue to store nuclear waste on - site at the power plants where it is produced while continuing to search for as a safer , more cost - effective solution to permanent disposal of spent nuclear fuel and high - level nuclear waste . a larger issue is how will the continuing controversy over the yucca mountain project affect the u.s. nuclear power industry and its role in broader national energy policy . on july 9 , 2004 , the u.s . circuit court of appeals for the district of columbia dismissed the nei groundwater challenge , and all but one of the challenges by nevada and nrdc . on the issue of the 10,000-year compliance standard , the court upheld the challenge and vacated the 2001 standard , ruling that the 10,000-year compliance time frame was not "based upon and consistent with" the nas finding that "there is no scientific basis for limiting the time period to 10,000 years or any other value ..." and their recommendation "that compliance assessment be conducted for the time when the greatest risk occurs within the limits imposed by long - term stability of the geologic environment. in response to the court decision , epa proposed a new version of the yucca mountain standard on august 22 , 2005 . the proposal retained the dose limits of the 2001 standard for the first 10,000 years but proposed a higher annual dose of 350 mrem / yr for the period of 10,000 years through 1 million years . the energy policy act ( epact ) of 1992 ( p.l . 102-486 ) maintained these roles , but established new requirements specific to the yucca mountain , nevada site . epa was directed to issue new environmental standards specifically for the yucca mountain repository site . nei challenged the groundwater protections as unnecessary , contrary to recommendations of the nas , and outside the agency's authority under the epact . epa based the standard on variations in natural background radiation between colorado and amargosa valley , nevada , arguing that it was reasonable to use natural background as a benchmark for exposure when the compliance point was up to 1 million years in the future . the agency also argued that it was reasonable to consider protective exposures no greater than residents of colorado experience today from natural background radiation alone . epa also proposed basing the post - 10,000-year standard on the median dose , rather than the mean , an approach that some argued would make it easier for doe to meet the standard . nevada state officials called epa's proposed standard far too lenient and charged that it was "unlawful and arbitrary. comments submitted to the public docket both praised and attacked epa's proposal . those in favor of the proposal focused on the unprecedented time frames and the reasonableness of drawing comparisons with natural levels of radioactivity ; opponents claimed that the proposal violated epa's basic principles of public health protection and was designed specifically to allow the facility to be built . comments submitted to the public docket both praised and attacked epa's 2005 proposal .