carsi . analysts have criticized carsi for lacking a comprehensive strategy and rigorous monitoring and evaluation . to what extent , if at all , does carsi have a guiding strategy behind its programs ? how has that strategy evolved over time ? how are the successes or gaps in the implementation of that strategy being measured and adjusted ? leveraging u.s. a ssistance . to what extent are u.s. anti - gang efforts being coordinated with those of other donors ? has the private sector stepped forward to complement any donor - led initiatives ? have any recipient countries been able to take over responsibility for programs that began with u.s. funding ? how effective are regional anti - gang efforts ? new tools . to what extent are countries in the region using new tools — such as asset forfeiture and wiretapping — to go after the gangs ? how has the treasury designation of ms - 13 as a tco affected u.s. and salvadoran efforts against that gang ? gangs as terrorist groups . what are the implications of the government of el salvador designating gangs as terrorists ? the data are accessible to central american police officials . transnational anti - gang ( tag ) units : a program that began in el salvador in october 2007 involving the creation of vetted police units that work with fbi agents stationed in san salvador to investigate gang - related cases that have a nexus with the united states . tag activities have been expanded into guatemala and honduras and have contributed to successful indictments of ms - 13 members in major cities across the united states . central american law enforcement exchange ( calee ) : a joint fbi - inl program that brings law - enforcement officials from central america together with their counterparts from several large u.s. cities to share information and intelligence . since 2005 , ice's operation community shield has led to the arrest of more than 32,200 gang members in the united states , including thousands of ms - 13 and 18 th street gang members . in addition to operation community shield , ice formed an anti - gang task force in honduras to gather intelligence to support gang investigations in honduras and the united states . ice special agents are also based at other u.s. embassies in the region , including in guatemala and el salvador . ice supports transnational criminal investigative units ( tcius ) in el salvador , honduras , guatemala , and panama . governments also support some programs . the honduran government has provided $3 million from its security tax to support usaid's violence - prevention programming . through vanderbilt university , usaid concluded a rigorous three - year impact evaluation of its carsi - funded community - based crime and violence - prevention programs in 120 high - crime urban treatment and control communities in el salvador , guatemala , honduras , and panama . final results demonstrated that crime victimization is lower and public perception of security is higher in usaid's carsi treatment communities . until recently , however , usaid and inl were working in separate municipalities and were not closely coordinating their efforts .