of farm milk . several measures were enacted to provide short - term extensions of many expiring usda programs , including the dpsp , so that congress could complete work on a new farm bill . historically , the supported farm price for milk is intended to protect farmers from price declines that might force them out of business and to protect consumers from seasonal imbalances of supply and demand . usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) supports milk prices by its standing offer to purchase surplus nonfat dry milk , cheese , and butter from dairy processors . government purchases of these storable dairy products indirectly support the price of milk for all dairy farmers . under the 2002 farm bill , prices paid to the processors were set administratively by usda at a level that would permit them to pay dairy farmers at least the federal support price for their milk . prior to passage of the 2008 farm bill , in order to achieve the support price of $9.90 per cwt . of milk specified in the 2002 farm bill , usda had a standing offer to processors to purchase surplus manufactured dairy products at the following prices , which were administratively established by usda: $1.05 per pound for butter , $0.80 for nonfat dry milk , $1.13 per pound for block cheddar , and $1.10 per pound for barrel cheese . whenever market prices fell to the support level , processors generally made the business decision of selling surplus product to the government rather than to the marketplace . consequently , the government purchase prices usually served as a floor for the market price , which in turn indirectly supported the farm price of milk at $9.90 per cwt . government purchases of surplus dairy products have been relatively small since late 2003 , as market prices have remained above the support price . in the early 1980s , the support price was $13.10 per cwt . and government purchases peaked at $2.6 billion in 1983 . a gradual decline in the support price to $9.90 significantly reduced the cost of the program from peak levels . in late 2008 and early 2009 , after several years of relative inactivity , the price support program resumed purchases following a decline in milk product prices . usda estimated that it removed 115 million pounds of nonfat dry milk in 2008 and expects to remove 320 million pounds in 2009 , along with small amounts of cheese and butter . first authorized in 1985 , the dairy export incentive program ( deip ) provides cash bonus payments to u.s. dairy exporters . the program was initially intended to counter foreign ( mostly european union ) dairy subsidies , but subsequent farm bill reauthorizations expanded its purpose to market development . payments since the program's inception have totaled $1.1 billion , with the most recent expenditures made in fy2004 . the program was active throughout the 1990s , peaking in 1993 with $162 million in bonuses ( see table 4 ) . u.s. dairy product exports made with deip bonuses are subject to annual limitations under the wto uruguay round agreement .