the privilege was restored in 1847 . when the general franking privilege was abolished in 1873 , postmasters were restricted to the use of penalty mail for official government communications . representatives and senators are authorized a specific dollar allotment for franked mail , according to a formula based on the number of addresses in their districts / states . the first franking statute , passed by the continental congress in 1776 , authorized free mail for revolutionary soldiers . this option , however , does not directly address contemporary concerns about the frank . because all franking is now individually charged against member expense accounts , switching to a stamp allowance would have only a symbolic effect as an abolition of the frank . a second option would be for members to use the penalty mail system under the same restriction as other federal employees . this would restrict members from sending any mail matter other than official correspondence in response to constituent requests . this option would likely reduce congressional mail costs significantly . it could also impair the ability of members to communicate with their constituents . a ban on all unsolicited mass mailings could potentially save millions of dollars in congressional mail costs and reduce concerns about the effect of franked mass mailings on congressional elections . a related option would be to reduce the number of mailings that constitute a mass mailing to a smaller number from 500 . 2687 introduced by representative ray lahood during the 110 th congress , would have effectively prohibited representatives from mass mailing newsletters , questionnaires , or congratulatory notices . the prohibition would not have covered certain other types of mass mailings made by members , including federal documents ( such as the congressional record ) or voter registration information . the proposed legislation would have applied only to representatives ; it would not have affected mass mailings made by senators . similarly , h.r . 5151 , introduced in the 111 th congress , would have restricted franked materials to documents transmitted under the official letterhead of members . a ban on all unsolicited mass mailings could potentially save millions of dollars in congressional mail costs and reduce concerns about the effect of franked mass mailings on congressional elections . unlike a ban on mass mailing , however , a ban on unsolicited mailings might be governed by rules similar to the house's current email policy , allowing unsolicited mass communications to constituents on a subscriber list . opponents argue that a prohibition on unsolicited mail would restrict the ability of members to communicate with their constituents . bills to extend the current pre - election ban on mass mailings have been introduced in congress in recent years , ranging from an extension of the prohibited period to 120 days prior to the general and primary elections to a year - long ban that would prohibit mass mailings during the second session of each congress . some critics of the franking privilege have raised concerns about its effect on elections and have advocated giving franking privileges to challengers in congressional elections .