transmittal no . kuwait on october 4 , 2007 , congress was notified of a possible sale to upgrade three l - 110-30 aircraft , ( a commercial version of the c - 130 aircraft ) to include modifications , spare and repair parts , support equipment , publications and technical data , flight engineer training , communications equipment , maintenance , personnel training and training equipment , u.s. government and contractor engineering and logistics support services , preparation of the aircraft for shipment , and other related elements of logistics support . the estimated value of the sale , if all options are exercised , could be as high as $250 million . transmittal no . on november 9 , 2007 congress was notified of a possible sale of technical logistics support , contractor maintenance , and technical services , in support of the f / a - 18 aircraft to include contractor engineering technical services , contractor maintenance support , avionics software , engine component improvement and spare parts , technical ground support equipment , spare and repair parts , supply support , publications and technical data , engineering change proposals , u.s. government and contractor technical and logistics personnel services and other related elements of program support . the estimated value of the sale , if all options are exercised , could be as high as $90 million . transmittal no . on december 4 , 2007 , congress was notified of a possible sale of 80 pac - 3 missiles , patriot gem - t modification kits to upgrade 60 pac - 2 missiles , 6 patriot system configuration 3 modification kits to upgrade patriot radars to rep ii , communications support equipment tools and test equipment , system integration and checkout , installation , personnel training , containers , spare and repair parts , publications and technical data , u.s. government and contractor technical and logistics personnel services , and other related elements of program support . this sale also will increase the royal saudi air force ( rsaf ) apache sustainability and interoperability with the u.s. air force , the gulf cooperation council countries , and other coalition air forces. the estimated value of the sale , if all options are exercised , could be as high as $598 million . transmittal no . united arab emirates on october 4 , 2007 , congress was notified of a possible sale of 300 agm - 114m3 blast fragmentation warheads and 900 agm - 114l3 hellfire ii longbow missiles , 200 blast fragmentation sleeve assemblies , containers , spare and repair parts , test and tool sets , personnel training and equipment , publications , u.s. government and contractor engineering and logistics personnel services , quality assurance team support services , and other related elements of logistics support . the estimated value of the sale , if all options are exercised , could be as high as $428 million . transmittal no . on december 4 , 2007 , congress was notified of a possible sale of upgrades and refurbishment for three used , excess defense articles ( eda ) e - 2c airborne early warning ( aew ) aircraft with radar and antennae .