sec . 7.1 discretion in filling vacancies . in his discretion , an appointing officer may fill any position in the competitive service either by competitive appointment from a civil service register or by noncompetitive selection of a present or former federal employee , in accordance with the civil service regulations . he shall exercise his discretion in all personnel actions solely on the basis of merit and fitness and without regard to political or religious affiliations , marital status , or race . other regulations provide that office of personnel management ( opm ) approval is required before employees in schedule c positions may be detailed to competitive service positions , public announcement is required for all ses vacancies that will be filled by initial career appointment , and details to ses positions that are reserved for career employees ( known as career - reserved ) may only be filled by career ses or career - type non - ses appointees . during the period june 1 , 2012 , through january 20 , 2013 , defined as the presidential election period , certain appointees are prohibited from receiving financial awards . these appointees , referred to as senior politically appointed officers , are individuals serving in noncareer ses positions ; individuals serving in confidential or policy determining positions as schedule c employees ; and individuals serving in limited term and limited emergency positions . when a department or agency , for example , converts an employee from an appointed ( noncareer ) position to a career position without any apparent change in duties and responsibilities , or that appears to be tailored to the individual's knowledge and experience , such actions may invite scrutiny . opm , on an ongoing basis , and the government accountability office ( gao ) , periodically , each conduct oversight related to conversions of employees from noncareer to career positions to ensure that proper procedures have been followed . an opm memorandum to the heads of departments and agencies that was issued on november 5 , 2009 , reiterated that , under section 1104 ( b ) ( 2 ) of title 5 , united states code , and section 5.2 of title 5 , code of federal regulations , "opm requires federal agencies to seek our approval before selecting a political appointee for a competitive service position during a presidential election year" and "conducts merit staffing reviews of proposed ses appointments whenever they occur. the memorandum noted that , "if the proposed civil service job is below the ses level , opm's review has been limited only to competitive service appointments and only those appointments that take place during a presidential election year. in a significant change to the policy , the memorandum announced that , beginning on january 1 , 2010 , departments and agencies "must seek prior approval from opm before they can appoint a current or recent political appointee to a competitive or non - political excepted service position at any level.