both are discussed below . the first topic addressed in subtitle a is agency clearance of employee scientific publications . the secretary is required to establish and make publicly available clear written policies to implement the publication provisions . for fda officers or employees who are directed by policy to obtain agency review or clearance prior to their work's publication or presentation , fdaaa provides a timeline for such review or clearance . nothing in the policy is to be construed as affecting any restrictions on publication or presentation provided by other law . the second topic addressed in subtitle a is the introduction of a priority review voucher as an incentive to develop medical products that treat tropical diseases . qualifying diseases are those listed in the law , and any other infectious disease the secretary designates by regulation . diseases designated by regulation must disproportionately affect poor and marginalized populations , and must have treatments with no significant market in developed nations . the fdaaa provision adds a new use to the older fda priority review mechanism . rather than ( or in addition to ) providing the possible financial benefit of priority review to a sponsor for its tropical disease product application , fdaaa directs fda to reward that sponsor for developing that product by giving it a priority review voucher that it can use for any one proposed subsequent product that would not otherwise qualify for priority review . the new provision further alters fda's priority review mechanism by allowing the tropical disease product sponsor to transfer the voucher , including by sale , to another entity . the secretary is to establish a user fee program and set the fee amounts for sponsors of human drug applications that are the subject of a priority review voucher . the third topic addressed is the regulation of genetic testing . fdaaa requires that , if the specified secretary's advisory committee does not complete and submit its report and recommendations regarding regulation and oversight of genetic testing to the secretary by july 2008 , the secretary is to enter into a contract with the iom to conduct a study and issue a report on the topic . the fourth topic consists of technical amendments to sections of the phsa ( 42 usc 201 et seq .

 ) , making five changes . though the section is titled "nih technical amendments," the first provision does not apply to nih , but is rather a correction to p.l . 109-417 , the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act , and applies to the hospital preparedness program administered by the hhs assistant secretary for preparedness and response . the provision amends phsa section 319c - 2 to make appropriate reference to the applicable funding formula for hospital preparedness and surge capacity grants . the second provision adds minority health disparities to the types of data that the nih director is to assemble to assess research priorities . the third provision adds postdoctoral training funded through research grants to the list of research activities that the nih director is required to catalog in a biennial report to congress . the fourth provision designates phsa 403c ( relating to the drug diethylstilbestrol ) as 403d .