equation 1 . , vmt ) of its citizens . other factors — especially a state's ratio of high and low carbon intensive industries — are more structural , and thus more difficult ( if not impractical ) to alter through public policy . in addition , depending on the degree to which a state's energy intensity is influenced by its climate , a newly - imposed carbon price may have a greater impact . these factors may be altered through public policy . for example , states could initiate policies or support programs that seek to change the driving behavior ( i.e. in these states , the demand for energy may be less elastic ( i.e. , responsive to price changes ) than other states , because energy is more critical for daily life necessities , such as home heating . low - income citizens may face a disproportionate burden , as a share of income , of price increases in states with substantial heating and / or cooling needs . states with high energy intensity may have a high percentage of carbon - intensive industries ( eg , manufacturing ) . these industries would likely see an increase in their operational costs due to the new carbon price , but they may be able to include the additional carbon costs in the price of their products ( eg , paper , cement , steel ) , thus spreading the costs to consumers in other states . however , passing along the carbon price to consumers may not be financially viable for producers . the ability of producers to pass along the carbon price would be determined by the competitiveness of the market and consumers' willingness to pay higher prices or forego purchases for a particular good . consumers may seek out product substitutes or lower cost suppliers ( which could include foreign producers not subject to a domestic carbon price ) . from another perspective , higher levels in emissions drivers , particularly the energy intensity variable , may suggest a state has comparatively more "low hanging fruit" or lower - cost options to meet emission reduction requirements . as noted above , the states with high energy intensities were also ranked poorly by aceee's energy efficiency scorecard . although these states' energy intensity levels are primarily due to economic structure , there may be room for improvement — via "no regrets" energy efficiency policies — within the framework of their economic structure . along these lines , states that currently use a substantial percentage of high - carbon fuels for energy purposes ( particularly for electricity generation ) may have more options in a carbon - constrained regime than states that are already utilizing a high percentage of low - carbon energy sources . table 1 provides a snapshot of information . annual changes ( or growth rates , which can be either positive or negative ) in the ghg emission drivers will influence whether ghg emissions rise or fall . in order to reduce emissions , the sum of the three variable rates — population , income , and intensity — must be negative .