countries have been held . supporters of the policy argue that having regular exchanges and embassies on the ground in pyongyang may eventually build up the trust necessary to make progress on human rights . by most accounts , north korea's human rights record has not demonstrably improved since relations were established , although supporters of the approach point to isolated cases of progress . some observers insist that increased contact with north korean leadership is the only way to improve human rights in the state , and argue as a result for early normalization of relations between the united states and dprk . however , the u.s. offer is conditional upon thorough and verifiable nuclear disarmament . some advocates argue that behind - the - scenes discussions with pyongyang and beijing are the most effective way to improve human rights in north korea . by staying out of the public eye , the danger of appearing to be interfering in internal affairs could be reduced . although there were few direct exchanges between high - level north korean and u.s. officials when the six - party talks stalled , a revival in direct bilateral contact may provide more opportunities to discreetly raise human rights concerns . in terms of protecting individual north korean refugees , some refugee advocates argue that beijing is receptive to their appeals to take small humanitarian steps if the exchange remains out of the public eye . for example , china might be convinced to quietly stop deportations and arrests , and perhaps even offer legal resident status to north koreans who have married chinese nationals . high - level u.s. officials could raise the issues quietly with their counterparts in bilateral talks . in addition , quiet pressure on other regional countries not to repatriate north korean refugees and to streamline asylum seekers' cases with the south korean government and unhcr could help alleviate humanitarian concerns for fleeing north koreans . the bush administration's hope that a normalization of diplomatic relations between the united states and dprk could begin after the successful elimination of north korea's nuclear weapons and related programs is further demonstrated by discussion of other plans , such as the negotiation of a permanent peace treaty on the korean peninsula , development of a multinational security organization for northeast asia , and economic aid to north korea . however , not mentioned in these headlines are humanitarian and human rights issues , at least for the moment . depending upon the outcome of the current negotiations with north korea and fulfillment of its obligations , refocusing attention on the humanitarian and human rights issues may support the need for additional legislation and oversight by congress . one option that congress might consider is developing legislation that requires north korea to make progress on addressing human rights conditions in exchange for diplomatic relations and an end to u.s. economic sanctions . for example , although the political situations are very different in these two countries , the burmese freedom and democracy act of 2003 could provide a useful model for such legislation . since 1988 the united states has imposed a wide range of sanctions against burma , which , by 2004 , meant that nearly all economic relations with burma had terminated .