global efforts . the united states and brazil are working with other members of the international biofuels forum ( ibf ) to make biofuels standards and codes more uniform by the end of 2007 . ibf members include brazil , the united states , the european union , china , india , and south africa . some argue that the u.s. - brazil agreement could provide the impetus needed to develop a viable biofuels industry in latin america , a region with a comparative advantage in biofuels production . other observers are less sure . they are concerned about the huge investment outlays that governments would have to make to ramp up biofuels production . the idb estimates that at least $200 billion in new investments would have to be made for biofuels to provide even 5% of the region's transport energy by 2020 . skeptics question whether countries that lack the type of enabling environment that brazil possesses — infrastructure , research and extension services , technology , educated workforce , and credit market — should lend their support to biofuels before those items are in place . on the domestic front , some analysts worry that increasing biofuels cooperation with brazil and other countries in latin america may prompt challenges to existing u.s. trade , energy , and agriculture policies . in the past two years , there has been significant congressional interest in issues related to energy security . some of that interest has focused on how to ensure that countries in the western hemisphere , which currently supply about half of u.s. imports of crude oil and petroleum products , remain reliable sources of energy for the united states . another area of interest has been to promote cooperation among latin american countries , which are divided between net energy exporting and importing nations , to ensure that enough clean , affordable , and reliable energy sources are exploited to support regional growth and development . members have cited brazil as an example of a country that has successfully reduced its reliance on foreign oil by using alternative energies . in addition to the importance of following brazil's example in the field of biofuels development , some members have cited the importance of u.s. engagement in regional efforts to develop biofuels and other renewable energies . of the three pillars of the u.s. - brazil mou on biofuels , progress on the first ( technology - sharing ) and third ( working multilaterally to advance biofuels ) pillars are likely to occur most quickly . in the short to medium term , collaborative research and development activities may yield the largest potential benefit for both countries , particularly if they are able to hasten the development of cellulosic ethanol technology . producing ethanol from dedicated energy crops and waste products may allay many of the environmental and food - versus - fuel concerns that are drawbacks of producing ethanol from food crops like sugar or corn . both countries also stand to benefit from working together on the global front to establish consistent ethanol standards and codes , a crucial step in the process for ethanol to become a globally traded energy commodity .