mongolia is a relatively minor u.s. trading partner . in 2008 , mongolia was the 164 th largest u.s. export market ( at $57.2 million ) and its 139 th largest source of imports ( at $52.8 million ) . mongolia has struggled to reform the economy while promoting economic growth . from 1997 to 2002 , real gdp growth averaged only 2.8% . in addition to the effects of the global economic slowdown , challenges mongolia faces over the long term include a weak banking system , sharp fluxes in global mineral prices , high dependency on imported energy , high unemployment , weak rule of law , government corruption , and inadequate infrastructure . since the early 1990s , mongolia has pursued an open and non - aligned foreign policy , seeking supportive friendships broadly in asia and around the world and taking a more active role in international organizations , particularly in the united nations . not surprisingly given its geographical location , the land - locked country maintains good relations with russia and china , its two giant neighbors . as a new democracy , mongolia also places a high priority on cultivating good relations with the united states , which government officials in ulaan bator have referred to as mongolia's "third neighbor. the united states recognized mongolia in 1987 and since then has sought to expand cultural and economic ties . at mongolia's invitation , the united states began a peace corps program there in 1991 , which by 2007 was maintaining about 100 peace corps volunteers in the country . also in 1991 , following the signing of a bilateral trade agreement , the president restored mongolia's most - favored - nation ( mfn ) trading status — now referred to as normal trade relations ( ntr ) — under the conditional annual waiver provisions of title iv of the trade act of 1974 . ntr status was made permanent for mongolia effective july 1 , 1999 , obviating the annual trade status review process , and creating a more stable trade environment . total usaid assistance to mongolia from 1991 through 2008 was about $174.5 million . major usaid programs have focused largely on promoting sustainable private sector - led economic growth and more effective and accountable governance . the administration proposed fy2009 usaid budget would give mongolia $10.4 million . one primary u.s. interest in mongolia is in supporting the country's ongoing transition from a communist state to a nation with a market - based economy and a democratically elected government . u.s. support for both mongolia's political and its economic reforms has been tangible . the united states strongly supported mongolia when it joined the imf , the world bank , and the asian development bank in 1991 . congress annually has earmarked u.s. assistance amounts for mongolia to signal its support . in addition , in 2007 , the house democracy assistance commission initiated a program of parliamentary assistance to mongolia's parliament , the state great hural . from 2000 to 2008 , u.s. exports to mongolia more than tripled , but they remain extremely small .