creating such legislation would have costs and benefits . constituents with concerns about environmental waste or identity theft could sign up for the registry and reduce unsolicited advertising mail from their mailboxes . organizations that rely on advertising mail for revenue , however , could suffer economic losses that prompt a rise in pricing or lead to the elimination of jobs . congress may also consider other legislative action to help usps generate revenues to replace those lost , including increasing federal building flexibilities for usps . current statutes and usps policies place restrictions on renting space in post offices to private vendors like banks and coffee shops . by allowing usps greater flexibility to rent some of its retail space , the service could collect additional revenue to help close its current budget shortfall and possibly replace revenue that could be lost if state or federal level dnm legislation were passed . in regard to resource usage concerns , congress may consider policies that would provide mailers with incentives to use environment - sensitive products and methods . a gao report suggested the creation of a green rate , or "discounted postal rate ... for mailers that use recycled and / or certified paper. the report states that "stakeholders in the environmental advocacy industry" suggested the idea , which "would help mailers offset the increased costs associated with using recycled paper and would provide an incentive for mailers to use certified paper. a green rate could also be used to reward direct mail marketers who heed existing private do not mail registries . if marketers demonstrated that they did not contact consumers who opted out of receiving unsolicited marketing , the company could be deemed eligible for the green rate . additionally , the green rate could also be made available to "demonstrate measurable reductions in the amount of [undeliverable - as - addressed] uaa mail they send" and "use mail materials efficiently. gao stated that a green rate could increase usps revenue , but added that usps would have to conduct a variety of "feasibility studies" to ensure that the service had the technology and resources needed to create a new mail class . usps may need both congressional and postal regulatory commission approval to create a new class of mail . congress could equally choose to not take any legislative action , but instead provide constituents and governmental entities guidance on how to manage the volume and impact of direct mail . members could inform constituents of the previously discussed private registries available to manage advertising mail as well as other options that could reduce it . the national impact of state - level legislation may be of concern to lawmakers at all levels of government . efforts to protect both the environment and consumer identity may negatively affect job creation and usps self - sustainability requirements . existing private - sector efforts that allow a consumer to tailor the solicitations that arrive in his or her mailbox may significantly reduce the amount of unsolicited advertising mail he or she receives . the mail registries , however , have no authority to fine or otherwise penalize organizations that do not heed the lists . congress may consider potential legislative options related to reduction of unsolicited advertising mail .