39 in the senate . this measure , the every vote counts amendment , was introduced by representative gene green of texas on january 4 , 2007 . representatives brian baird and william d. delahunt joined as cosponsors on january 9 . on february 2 , it was referred to the subcommittee on the constitution , civil rights , and civil liberties of the house committee on the judiciary . no further action was taken during the balance of the 110 th congress . sections 1 , 3 , 4 , and 5 of the proposed amendment dealt with the election process . section 1 specified election by "the people of the several states and the district constituting the seat of government. this provision recapitulated existing requirements of state residence ( or residence in the district of columbia ) , and implicitly excluded puerto rico and u.s. territories . section 3 set a plurality , rather than a majority requirement for election . section 4 established in the constitution the joint candidacies currently provided in state law . section 5 empowered congress to provide by law for: ( 1 ) the death of candidates prior to election day ; and ( 2 ) any tie vote in a presidential election . the section 5 language appeared to give congress broad authority in these situations , arguably extending to various options in the event of the death of a candidate or candidates and including such options as rescheduling elections and / or the date for casting electoral votes . in the event of a tie , the amendment arguably sought to empower congress to provide for a second round election to the break the deadlock , or authorize congress itself to break a tie . it is less clear whether the amendment would have made an implicit grant of authority to congress to intervene in the process of replacing party candidates under such circumstances , an eventuality that has historically been addressed by the parties through internal procedures . if so , this would have constituted a departure from current practice and political tradition by empowering congress to intervene in the internal workings of the political parties . section 2 of the proposed amendment contained three elements relating to voter qualifications . first , it specified that voters for president and vice president "shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of senators and representatives.... " this sentence built on , and explicitly extended to the presidential electorate , existing constitutional voter qualifications stated in article i , section 2 ( for the house ) , and the 17 th amendment ( for the senate ) , and as further defined and guaranteed by the 14 th , 15 th , 19 th , 24 th , and 26 th amendments . next , if adopted , it would have empowered the states to set "less restrictive qualifications with respect to residence.... " in contemporary practice , most states have reduced voting residence requirements to an average of 30 days .