appendix a . government debt in other industrialized countries the united states is not the only country whose central government has issued a significant amount of debt . as the figures in table a - 1 indicate , the united states is far from having the largest government debt . why is it important to examine this measure of debt ? when the trust funds run surpluses , they receive ious in the form of treasury securities , as required by law . these surplus funds are then used to finance other government spending . in 1983 , major reforms to the social security program were recommended by the greenspan commission to stave off impending trust fund insolvency . these reforms led to increases in payroll tax collections , among other changes . since these changes were made , the level of surplus in the social security trust fund has been rising and the treasury has been borrowing from it to finance other types of spending , thereby increasing intragovernmental debt . in 1982 , intragovernmental debt as a percentage of gdp reached its lowest level , at 6.6% of gdp . since that time , intragovernmental debt has been rising and totaled 30.4% of gdp in 2009 . budget and debt figures , 1940-200 . increases in gross debt as a percentage of gdp as a result of intragovernmental debt are a significant concern over the long run . when the trust funds begin to owe more in benefits than what they collect in payroll taxes , they will eventually begin to redeem treasury securities in order to pay the benefits owed . this will result in additional strains on the budget as money from general revenues will be needed to fund these benefits or treasury will have to borrow additional debt from the public . in addition , the funds from the trust fund surpluses currently being used by the government to fund other programs will no longer be available , putting strain on the funding for these programs . over the long - term , high levels of debt can have a significant impact on future federal spending and revenue decisions and the economy . in order to keep high debt levels from causing substantial harm to the economy , spending cuts , tax increases , or both , will be necessary . high interest rates , lower rates of domestic investment , and a larger trade deficit could also affect the economy if debt levels remain elevated . long terms projections of debt held by the public show it rising from 53.0% of gdp in 2009 to 90% of gdp by 2020 under the president's fy2011 budget . by 2035 this level could rise to 185% of gdp , under certain policy conditions – a level which would likely have severe effects on the economy . cbo calculates a measure called the fiscal gap in order to quantify the reductions in spending and revenues necessary to maintain the same level of debt at the end of a given period as at the beginning . under current policy , significant increases in debt held by the public are projected , largely due to increased spending for certain mandatory programs .