rev . proc 2007-72 was limited to the afs plan . the irs then issued a separate revenue procedure ( rev . proc 2008-28 ) to clarify more general tax issues relating to modification of securitized mortgage loans . the irs identified conditions under which it would not challenge the tax status of the trusts that hold securitized loans , or assert that anticipatory loan modifications create a tax liability on prohibited transactions . the conditions enumerated in rev . proc 2008-28 are ( 1 ) the mortgage is for a single - family ( one - to four - unit ) dwelling ; ( 2 ) the dwelling is owner - occupied ; ( 3 ) overdue mortgages make up less than 10% of the trust's assets at start - up ; ( 4 ) there is reasonable belief that the original loan will result in foreclosure ; ( 5 ) the loan modification is less favorable to the holder of the loan than the original loan ; and ( 6 ) there is reasonable belief that the loan modification reduces the risk of foreclosure . the sec , which has oversight authority over organizations that coordinate accounting standards , provided a letter dated january 8 , 2008 , stating that it would not object to loan modifications on the basis of fas 140 , but specifically abstained from passing judgment on possible alternative plans or the rights of third parties such as investors . like the irs's tax opinion , the sec's accounting opinion might need to be supplemented if significant features of the plan are changed . although the sec has stated that it would not object to the asf plan based on the npv test , servicers who provide fast track loan modifications may still face from objections from other parties . secondary mortgage market investors could still challenge servicers who provide these modifications on a contract violation theory if they could show that the gains from avoiding foreclosures have a reasonable probability of outweighing the losses from freezing payments at lower rates . for example , if a secondary mortgage market investor could show that only 35% of loans in a particular trust that were modified under the fast track plan would have resulted in foreclosure in the absence of some kind of workout plan , while the remaining 65% of those modified mortgages would not have resulted in foreclosure , then that investor could argue that these modifications did not increase the npv of the trust , and thus the fast track rate freezes were provided in breach of the governing psa . the hope now alliance has accumulated data on the number of loan modifications and repayment plans that have been initiated by servicers per quarter . table 1 presents the quarterly statistics for prime and subprime loss mitigation , including both loan modification and formal repayment plans . the data show that loan modifications and formal repayment plans have been increasing steadily in each successive quarter since the issuance of the framework . total workout plans rose from 398,691 in the third quarter of 2007 to 502,520 in the first quarter of 2008 . second quarter 2008 data are not yet available but an additional 182,901 mortgages received workout plans in april 2008 .