the bill would permit banking of allowances . seventh , s. 2191 ' s climate - related environmental benefit is best considered in a global context and the desire to engage the developing world in the reduction effort . it is in this context that the united states and other developed countries agreed both to reduce their own emissions to help stabilize atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases and to take the lead in reducing greenhouse gases when they ratified the 1992 united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) . this global scope raises two issues for s. 2191 : ( 1 ) whether s. 2191 ' s greenhouse gas reduction program and other provisions would be considered sufficiently credible by developing countries so that schemes for including them in future international agreements become more likely , and ( 2 ) whether s. 2191 ' s reductions meet u.s. commitments to stabilization under the unfccc and occur in a timely fashion so that global stabilization may occur at an acceptable level . for each year 2012 through 2050 , the bill specifies the total number of allowances available , then explicitly states the percentage of those allowances that will go to covered and non - covered sectors , as well as the share that will be auctioned . ( see table 1 . ) over time , an increasing share of the allowances are auctioned , while the allowances to covered sectors decrease to zero . auction proceeds are allocated for various purposes , including technology development and deployment , transition assistance , adaptation , and program administration . ( see table 2 . ) under a proposed amendment to make the bill revenue neutral , a percentage of allowances ( starting at 6.1% , increasing to 15.99% ) would be auctioned off - the - top for deficit reduction ( "deficit reduction fund" ) . after the deficit reduction allowances are allocated , the rest of the allowances ( "remainder allowances" ) are allocated according to the bill as reported . for example , in 2012 , 6.1% of the total number of allowances are auctioned for deficit reduction , and an additional 21.5% of the "remainder allowances" are auctioned for program management , technology deployment , adaptation , and other purposes . in addition to the cap - and - trade program , s. 2191 has other key provisions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions . banking activity reflects the assumed foresight of affected entities to the likelihood of increasing allowance prices ( in real terms ) as the cap tightens . as indicated by the experience with the so 2 program , entities will bank substantial allowances early and use them later as the program's requirements tighten . this results in allowance prices being higher than marginal costs in the early years of the program , and lower in later years . for example , the nma / cra international analysis of s. 2191 has a 2050 allowance price of about $352 under "no banking" assumptions , but an allowance price of about $195 with banking . in contrast , 2015 allowance prices are estimated at $51 for the "banking" scenario , but only $38 under the no banking scenario .