the hloga rulemaking is perhaps the most prominent one now facing the fec . steven walther was unanimously elected vice chairman . pending issues facing the commission include rulemaking to implement portions of the honest leadership and open government act of 2007 ( hloga , discussed later in this report ) , pending enforcement cases and advisory opinion requests , and administering the presidential public campaign financing program . the commission may also need to respond to ongoing litigation surrounding bcra . legislative activity regarding campaign finance has occurred on two fronts during the 110 th congress . first , and most notably , the honest leadership and open government act ( hloga ) contains some campaign finance provisions , but the law is primarily devoted to lobbying and ethics . hloga and the afp extension were the only legislation changing campaign financing policy to become law during the 110 th congress . second , various other bills that emphasize campaign finance have been the subject of committee or floor action , but none have become law . overall , approximately 50 bills that would affect campaign finance policy have been introduced in the 110 th congress . the following discussion provides additional details on campaign finance bills that have been the subject of committee action or floor votes during the 110 th congress . hloga represents the most significant legislative development related to campaign finance during the 110 th congress . more than 50 other campaign finance bills have been introduced in the 110 th congress , but few have received major legislative attention . other significant campaign finance developments have occurred away from capitol hill , particularly at the fec and in the federal courts . fec activity has focused on rulemakings in response to recent congressional activity , particularly regarding hloga . the campaign travel rules are relatively straightforward and consistent with the new lobbying and ethics law . those rules , however , could be clarified by an e&j statement that has yet to be considered . the bundling and electioneering communications rulemakings ( the latter was undertaken in response to the supreme court's ruling in wrtl ii ) are more complicated and , in some cases , less clear . although the proposed bundling rules are consistent with hloga's content , the many questions and regulatory alternatives posed in the nprm and at the september 2008 fec hearing suggest that the agency is still considering how to implement that section of the law . similarly , although the commission has already adopted final electioneering communications rules , what those rules mean in practice will depend on how the fec decides to pursue future enforcement and advisory cases . these issues could also be revisited now that additional commissioners are in office . the long - term effect of the fec's inability to consider major policy questions between january and june 2008 remains to be seen . it is clear , however , that the agency faces a substantial rulemaking and enforcement backlog in the short term . the fact that four of six commissioners are new to the agency could also delay some activities .