there was no limit to the amount of gain on a sale that could be deferred . furthermore , minority ownership was only required to continue for one year from the date of sale . members were also concerned that the short holding period requirement rendered the tax incentive ineffective , because properties could quickly transfer from minority ownership without penalty . in may of 2009 , the fcc issued a fourth further notice of proposed rulemaking in this proceeding . diversity of viewpoint has long been a primary goal of u.s. communications policy . assuming that viewpoint diversity in broadcasting is a compelling governmental interest , the government then must prove that the program is necessary and narrowly tailored to achieve that interest . the supreme court has yet to decide the parameters of a narrowly tailored program in this context , however , examples of narrow tailoring in other contexts and the court's analysis in metro broadcasting may provide guidance . the government must first show that diversity of broadcast ownership is necessary to increase diversity of broadcast viewpoint . the metro broadcasting majority gave weight to the findings of congress and the fcc that minority - owned broadcast stations produced programming that was qualitatively different from their counterparts , and the finding that this programming contributed to broadcast programming diversity . the court also deferred to the findings of congress and the fcc that many minority viewpoints were underrepresented in broadcast programming and that race - neutral methods of increasing that representation had failed repeatedly . with these conclusions in mind , the court found that increased diversity of broadcast property ownership is substantially related to increased diversity of broadcast programming . a conclusion , however , that a policy is substantially related to the achievement of an interest does not mean that the program is "necessary" to achieve that interest . the concerns of the dissenting justices in metro broadcasting could provide guidance for the required nexus between broadcast property ownership and diversity of programming that would support a finding of necessity . the dissenting justices in metro broadcasting found no supporting evidence for the concept that increased diversity among owners increased diversity of viewpoint , much less that a policy favoring minority ownership was necessary to increase diversity of viewpoint . the dissenters observed that the ownership policies were based on the assumption that minority - owned stations provide desired viewpoints , and that stations not owned by minorities do not or cannot provide these viewpoints . the dissenters opined that the fcc was barred by congress from examining the factual basis for the asserted nexus between broadcast programming diversity and diversity among broadcast property owners , and that the evidence purporting the existence of a nexus was too weak to support a finding of necessity . without stronger evidence that this assumption was correct , the dissenters could not conclude that increased minority ownership was necessary to achieve increased diversity of broadcast programming . the metro broadcasting dissenter's opinion could suggest a closer examination by the court of the factual basis supporting the minority ownership program , than the deference accorded to congress's fact finding by the metro broadcasting majority .