appendix a . responsibilities and authorities of the under secretary the responsibilities and authorities of the under secretary for science and technology were established by sec . 302 of the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l . references to radiological and nuclear threats were deleted from paragraphs ( 2 ) and ( 5 ) ( a ) by sec . 501 of the safe port act ( p.l . the full text as amended ( 6 u.s.c . 182 ) is quoted here for reference: responsibilities and authorities of the under secretary for science and technology . the secretary , acting through the under secretary for science and technology , shall have the responsibility for — ( 1 ) advising the secretary regarding research and development efforts and priorities in support of the department's missions ; ( 2 ) developing , in consultation with other appropriate executive agencies , a national policy and strategic plan for , identifying priorities , goals , objectives and policies for , and coordinating the federal government's civilian efforts to identify and develop countermeasures to chemical , biological , and other emerging terrorist threats , including the development of comprehensive , research - based definable goals for such efforts and development of annual measurable objectives and specific targets to accomplish and evaluate the goals for such efforts ; ( 3 ) supporting the under secretary for information analysis and infrastructure protection , by assessing and testing homeland security vulnerabilities and possible threats ; ( 4 ) conducting basic and applied research , development , demonstration , testing , and evaluation activities that are relevant to any or all elements of the department , through both intramural and extramural programs , except that such responsibility does not extend to human health - related research and development activities ; ( 5 ) establishing priorities for , directing , funding , and conducting national research , development , test and evaluation , and procurement of technology and systems for — ( a ) preventing the importation of chemical , biological , and related weapons and material ; and ( b ) detecting , preventing , protecting against , and responding to terrorist attacks ; ( 6 ) establishing a system for transferring homeland security developments or technologies to federal , state , local government , and private sector entities ; ( 7 ) entering into work agreements , joint sponsorships , contracts , or any other agreements with the department of energy regarding the use of the national laboratories or sites and support of the science and technology base at those facilities ; ( 8 ) collaborating with the secretary of agriculture and the attorney general as provided in [7 u.s.c . 8401] ; ( 9 ) collaborating with the secretary of health and human services and the attorney general in determining any new biological agents and toxins that shall be listed as 'select agents' in appendix a of [42 c.f.r . 72] , pursuant to [42 u.s.c .