appendix a . estimated world oil resources appendix b . regional distribution of estimated technically recoverable heavy oil and natural bitume . surface disturbance is another major issue . the oil sands industry practice leaves land in its disturbed state and left to revegetate naturally . operators , however , are responsible over the long term to restore the land to its previous potential . u.s. refinery and pipeline expansions are needed to accommodate canadian oil sands developments . those expansions will have environmental impacts , but the new infrastructure could strengthen the flow of oil from canadian oil sands . this expanded capacity will likely lead to even greater investment in canada . whether u.s. oil sands are developed , congress will continue to be faced with regulatory matters . oil imports from oil sands are likely to increase from canada and the permitting of new or expanded oil refineries will continue to be an issue because of the need to balance concerns over the environment on one hand and energy security on the other . because capital requirements for oil sands development has been enormous and risky , government involvement was seen as being essential in canada , particularly during sustained periods of low oil prices . this private sector / government partnership in r&d , equity ownership , and public policy initiatives over the last 100 years has opened the way for the current expansion of the oil sands industry in alberta . ongoing r&d efforts by the public and private sectors , sustained high oil prices , and favorable tax and royalty treatment are likely to continue to attract the increasing capital expenditures needed for growth in canada's oil sands industry . planned pipeline and refinery expansions and new upgrading capacity are underway to accommodate the increased volumes of oil sands production in canada . u.s. markets will continue to be a major growth area for oil production from canadian oil sands . currently , about 5% of the total oil refined in the united states is from canada's oil sands . even though prospects for canadian oil sands appear favorable , factors such as water availability , waste water disposal , air emissions , high natural gas costs , insufficient skilled labor , and infrastructure demands may slow the pace of expansion . prospects for commercial development of u.s. oil sands are uncertain at best because of the huge capital investment required and the relatively small and fragmented resource base . the task force on strategic unconventional fuels reported that oil sands comprise only about 0.6% of u.s. solid and liquid fuel resources , while oil shale accounts for nearly 25% of the total resource base . under an alberta energy utility board directive ( aeub ) , alberta's upstream oil and gas reclamation and remediation program has expanded industry liability for reclaiming sites . the directive requires a "site - specific liability assessment" that would estimate the costs to abandon or reclaim a site . the government of alberta's department of the environment established a "regional sustainable development strategy" whose purpose is , among other things , to "ensure" implementation of management strategies that address regional cumulative environmental impacts .