but we don't have that choice . so they raise capital from where it exists , and sovereign wealth funds are the most available form of capital right now . or [financial institutions] can dramatically shrink , and we can lose thousands and thousands of jobs . the choice is a simple one , and the issue with sovereign wealth funds can be defined in a single sentence: because they are government - owned , noneconomic factors may influence their decision - making and the pressure they put on companies that they own a piece of . why should we assume that other nations are driven purely by financial interests when we are not ? the political challenges facing u.s. leaders are aptly summarized by senator charles schumer ( ny ) : right now , the u.s. finds itself in a difficult position . some of our financial institutions have made mistakes and need capital . so we're short of capital because of the credit crunch , and in the longer run because of our own habits . we import more than we export ; we consume more than we save . the best choice would be that financial institutions could raise capital within the u.s . given these concerns , congressional attention on swfs has focused on two broad areas , namely ( 1 ) the lack of swf transparency and ( 2 ) the potential use of swf capital for strategic or political ( i.e. , non - commercial ) purposes . these concerns as applied to specific swfs are mapped in figure 3 . the x axis illustrates fund transparency , or levels of disclosure . the y axis measures the active , or strategic , nature of their stated ( or perceived ) investment philosophy . for example , the funds of norway , alaska , and alberta , canada , are conventionally invested in a wide range of investments and are highly transparent . malaysia's swf and singapore's temasek , while also highly transparent , pursue a more strategic approach to their investments , targeting various industries that are of interest to their respective governments . the funds in the upper - left quadrant are of most concern to western policy makers . these are the funds that disclose the least information about their funds and are the most strategic in their investment philosophy . a third issue that has sparked some congressional interest is how the united states taxes gains on investments in the united states made by swfs . at the g7 finance ministers meeting in october 2007 , ministers discussed swfs for the first time , noting that they are "increasingly important participants in the international financial system and that our economies can benefit from openness to swf investment flows. the final g7 communique for the meeting stated that the imf , world bank , and the oecd should explore best practices for swfs in key areas such as institutional structure , risk management , transparency , and accountability .