some bills ( eg , h.r . this report is not an analysis of the broader anwr issue . these revenue estimates are premised on significant changes in federal legislation , as well as a number of other assumptions . to reach these estimates , the following was assumed: ( 1 ) congress authorizes oil and gas production from anwr ; ( 2 ) commercial quantities of oil will be found , currently an unknown ; ( 3 ) the current revenue division of 90% to alaska and 10% to the federal government will be modified by congress to allow a 50-50 split of royalties ; ( 4 ) other current bidding systems apply such as bonus bidding and ad - valorem royalties of 12.5% ; ( 5 ) congress authorizes oil and gas production under native - owned lands ; and ( 6 ) all of the coastal plain , including state waters are available for leasing . the same amount of revenues are projected to accrue to the state of alaska . federal revenues would consist primarily of corporate income taxes on profits earned by oil producers from the production and sale of anwr oil . as landowner , the federal government would also collect royalties from such production on federal lands , which are included in the estimates . revenues from bonus bids from federal leases , and rents on undeveloped leases , however , are not estimated separately , although congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates of bonus bids are reported . in addition , the federal government would collect income tax revenues from the secondary feedback effects as a result of the stimulus to general economic activity . however , these revenues are not included here due to the difficulty in estimation over an assumed 30-year production horizon . note that all estimates of future revenues are not discounted to real 2008 dollars due to lack of available data ; such discounting would result in much smaller revenue estimates . estimates of technologically recoverable oil used in this report include the resources from the federal lands , and assume the availability of resources in native lands in the refuge and offshore state lands ; however such availability is not within federal control . the estimates are based on a 1999 usgs study of the quantity of technically recoverable oil , and they assume that all technically recoverable oil is also economically recoverable . the revenue projections below are very long - term forecasts of what might happen , and not what will happen , given the methodology and the posited assumptions . all of the data used in this estimation are provided by the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) , as documented in the footnotes . in particular , the oil production data draws from a may 2000 eia report based on the resource assessment estimated by the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) in 1998 . note also that , according to the eia and the usgs , it would take between 7 and 12 years after congressional approval to commence production , if feasible , from the anwr area . further , production from the area is assumed to last at least 30 years .