this report will be updated as warranted . , home - delivered meals ) . many of these services are offered through the same programs mentioned above ( i.e. , older americans act , social services block grant , and medicaid waivers ) . access to benefits that directly assist caregivers are often limited by program funding and may be insufficient in coverage and duration . furthermore , coverage for direct benefits to caregivers may be uneven across states . in doing so , the federal government would devote additional funding to new or existing programs or reduce federal revenues , implying increasingly difficult tradeoffs between support to caregivers and federal programs that benefit other populations . alternatively , other policy makers may feel that greater state assistance to family caregivers is warranted , and that the federal government can best serve family caregivers by providing technical assistance to states in service planning and delivery . still others may believe the federal government has a limited responsibility in assisting families who provide unpaid assistance , many by choice , to older individuals . thus , congress may decide that no additional federal assistance can be made available to help family caregivers . in this case , federal policy makers may want to evaluate how best to spend existing funds . this section briefly describes three sets of policies that would expand or enhance the federal government's role in providing direct assistance to family caregivers to older adults . these policy issues , which have either received recent congressional attention or otherwise been the subject of discussion among federal policy makers and other interested stakeholders , are organized into the following topics: enhancing and expanding caregiver services and supports , assisting employed caregivers through flexible workplace accommodations and income security , and providing caregivers with opportunities for additional tax credits . many family caregivers identify the need for enhanced services and supports that can help them with their current caregiving responsibilities and provide further information assistance as caregiving demands change over time . policy makers indicate that services such as respite care can improve care quality , avoid burnout , and allow caregivers to continue providing informal care to an older relative , thus potentially avoiding or delaying unnecessary institutionalization . proponents of increased federal funding for services and supports to caregivers have indicated the need for enhanced education and training for caregivers so that they can develop the skills necessary to provide quality care to a frail elderly population . others have suggested targeting services and supports to those caring for individuals with specific illnesses or disease , such as alzheimer's . advocates have also suggested adding an assessment of the caregiver's needs to the existing eligibility determination and assessment processes for public benefits . the caregiver assessment process would identify and link appropriate services and support for family caregivers . these services could provide back - up support , in cases of emergency , counseling , or respite care . caregiver assessments would also elicit information about the caregiver's health , willingness to provide care , and training and support needs . through the assessment process family caregivers could learn about the resources available to them in their communities .