appendix a . internal consultation: the national fire plan ( nfp ) of the healthy forests initiative the national fire plan , part of the healthy forests initiative , is administered primarily by the bureau of land management ( blm ) and the forest service ( fs ) . joint regulations were issued in 2003 to address the effects of increasing levels of wildfires on listed species . among other things , those regulations turn consultation into a process that occurs wholly within blm or fs , without concurrence by a service , when the action agency finds its project is not likely to adversely affect a listed species . these regulations were issued under the provision for counterpart regulations , which some have suggested could be used as an alternative to the regulatory changes proposed . in some respects , proposed sections 402.03 ( b ) and 402.03 ( c ) resemble the internal consultations that were created under the nfp . a review of the delegation of some esa consultation responsibilities to the nfp agencies may illuminate possible results for similar delegations apparently envisioned in the proposed regulations . in january 2008 , the services , fs , and blm issued a joint report on the nfp in its first full year of experience with these counterpart regulations ( fy2004 ) . the services reviewed whether the two action agencies met the various esa requirements in their preparation of bas . fs and blm documents for their internal review were required to do the following: describe the federal action clearly ; describe the action's direct and indirect environmental effects ; describe the specific area that may be affected by the action ; identify the listed species and the designated critical habitat that may be affected ; compare the list of species and the potential effects to determine if exposure is likely , and if so , whether any exposure is likely to be beneficial , insignificant , or discountable ; and use the best available scientific and commercial data . nmfs and fws constructed separate analyses of the results . table a - 1 is the summary of the 10 projects involving species under nmfs management ; table a - 2 and table a - 3 summarize the 50 projects with fws species . the nmfs review concluded that there were deficiencies in all 10 project assessments in five of the six criteria for evaluation , including the use of the best available scientific information . fws analyzed 50 projects . ( see table a - 2 and table a - 3 . ) of the 43 fs project bas , 18 met all of the review criteria , and 25 missed one or more . six of the 25 ( roughly 15% of the total projects ) met none of the evaluation criteria . of the seven blm project bas , one met all of the criteria , and six missed at least one . of the six , there were two bas that met none of the criteria . overall , 31 of the 53 project bas ( 66% ) were deficient in at least one respect ; 4% were deficient in all criteria .