appendix a . summary of provisions in adufa i appendix b . the animal drug approval process like human drugs , animal drugs must be shown to be safe and effective before they can be marketed . the fda center for veterinary medicine ( cvm ) , office of new animal drug evaluation ( onade ) , is responsible for the premarket review of new animal drugs , and it grants approvals when requirements have been met . ( cvm also regulates veterinary devices but does not require their premarket approval . veterinary biologics are regulated by the u.s. department of agriculture. ) specific statutory requirements for the approval of "new animal drugs" are found in the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) , section 512 [21 u.s.c . specific regulations are primarily at 21 c.f.r . 510 , et seq . in each case , general provisions also apply , such as labeling requirements and enforcement provisions . according to cvm , virtually all animal drugs meet the ffdca definition of "new animal drug. the term does not , as it may sound , distinguish between pioneer ( i.e. , brand - name ) and generic animal drugs . several application names and acronyms used in the animal drug approval process derive from the term "new animal drug. these names and acronyms are described in table b - 1 and discussed below . in this report , the terms "animal drug" and "new animal drug" are used interchangeably . requirements for the approval of pioneer animal drugs begin at ffdca section 512 ( b ) ( 1 ) , and those for the approval of generic animal drugs begin at ffdca section 512 ( b ) ( 2 ) . the respective products are often referred to as " ( b ) ( 1 ) " or " ( b ) ( 2 ) " animal drugs . the animal drug approval process is generally similar to that for human drugs , devices , and many biologics . animal drug sponsors conduct discovery research on drug candidates , including pilot studies of dose and potential toxicity . sponsors seeking to develop a promising drug candidate ( an investigational new animal drug , or inad ) submit relevant information to cvm . usually , the process begins with a sponsor's request for an exemption , pursuant to ffdca section 512 ( j ) , to allow for the interstate shipment of the unapproved product in order that clinical trials of the drug's safety and effectiveness may be conducted . sponsors wishing to begin the fda approval process for an inad submit a new animal drug application ( nada ) to cvm . cvm generally conducts phased review of animal drugs , encouraging sponsors to submit information about a product as it becomes available , rather than all at once , and to maintain ongoing consultations with cvm about technical and other requirements .