that really is the exception. both of the above controversies ultimately ended with the judicial nominations in question being returned to the president and not being confirmed . a key factor in the failure of the nominations to move forward in the judicial confirmation process was opposition to them by home state senators . the opposition , in turn , was based in part , on senatorial concern with not being consulted by the white house prior to the president making a nomination . the episodes in both states underscored that an administration's declining to consult beforehand with home state senators regarding selection of judicial nominees is very much the exception to the rule . the episodes as well underscored the typical importance of such consultation to securing home state senator support for the nominees . historically , as a general rule , presidents , as already discussed , have been much more accepting of judicial recommendations from senators of their own party than from senators of the opposition party . when neither of a state's senators is of the president's party , the recommending role has traditionally been filled by another state official of the same party as the president , such as the governor or the most senior u.s. representative of the president's party from the state . if only one of the state's senators is of the president's party , the role of providing recommendations traditionally has belonged to that senator alone , to the exclusion of any significant consultative role for the opposition party senator . many presidents , however , have selected some lower court nominees from among candidates recommended by opposition party senators . an administration might make special accommodations with opposition party senators for reasons unique to the state in question — for example , to be in keeping with an established practice in the state for its two senators , regardless of their party , to make recommendations to the president ; to minimize potential conflict with particular senators whose support for , or opposition to , the president's judicial nominations , might be regarded as of strategic importance for confirmation purposes ; or to minimize the chances of opposition party senators using the senate judiciary committee's blue slip procedure to block home state nominations in committee . early in the obama presidency , as discussed earlier , a white house official reportedly said the administration would seek out the views of opposition party senators before selecting judicial nominees from their states . one news story quoted the administration official as saying it was "eager to put the confirmation wars behind us — to turn the page and work with senators from both sides of the aisle to achieve at least a bipartisan process. for its part , the senate republican conference , it will be recalled , has said its members "will be unable to support moving forward" on judicial nominees from their states "if we are not consulted on , and approve of," the nominees . each presidential administration , as it considers judicial candidates from states with one or two opposition party senators , likely will address a variety of questions about the kind of consultative relationship it wants with the senators .