75-412 , as amended ) ) . with hud approval , mtw agencies can merge their section 8 voucher , public housing capital and public housing operating funds , alter eligibility and rent policies , modify their funding agreements and reporting requirements with hud , and make other changes . a new version of sevra — the section eight voucher reform act of 2009 ( h.r . 3045 ) — was introduced in the 111 th congress and reported out of the house financial services committee , but not enacted before the 111 th congress adjourned . several section 8 reform bills were again circulated , introduced , or considered in the 112 th congress . no reform legislation has been introduced in the 113 th congress . the following section of the report summarizes reform efforts from the 112 th congresses . a version of sevra very similar to the one approved by the house financial services committee in the 111 th congress was introduced by representative waters in the 112 th congress . the bill proposed to simplify the income calculation process by streamlining deductions , permitting families on fixed incomes to self - certify their income for up to three years , and permitting phas to use tenants' prior - year income to calculate current year income . it would have modified the inspection process to permit phas to inspect units every other year , rather than every year . it proposed other changes , including requiring phas to absorb portability vouchers , allowing phas to establish alternative rent structures for non - elderly , non - disabled tenants ( with limits on how much families could be required to pay ) , and making it possible for phas to use their voucher funding to provide downpayment assistance for first time homebuyers ( without requiring direct appropriations ) . the bill would have established a new renewal funding allocation formula for phas , similar to the formula enacted in appropriations laws since fy2007 , but including provisions for reallocating unused funds and permitting phas to borrow against future appropriations . some have adopted time limit and work requirement policies , similar to those enacted in the 1996 welfare reform law . the major difference between the section 8 voucher reform act of 2011 ( h.r . 1209 ) and the version from the prior congress is that the most recent version did not contain a controversial firearms provisions that had been added during committee consideration . sevra was not considered before the end of the 112 th congress . on june 23 , 2011 , the insurance , housing and community opportunity subcommittee of the house financial services committee held a hearing entitled "legislative proposals to reform the housing choice voucher program. at that hearing , witnesses discussed a draft bill that has been circulated by the subcommittee , the section eight savings act of 2011 ( sesa ) . on october 13 , 2011 , the subcommittee held another hearing entitled " the section 8 savings act of 2011: proposals to promote economic independence for assisted families," where a revised draft version of sesa was circulated .