there are differences , however . lastly , the history of congress is the history of change . lawmaking processes adapt in big and little ways to new pressures , actors , and events . yet one constant is that both chambers must pass a measure in absolutely identical fashion before it can be sent to the white house for presidential consideration . recall that table 1 provides data on the methods used to secure bicameral concurrence on legislation . what the table cannot reveal is that many respected individuals believe that a once little - discussed method — the exchange of amendments between the houses — recently has taken on larger importance in reconciling house - senate differences on major legislation . whether this development is an anomaly , unique to recent congresses , or reflects the wave of the future is not clear . prediction is very hard , yogi berra is reputed to have said , especially about the future . one thing does seem certain , however . if there are continuing issues in convening conference committees , or circumstances warrant their calculated circumvention , institutional leaders seem certain to employ the ping pong method or devise other ways to resolve bicameral differences on legislation . each merits additional discussion . they are the senate's tradition of extended debate ( the filibuster ) ; the polarization that characterizes the modern senate ; and the exclusion of minority party conferees from participating in the bicameral bargaining process . the recent tendency to bypass the conference stage underscores that house - senate interrelationships change and adapt to the broader legislative - political environment of which they are a part . compared with the 1950s or 1960s , today's congress is more open , partisan , workload - packed , and deadline - driven ; there are many more interest groups that influence and monitor legislative proceedings ; and individual lawmakers are not reluctant to utilize parliamentary tools to advance their objectives . because these developments have sometimes made the convening of conference committees problematic , the exchange of amendment procedure — and the concomitant informal negotiations that accompany it — has become a more efficient method for resolving bicameral differences on major legislation . several of the reasons for the heightened importance of the ping pong approach , and the implications that flow from its use on major legislation , seem directly or indirectly related to at least six factors ( setting aside the earlier discussion about the relative ease of blocking the appointment of conferees in the senate ) . the six are ( 1 ) a further enhancement of the role of party leaders ; ( 2 ) limits on the role of committees and their leaders ; ( 3 ) a marginal role of the minority party ; ( 4 ) constraints on the deliberative process ; ( 5 ) the avoidance of procedural / political issues ; and ( 6 ) the lack of transparency . whether these factors are causes or effects of ping ponging , or both , merits brief mention . because cause and effect are hard to disentangle , it is probably safe to say that the six factors reflect both ingredients to one degree or another .