reports to congress are required for each of those programs . section 1204 raises the small business investment act ( sbia ) loan ceilings for certain energy efficiency and renewable energy projects undertaken by small businesses . section 1205 enables qualified small business investment companies to issue energy - saving debentures . section 1206 expands certain sbia provisions to include investments in energy - saving small businesses . section 1207 creates a renewable fuel capital investment ( rfci ) pilot program that taps into venture capital to help small firms develop renewable energy sources and new technologies . a funding authorization of $30 million is provided for rfci over two years . section 1208 requires sba to study the rfci program and issue a report to congress on its findings . section 1301 establishes a federal policy to modernize the electric utility transmission and distribution system to maintain reliability and infrastructure protection . the term "smart grid" refers to a distribution system that allows for flow of information from a customer's meter in two directions: both inside the house to thermostats , appliances , and other devices , and from the house back to the utility . smart grid is defined to include a variety of operational and energy measures — including smart meters , smart appliances , renewable energy resources , and energy efficiency resources . section 1302 calls for doe to report to congress on the deployment of smart grid technologies and any barriers to deployment . section 1303 directs doe to establish a smart grid advisory committee and a smart grid task force to assist with implementation . section 1304 directs doe to conduct smart grid rd&d and to develop measurement strategies to assess energy savings and other aspects of implementation . section 1305 directs the national institute of standards and technology to establish protocols and standards to increase the flexibility of use for smart grid equipment and systems . section 1306 directs doe to create a program that reimburses 20% of qualifying smart grid investments . section 1307 directs states to encourage utilities to employ smart grid technology and allows utilities to recover smart grid investments through rates . section 1308 requires doe to prepare a report to congress on the effect of private wire laws on the development of combined heat and power facilities . section 1309 directs doe to report to congress on the potential impacts of smart grid deployment on the security of electricity infrastructure and operating capability . ( for additional information , see crs report rl34288 , smart grid provisions in h.r . 6 , 110 th congress , by [author name scrubbed]. ) section 1401 identifies this title as the "virginia graeme baker pool and spa safety act. the energy independence and security act ( p.l . section 1403 provides several definitions employed throughout this subtitle . section 1404 sets an industry standard ( asme / ansi a112.19.8 ) as a national performance standard for swimming pool and spa drain cover equipment . section 1405 establishes a grant program and requires that at least 50% of the funding be used to assist states in hiring and training enforcement personnel to implement and enforce standards .