for example , h.r . 2749 would exempt from the facility registration requirements most commodity producers that sell directly to consumers , including an "operation that sells food directly to consumers if the annual monetary value of sales of the food products from the farm or by an agent of the farm to consumers exceeds the annual monetary value of sales of the food products to all other buyers" ( section 101 ( b ) ( 1 ) ) . 2749 also would require that any regulations governing performance standards "take into consideration , consistent with ensuring enforceable public health protection , the impact on small - scale and diversified farms , and on wildlife habitat , conservation practices , watershed - protection efforts , and organic production methods" ( § 104 ( b ) ) . foodborne pathogens include the following . viruses such as hepatitis a often originate from human feces , which can contaminate produce either when handled by infected humans or exposed to unsafe irrigation or washing water . parasites such as cryptosporidium , cyclospora , and giardia can be acquired from human and other animal fecal material directly or through water or soil ; such waste can be generated by both domesticated and wild animals . bacteria including salmonella enteritidis , e. coli o157 , campylobacter , vibrio , and yersinia are ubiquitous and can proliferate on the farm ; the degree to which they are a problem depends on such variables as animal density and housing , feeding practices , water and wastewater treatment and disposal methods , human handling practices , interactions between animals , and the proximity of animals to crop - producing fields and orchards . some hazards are naturally occurring , such as aflatoxin , a fungus that can infect crops , including peanuts and grains . pre - harvest controls are only effective if additional safety problems are avoided further down the food production and marketing chain . there is not always a clear relationship between food safety measures taken — or not taken — prior to harvest , and their impacts on the incidence of foodborne illnesses . also of potential risk to the food supply are numerous nonbiological contaminants . fsma § 101 amends ffdca § 414 and modifies the circumstances under which the hhs secretary could access the records of facilities ( see above definitions for what is or is not considered a facility ) . however , it does not appear to change the definition of a facility ; thus farms would not be newly impacted by this provision , at least directly . however , farms that fall within the definition of "facility" ( eg , those that process some or all of their production for sale ) would be affected . fsma § 102 amends ffdca § 415 to require biennial facility registration , with an abbreviated process for registrants whose information has not changed . for example , although the house energy and commerce committee amended and approved its version of the bill ( h.r . 2749 ) to address small - farm concerns , the version passed by the full house in june 2010 contained additional changes addressing agricultural interests .