in 2001 , sic no . more diverse products are imported . the harbor at pago pago provided , during earlier periods , a naval base , but now it appears to be especially notable as a tuna port . although some tourism has developed over the years , the relative isolation of american samoa has rendered the islands a somewhat exotic destination . fish processing is samoa's single primary private - sector industry . under the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) , the insular minimum wage has been fixed by the secretary of labor through a special industry committee ( sic ) . in early 2007 , the rate for the tuna canneries was $3.26 per hour ; the federal rate , $5.15 per hour . then , in late may , congress adopted a new minimum wage standard: to escalate to $7.25 per hour over several years . at the same time , the sic system was abolished and the insular rate was raised , though in more extended steps , until it might coincide with the federal rate . in 1938 , congress enacted the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) — a measure designed to provide minimum wages and overtime pay , to limit child labor , and to restrict industrial homework . although the act would seem to have applied to the states and the territories ( to puerto rico , the virgin islands , etc .

 ) , little thought appears to have been given to how that act might be applied to jurisdictions that were , in significant ways , economically different from the u.s. mainland . shortly after its passage , the act was modified . in response to industry complaints , puerto rico and the virgin islands were exempted from the full force of the act ( 1940 ) , being placed under a special industry committee ( sic ) structure . thus , puerto rico and the virgin islands were set aside for special treatment under the flsa — a process that would continue , in part , for the next 50 years . under section 8 of the original enactment , the department of labor ( dol ) was required , "from time to time," to convene an industry committee for each industry covered under the act and , through the committee , to "recommend" a rate ( or rates ) of wages that might be higher than those established by the act . section 8 ( b ) states: the industry committee shall investigate conditions in the industry and the committee ... may hear such witnesses and receive such evidence as may be necessary or appropriate... . the committee shall recommend to the administrator the highest minimum wage rates for the industry which it determines , having due regard to economic and competitive conditions , will not substantially curtail employment in the industry . ( emphasis added. ) rates the committee could recommend were not to exceed the statutory standard ( 40 cents per hour ) . the administrator was admonished to "consider among other relevant factors ... competitive conditions as affected by transportation , living , and production costs...." discretion rested with the administrator .