appendix a . presidential death threats and direct assaults against presidents presidential safety is and has been a concern throughout the nation's history . for example , fears of kidnapping and assassination threats to abraham lincoln began with his journey to washington , dc , for the inauguration in 1861 . a much more recent example is the breach of secret service security at a white house state dinner on november 24 , 2009 , where two uninvited guests gained entry to the event . what is the optimum or preferred mission of the usss and whether the mission should consist of both investigation and protection ? is the current allocation of resources ensuring one or both usss missions are efficiently achieved ? the two usss missions — investigation and protection — have evolved over 143 years . the original and oldest mission , which began in 1865 , is the investigation mission . statutorily , the protection mission did not begin until 1906 . in fy2014 , however , the protection mission received approximately 63% of the agency's funding . in fy2014 , the protection mission was appropriated approximately $920 million , and the investigation mission was appropriated $368 million . as described earlier in this report , usss's protection mission employs the majority of the service's agents and receives a larger share of the agency's resources . additionally , the majority of congressional action concerning usss has been related to its protection mission . this difference may be the result of the costs associated with an increase in protecting individuals , events , and facilities . the relevant statutes discussed above illustrate the service's expanding protection mission which includes what federal officials are authorized , through statute , usss protection ; the role and responsibilities of the secret service uniform division ; and the service's role in security for nsses . while congress has maintained usss's role investigating financial crimes , congressional action primarily has addressed , and continues to address , the service's protection mission . an example of this is congress's enactment of p.l . 110 - 326 , the former vice president protection act of 2008 , which requires the service to protect former vice presidents , their spouses , and minor children for a period up to six months after leaving office . another example of congressional interest in the service's protection mission occurred in the fy2008 consolidated appropriations act , when congress specifically stated that the usss could not use any funds to protect any federal department head , except the dhs secretary , unless the service is reimbursed . the service's protection mission has expanded and become more "urgent" due to the increase in terrorist threats and the expanded arsenal of weapons that terrorists could use in an assassination attempt or attacks on facilities . the usss transfer from the treasury department to dhs could be seen as a response to the changing nature of the terrorist threat . the establishment of a single mission , or a distinct primary and secondary mission , for the usss is one option for congress in light of this increased terrorist threat .