ibid . intimidation in the constitutionally proscribable sense of the word is a type of true threat , where a speaker directs a threat to a person or group of persons with the intent of placing the victim in fear of bodily harm or death . because cross burning is often intimidating , and often done with the intent of creating pervasive fear in victims that they are a target of violence , it seems to fall squarely within the type of constitutionally proscribable speech described by the court . the court also recognized that , historically , crosses have been burned for reasons that are protected by the first amendment . the act of burning crosses is common at traditional klan meetings , not unlike the meeting mr. black held during which the cross was lit , and those gathered sang songs , including "amazing grace. however , the majority declined to find that once a law discriminates based on this type of content , the law is unconstitutional . the first amendment does not prohibit all forms of content discrimination within a proscribable area of speech . within the types of content discrimination that did not violate the first amendment , the court cited r.a.v . for the proposition that "when the basis for the content discrimination consists entirely of the very reason the entire class of speech at issue is proscribable , no significant danger of idea or viewpoint discrimination exists. in this case , virginia did not single out cross - burning with the intent to intimidate for certain reasons , such as cross - burning with the intent to intimidate due to racial prejudice , but rather banned all cross burning done with the intent to intimidate regardless of the underlying animus . the majority found the facts of one of the cases it was deciding illustrative . it was unclear from the record whether mr. elliot burned a cross on his neighbor's lawn to express racial hatred or to express his lack of appreciation for complaints about guns mr. elliot fired in his back yard . because the virginia statute was written to include mr. elliot's conduct regardless of his motivation , the statute did not discriminate against his conduct on the basis of the content of the message the cross - burning conveyed and fell within the permissible bounds of content discrimination outlined in r.a.v . the court acknowledged that cross burning is a particularly virulent form of intimidation . as a result , the court held that a statute which criminalizes cross - burning "with the intent to intimidate" is fully consistent with the court's previous holdings . likening the situation to its obscenity cases where a state may regulate only that obscenity "which is most obscene," the court held that a state may choose to prohibit "only those forms of intimidation that are most likely to inspire fear of bodily harm. following the "true threat" analysis , justices o'connor , rehnquist , stevens , and breyer went on to strike down the statute , because it contained another provision that made the act of cross burning prima facie evidence of the intent to intimidate .