circuit's ruling . in order to insure that the rule is implemented quickly , epa proposed a federal implementation plan ( fip ) for each of the states: the fip specifies emission budgets for each state based on controlling emissions from electric power plants . states may develop their own state implementation plans and choose to control other types of sources if they wish , but the federal plan will take effect until the state acts to replace it . the proposed transport rule responds to the court's decisions in four areas . first , the methodology used in the proposal to measure each state's significant contribution to non - attainment in another state uses state - specific data to emphasize air quality considerations , along with consideration of cost impacts . second , the state budgets for so 2 and nox ( both annual and seasonal ) are linked directly to the data measurements of that state's significant contribution to non - attainment downwind and interference with maintenance of downwind state attainment . third , the proposed compliance deadlines are coordinated with the caa's compliance deadlines for the appropriate naaqs . fourth , and perhaps most important , the proposal outlines a "preferred option" to allow affected entities to use intrastate trading and limited interstate trading in their compliance strategies , beginning in 2014 . this last response is an attempt by epa to preserve at least some of the compliance flexibility and cost savings of emissions trading in the transport rule while addressing the concerns of the court . this is known as a "sip call. in the case of both the ozone and the pm 2.5 naaqs , the process of developing effective compliance strategies is complicated by the problem of transported air pollutants . many states cannot attain the standards unless upwind states reduce their pollution . the act recognizes this and requires that those upwind states control major sources of pollution that affect other states: under section 110 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( d ) , sips must include adequate provisions to prevent sources within a state from contributing significantly to nonattainment in downwind states . finding that interstate transport of so 2 and nox contributes significantly to ozone and pm 2.5 nonattainment in the majority of eastern states , epa issued the clean air interstate rule ( cair ) in march 2005 to mitigate the problem . cair was based on a series of determinations by epa with respect to pollution transport , cost - effective pollution control , and compliance feasibility . these determinations were made within the state implementation plan process of sections 110 ( k ) ( 5 ) and 110 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( d ) of the clean air act . no fewer than 32 petitions for review of cair were consolidated in north carolina v. epa . on july 11 , 2008 , the d.c . circuit found several of the key challenges valid . table 1 summarizes the results of that analysis . as indicated , the benefit - to - cost ratio ranged from 20 to 1 , to 27 to 1 .