most ma enrollees choose a local hmo . figure 1 shows enrollment as of april 2007 by plan type , with 5.7 million beneficiaries in local hmos , 1.5 million beneficiaries in pffs plans , 136,000 beneficiaries in regional ppos , and the remaining 1.2 million beneficiaries divided among other types of plans . however , the proportion of beneficiaries enrolled in each plan type varies by state . table 1 shows that in some states , the proportion of ma enrollees enrolled in pffs plans may be as low as 0% or 1% or over 90% . figure 2 shows pffs enrollment over time . interestingly , pffs enrollment was only 22,344 in april , 2003 , and 31,550 as of april 2004 . by april 2007 , enrollment jumped to 1.5 million , an increase of over 4,000% in three years . comparatively , enrollment in all other ma plans was 5.3 million in december 2004 and 6.9 million in april 2007 , an increase of about 30% . there are a number of reasons for this attention . first , enrollment in these plans has risen significantly — increasing from 22,344 beneficiaries in april of 2003 to almost 1.5 million four years later . second , payments to pffs plans are typically higher than payments to other ma plans and higher than expenditures in ffs medicare . recent analysis conducted by the medicare payment advisory commission ( medpac ) demonstrated that in 2006 , payments to pffs plans averaged 119% of ffs expenditures . this is in contrast to payments to all ma plans , which averaged 112% of expected ffs expenditures , and payments to hmos , which averaged 110% . complaints have also been made related to allegedly aggressive and potentially misleading marketing practices of pffs plans , leading some to question medicare's oversight of these plans . most recently , in an agreement with the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) , seven health care organizations representing 90% of the non - group pffs market voluntarily agreed to suspend marketing of their pffs products because of complaints and accusations of deceptive marketing practices . according to cms , the suspension for a given plan will be lifted when the plan meets specified conditions . finally , pffs plans are subject to different statutory and administrative requirements than other medicare private plans , specifically those related to access , quality , review of plan premiums , medicare prescription drug benefits , and balance billing . policy makers and beneficiary advocates are questioning whether beneficiaries fully understand these differences when they enroll in a pffs plan and what their implications are for beneficiary spending , access to providers , and adequacy of benefits . this report focuses on pffs plans and how they differ from two other widely available ma options , local hmos and regional ppos . background information related to enrollment and the characteristics of these plans is presented , as well as a discussion surrounding current issues . appendix provides a side - by - side comparison of the major statutory differences between these three types of plans . it does not include all provisions of the law , rather only those for which there are significant differences .