this is an area of considerable scientific uncertainty . whether the oceans and land surface will continue to be net sinks for carbon if atmospheric co 2 concentrations continue to rise is unclear . alternatively , they may continue to be net sinks , but their capacity for taking up carbon may weaken or slow down . very little carbon is sequestered by deliberate action . ( see figure 1 a . ) geological reservoirs also store carbon in the form of fossil fuels , such as oil , gas , and coal . of these reservoirs ( or pools ) , dissolved inorganic carbon in the ocean is the largest , followed in size by fossil carbon in geological reservoirs , and by the total amount of carbon contained in soils . ( see figure 1 a and table 1 . ) the atmosphere itself contains nearly 800 billion metric tons of carbon ( 800 gtc ) , which is more carbon than all of the earth's living vegetation contains . carbon contained in the oceans , vegetation , and soils on the land surface is linked to the atmosphere through natural processes such as photosynthesis and respiration . in contrast , carbon in fossil fuels is linked to the atmosphere through the extraction and combustion of fossil fuels . the atmosphere has a fairly uniform concentration of co 2 , although it shows minor variations by season ( about 1% ) — due to photosynthesis and respiration — and by latitude . carbon dioxide released from fossil fuel combustion mixes into the atmospheric carbon pool , where it undergoes exchanges with the ocean and land surface carbon pools . thus , where fossil fuels are burned makes relatively little difference to the average concentration of co 2 in the global atmosphere ; emissions in any one region affect the concentration of co 2 globally . the oceans , vegetation , and soils exchange carbon with the atmosphere constantly on daily and seasonal time cycles . ( see figure 1 b . ) in contrast , carbon from fossil fuels is not exchanged with the atmosphere , but is transferred in a one - way direction from geologic storage , at least within the time scale of human history . how much of the fossil fuel carbon ends up in the atmosphere , instead of the oceans , vegetation , and soils , and over what time scale , is driving much of the debate over what type of action to take to ameliorate global warming . how much carbon is stored in the atmospheric pool is important because as more co 2 is added to the atmosphere , its heat - trapping capacity becomes greater . each storage pool — oceans , soils , and vegetation — is considered a sink for carbon because each pool takes up carbon from the atmosphere . conversely , each storage pool is also a source of carbon for the atmosphere , because of the constant exchange or flux between the atmosphere and the storage pools . for example , vegetation in the northern hemisphere is a sink for atmospheric carbon during the spring and summer months due to the process of photosynthesis .