the administrator agreed . a second major issue was whether the proposed range of standards ( as opposed to the final , promulgated version ) was supported by the available science . the range proposed by the administrator , while substantially stronger than the 1978 standard , would have allowed him to set a final naaqs 50% higher ( i.e. , less stringent ) than the least stringent level recommended by both epa's scientific staff and by the independent casac panel . given uncertainties in the science ( particularly the estimated correlation between airborne lead and blood lead levels and the uncertainties in the concentration - response functions — i.e. , the effect that changes in blood lead levels have on iq ) , the administrator stated in the may 2008 proposal that his decision would be supported by the science at any point in the proposed range of 0.10 to 0.30 µg / m 3 . his final choice ( 0.15 µg / m 3 ) fell within the range recommended by epa staff and casac , and , thus , did not provoke controversy . at that level , the standard was supported by the staff's conclusions , which were themselves based on the review of more than 6,000 scientific studies , and by the unanimous conclusions of the 22-member casac review panel . there are , of course , some who wanted weaker or stronger standards . in comments on the proposed range , some commenters expressed disappointment that the administrator did not consider the potential economic impacts in making his choice . these comments were echoed by the association of battery recyclers ( abr ) , following the administrator's decision: in press reports , an abr representative stated that the new standard "potentially threatens the viability of the lead recycling industry. the clean air act does not allow the consideration of costs or economic impacts in the setting of naaqs , however — a point underlined by the supreme court in a unanimous 2001 decision , and repeated by the agency in announcing the final decision . thus , the administrator appears to have been on firm ground in rejecting economic arguments . others , including epa's children's health protection advisory committee ( chpac ) , argued for a stronger standard . chpac cited evidence that lead exposure at low levels poses even greater harm per unit of lead than does exposure at higher levels , and argued that the standard should be set at 0.02 µg / m 3 , almost an order of magnitude below the administrator's final choice . emissions fell more than 98% from 1980 to 2007 . ambient concentrations ( the quantity of lead in the air ) fell by 94% . as of march 12 , 2008 , only two areas with a combined population of 4,664 people had air that remained in violation of the 1978 lead naaqs . these developments led some to suggest that there was no longer a need for an ambient air quality standard for lead .