appendix a . requirements for the community of democracies while the community of democracies does not define what a democracy is , it has established a list of requirements that countries must meet to become members . to become a member of the community of democracies , governments must have the following characteristics: free , fair and periodic elections , by universal and equal suffrage , conducted by secret ballot . the freedom to form democratic political parties that can participate in elections . a guarantee that everyone can exercise his or her right to take part in the government of his or her country , directly or through freely chosen representatives . the rule of law . the obligation of an elected government to protect and defend the constitution , refraining from extra - constitutional actions and to relinquish power when its legal mandate ends . at what point can a country be declared a successful democracy ? for years , the u.s. government has supported numerous bilateral and multilateral activities that promote democracy around the world . both the executive and congressional branches of government are involved . the democracy promotion rubric encompasses a wide range of policies and activities . as noted in the previous section on measuring success , experts have yet to carry out the type of comprehensive studies that can reliably establish a cause - and - effect relationship between efforts and outcomes . nevertheless , there is a general sense that some types of situations are harder to influence than others and require considerable debate over the appropriate balance of u.s. interests and risks to the domestic populations in the high cost - high stakes cases . the following provides an overview of perceptions of different types of cases and the debate about the circumstances in which assistance is appropriate . at the low cost - low risk end of the spectrum are programs whose distinctive feature is that assistance is targeted to countries that have already embarked on democratic transitions independently and with strong domestic popular support , as in central europe , the baltic countries , and some countries of latin america , asia , and africa . such assistance has been requested and embraced by the receiving countries . most of these countries were committed to democratic reforms , with or without foreign assistance , and might have succeeded without it . it is difficult to document and quantify the value added of u.s. and other assistance programs . however , the general belief in donor and recipient countries , alike , is that democracy promotion activities , largely consisting of training and technical assistance , have had a positive impact at a relatively modest cost . even where governments have seemingly retreated from their democratic course , as many would argue is the case in russia today , such programs are seen as worth the investment and possibly having a longer - term positive impact . medium cost - medium risk efforts include programs to help bring stability and democracy to postconflict societies in which an intrastate conflict has resulted in a brokered peace agreement . the challenges are often greater and the prospects more uncertain because the populations have only begun a process of reconciliation .