the plan was not adopted . two competing imperatives faced fema: provide safe housing for disaster victims and remain responsible stewards of federal funds . fema itself has had a shifting emphasis over the years , much of it driven by the nature and location of individual large disasters , which in turn has moved its policies and vehicles for providing temporary housing on a large scale . that shifting emphasis is reflected in the temporary housing response to katrina . with the discovery of unsafe levels of formaldehyde in trailers , fema may be shifting its approach once again . a more definitive approach might be helpful to fema , its state partners , and the disaster victims ; flexibility , however , might also be needed . despite the very real problems encountered by victims , their communities and their host communities , thousands of families and individuals have received a significant amount of supplemental aid from the government for housing . at present , the amount of funding spent on housing ( both rental assistance and manufactured housing ) for the gulf coast hurricane season of 2005 stands at over $10 billion . fema and other staff at federal , state , local , and voluntary agencies struggled to address an unprecedented event . there have been many challenges along the way , perhaps most importantly , the difficulty in communicating complicated housing policy decisions to a vast and dispersed population . many of the staff involved , both in the governmental and non - governmental sectors , at all levels , provided assistance through the temporary housing programs and administrative channels that existed . those programs were severely challenged by a disaster of unprecedented size , compounded by unique problems of devastation and mass evacuations . new partnerships were established and a significant level of federal resources were provided , if not always judiciously employed . programs that can work well for a "garden variety" disaster may not be appropriate for a catastrophic event . assumptions based on the average can be overwhelmed by the exceptional . for an event such as katrina , new approaches were apparently considered but often rejected in favor of the familiar . this is understandable given the propensity to avoid establishing precedent based on an outlier event , and the body of law and regulations and policies supporting current housing practices . however , effective leadership , and carefully drawn legislation , can help to distinguish between the extraordinary and the common events and respond appropriately . even now , long after katrina's landfall in august of 2005 , congress continues to debate long - term recovery roles among federal agencies and state governments that are still uncertain but clearly consequential . congress could opt to consider the lessons of this disaster in terms not only of program adjustments and corrections , but also the appropriate governmental role throughout the recovery process for any possible future events of this magnitude . appendix a. hud and other federal housing resources while fema has the principal responsibility for temporary housing following a presidentially declared disaster , the department of housing and urban development and other federal departments and agencies also played a prominent role in the post - katrina housing mission .