acceptable conditions of work . the government establishes a uniform minimum wage every january . the monthly minimum wage for 2010 was reportedly $285 , a 3.6% increase over the previous year . according to the report , the national minimum wage did not provide a decent standard living for a worker and family . in addition the government reportedly remained unable to enforce the minimum wage in the informal sector . the law provides protection for workers' occupational safety and health in the formal sector , which the government enforced through periodic inspections . however , the report notes , a scarcity of government inspectors , poor safety awareness , and inadequate attention by unions resulted in a high level of industrial accidents and unhealthy working conditions in the formal sector . the colombia fta ( along with panama and south korea ) is in the second set of ftas ( after peru ) to have some labor enforcement "teeth. labor provisions including the four basic ilo core labor principles ( enumerated previously ) would be enforceable through the same dispute settlement procedures as for all other provisions , such a those for commercial interests . opponents argued that under the cfta , only the concepts of core labor principles , and not the details of the ilo conventions behind them , would be enforceable . proponents pointed to recent colombian progress in protecting workers on many fronts . first , the personal protection program for union members has been a success in that since 2002 , not a single trade union member enrolled in the program has been killed , according to the colombian embassy . second , funding for investigating and prosecuting perpetrators of crimes against trade unionists has increased . third , the government has engaged in greater social dialogue with the ilo and other international union organizations , which are having an impact on national labor policy . fourth , other legislative approaches have been proposed to further protect basic core labor rights . fifth , the "action plan related to labor rights," jointly released by the president obama and colombian president juan manuel santos on april 7 , 2011 , is designed to "address serious and immediate labor concerns" and to "lead to greatly enhanced labor rights in colombia and clear the way for the u.s. - colombia trade agreement to more forward in congress. opponents argued that delaying the vote on the cfta further would give colombia more time to keep improving protections for its workers . they asserted that colombia is still the most dangerous place in the world to be a trade unionist , since it still accounts for the majority of homicides of trade unionists world - wide . they also argued that the progress made in bringing to justice perpetrators of violence against union workers has been limited , and point to the fact that a significant percentage of those convicted in these cases are convicted in absentia and remain at large . finally , they argued that passing the cfta could very well halt the progress by the colombian government on worker rights protections achieved to date .