( see discussion below. ) proponents of the mca view it as a way to reform foreign aid programs by rewarding good performers and by focusing on the objectives of poverty reduction , with limited consideration of strategic or political objectives . critics raise concerns that by creating new aid programs , including the hiv / aids initiative , which coexist with traditional aid programs , there is a fragmentation of resources , and potentially a lack of coordination among the various entities administering the programs . in response to the evolution of an aid program that has been criticized for being fragmented , uncoordinated , incoherent , and opaque , secretary of state rice began a reform effort in january 2006 . she created a new position and a new bureau to coordinate aid . the changes were made in the context of achieving the administration's development initiatives . 480 title ii food aid this account , funded through the annual agriculture appropriations bill , provides the funds for usaid to respond quickly to the food assistance needs of countries facing emergency situations . u.s. objectives have varied over the years . recent programs are meant to address poverty , health , economic growth , counternarcotics , and trade capacity building . the region is considered important to u.s. interests as countries of latin america and the caribbean are important trading partners , sources of immigration to the united states , and production centers and transit points for illegal narcotics . environmental concerns are also prominent , particularly in the amazon basin . u.s. support for development is identified by president bush as one of the three pillars , with defense and diplomacy , of the national security strategy , developed after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 . globally , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) identifies five challenges to which u.s. assistance programs are designed to respond: promoting transformational development ; strengthening fragile states ; providing humanitarian relief ; supporting u.s. geostrategic interests ; and mitigating global and transnational ills . usaid identifies the main security threats to the united states as the confluence of terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , and global criminal networks . the focus has shifted to strengthening the institutions of weak states , rather than on just economic growth , because weak states are seen as permissive environments for terrorist and criminal activities . a foreign aid reform initiative , begun in 2006 , categorizes countries in one of five categories: transforming ; developing ; sustaining partners ; rebuilding ; and restrictive . these categories , representing common development challenges , are linked to strategic objectives , promoting: peace and security ; governing justly and democratically ; investing in people ; economic growth ; and humanitarian assistance . ( see section below for more details on the effects of aid reform in latin america. ) this report tracks foreign aid funding levels to latin america and the caribbean over the last three years . the annual state department , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations bills are the vehicles by which congress funds foreign assistance programs . congress completed action on fy2008 funding in a consolidated appropriations act , division j ( h.r .