structural growth . in the long run , economic progress is not driven by random , seasonal , or cyclical fluctuations . seasonal fluctuations . economic activity fluctuates in a predictable way over the course of the year . when reflecting on the differences in the average standard of living today compared to 100 years ago or 200 years ago , an argument can easily be made that long - term growth trumps short - term fluctuations in importance . in a recession , boosting short - term growth is mainly a question of finding ways to stimulate overall spending so that the economy operates at its productive capacity . in the long run , concerns about matching the level of spending to the productive capacity of the economy are irrelevant because it will happen on its own . instead , long - term growth depends on increasing the economy's productive capacity . the economy's productive capacity can be boosted in only two ways — by boosting the economy's inputs or by using existing inputs more productively . inputs take the form of labor and physical capital ( investment in plant and equipment ) . policymakers' influence over economic activity is limited . avoiding recessions or demonstrably raising the economy's long - term growth rate are policy goals that have proven elusive . nevertheless , good or bad policies can make a difference at the margins , and even incrementally better performance can cumulate over time , so many policy improvements can have a low cost and high reward . there is widespread consensus among economists that the prudent stabilization policymaking regime that has evolved since world war ii is an important reason why the economy has become less cyclical and recessions have become shallower ( although better luck may have also played a role ) . the government has two tools at its disposal to moderate the short - term fluctuations of the business cycle — fiscal policy or monetary policy . fiscal policy refers to changes in the budget deficit . monetary policy refers to changes in short - term interest rates by the federal reserve . the government can use expansionary fiscal policy to boost overall spending in the economy by increasing the budget deficit ( or reducing the budget surplus ) . if the increased deficit is the result of increased government spending , aggregate spending is boosted directly since government spending is a component of aggregate demand . since the deficit is financed by borrowing from the public , resources that were previously being saved are now being used to finance government purchases or production of goods and services . if the increased deficit is the result of tax cuts , aggregate spending is boosted by the tax cut's recipient to the extent that the tax cut is spent ( not saved or invested in financial securities ) . in this case , resources that were previously being saved are now at the disposal of the tax cut's recipient , and to the extent that the recipient decides to increase his consumption , aggregate spending will rise .