but the president does certainly support him , and has continued to . by late march , however , when a new parliament , prime minister , and federal cabinet were being seated , senior bush administration officials appeared to be recognizing the importance of a broader array of political figures in islamabad and were vowing to work with all of them . most pakistanis express a keen sensitivity to signs of u.s. attempts to influence the post - election coalition - building negotiations , especially when such attempts were seen to run contrary to the expressed will of the pakistani electorate . the supreme court was then reconstituted with justices appointed by musharraf himself . the question of whether and how to restore the chief justice and other deposed senior judges remains a key divisive issue . immediately upon taking office , the new prime minister ordered all remaining detained judges to be released . in declaring an intention to restore the pre - november 3 supreme court , the new civilian dispensation appeared to set itself on a collision course with musharraf . reseating that court would almost certainly lead to musharraf's removal from office , as the justices had appeared close to finding his october reelection unconstitutional . pakistan's recently retired attorney general and longtime musharraf ally , malik qayyum , rejected the new government's plan to reinstate the judges within 30 days , saying their dismissal was constitutional and that efforts to reverse it through executive order or parliamentary resolution would be futile . according to him , only an amendment to the constitution can reverse president musharraf's earlier actions . many legal experts cast doubt on qayyum's position , however , claiming that because musharraf's emergency imposition was inherently unconstitutional ( as ruled by the supreme court on november 3 , 2007 , just before its reconstitution ) , all actions taken under that authority are invalid . some detractors of the new government's intentions call the effort a farce rooted in a desire for revenge , and they seek establishment of an independent judiciary without bringing back what critics have termed "a group of biased , politicized , and vengeful judges. the "lawyer's movement" that arose in response to musharraf's march 2007 dismissal of chief justice iftikhar chaudhry ( who was reseated in july ) was a vital facet of the pro - rule of law , anti - musharraf sentiment that spread in pakistan during 2007 . it has not faded away: lawyers continue to boycott many courts and the movement remains able to mobilize significant street protests , which chaudhry continues to publicly support . nawaz sharif himself has accused the u.s. government of actively discouraging the restoration of the deposed judges . when asked during a senate hearing about the status of supreme court justices and other judges dismissed under musharraf's emergency proclamation , deputy secretary john negroponte conceded that the u.s. government had "been silent on the subject. aitzaz ahsan , the lawyer who lead the successful effort to have former chief justice chaudhry reseated earlier in 2007 , has been at the forefront of the current effort to restore the pre - november 3 judiciary . his post - emergency detention attracted the attention of numerous u.s .