in 2011 and 2012 , however , there is a substantial difference . first , the analysis finds that most representatives make use of mass communications , mass mailings , or both to communicate with their constituents , with an annual average of 84% of members sending at least one mass mailing during the period 1997-2008 , and an annual average of 94% of members sending at least one mass communication between 2009 and 2015 . second , the analysis confirms that the cost per piece of mass communication is indeed less than the cost per piece of mass mailing . although this is not an unexpected finding , it implies that new communications technology may lower the overall cost to congress for constituent communication , or allow for a greater amount of communication at the same cost . finally , the analysis finds significant and regular quarterly variation in member mass mailing through 2008 , with the total number of pieces sent by members following an eight - quarter pattern that corresponds to the two - year cycle of each congress . the analysis shows two peaks in mailings , the first during the last quarter of the first session of congress and the second during the two quarters prior to the pre - election prohibition on member mass mailings . while there is currently not enough data on mass communications to conclude that similar patterns exist beyond 2008 , the observed variation implies that mass communications are probably not evenly distributed throughout a congress . these findings provide insight regarding concerns about election - year mass mailing expenditures . although they confirm that members send more pieces of mass mail or communications in the quarters just prior to the biennial elections , the findings also show that mass mailing peaks twice , and the larger peak takes place not prior to the election , but at the end of the first session . these findings also suggest that previous comparisons of election - year and non - election - year franked mail data may need to be considered . when mass mailings are compared by fiscal year , both the first session spike and the pre - election increase are in the same year , so the data show inflated election - year numbers and suppressed non - election - year numbers . first , the franking privilege is financially wasteful and , second , the franking privilege gives unfair advantages to incumbents in congressional elections . in particular , mass mailings have come under increased scrutiny during the past 20 years as critics argue that the vast majority of franked mail is unsolicited and , in effect , publicly funded campaign literature . critics assert that incumbent house members may spend as much on franked mail in a year as a challenger spends on his or her entire campaign . proponents of the franking privilege argue that the frank allows members to fulfill their representational duties by providing for greater communication between the member and individual constituents . proponents of the franking privilege also argue that representative accountability is enhanced by use of the frank .