a related issue is the design of mentoring evaluations . the council has been inactive since 2008 . this report begins with an overview of the goals of mentoring , including a brief discussion on research of structured mentoring programs . the report then describes the evolution of federal policies on mentoring since the early 1990s . the report provides an overview of the federal mentoring initiatives that are currently funded . while additional federal programs and policies authorize funding for mentoring activities , among multiple other activities and services , such programs are not discussed in this report . the report concludes with an overview of issues that may be of interest to congress . these issues include the limitations of research on outcomes for mentored youth , the quality of mentoring programs , and the potential need for additional mentors . mentoring refers to a relationship between two or more individuals in which at least one of those individuals provides guidance to the other . in the context of this report , mentoring refers to the relationship between a youth and an adult who supports , guides , and assists the youth . youth can receive mentoring through informal and formal relationships with adults . informal relationships are those that develop from a young person's existing social network of teachers , coaches , and family friends . this report focuses on formal mentoring relationships for vulnerable youth . these relationships are cultivated through structured programs sponsored by youth - serving organizations , faith - based organizations , schools , and after - school programs . approximately 4.5 million youth are in structured mentoring relationships . volunteers in structured programs are recruited from communities , religious organizations , and the workplace , and undergo an intensive screening process . youth eligible for services through structured mentoring programs are often identified as at "high risk" of certain negative outcomes . the goal of modern structured mentoring programs is to reduce risks by supplementing , but not replacing , a youth's relationship with his or her parents . some programs have broad youth development goals , while others focus more narrowly on a particular outcome such as reducing gang activity or substance abuse , or improving grades . structured mentoring programs are often community based , meaning that mentored youth and adults engage in community activities ( eg , going to the museum and the park , playing sports , playing a board game , and spending time together outside of work and school ) . other programs are characterized as school based because they take place on school grounds or some other set location , like a community center . the co - location of mentoring programs in schools facilitates relationships with teachers , who can meet with mentors and refer youth to the programs . mentors provide academic assistance and recreational opportunities and expose youth to opportunities that promote their cognitive and emotional development . issues that may be relevant to any discussions around the federal role in mentoring include the limitations of research on outcomes for mentored youth and the potential need for additional mentors , particularly for vulnerable populations . a few positive evaluations of mentoring programs may provide justification for federal support of these programs .