justice scalia did not participate in the case . in newdow , the father of a child in the school district claimed that requiring his daughter to recite the pledge , including the phrase "under god," constituted indoctrination of a religion in which he did not believe and did not want his child to be taught . in gonzales v. o centro espirita beneficente uniao do vegetal , the court again , as in smith , considered a challenge of a generally applicable law that incidentally burdened a religious group's religious practice . members of the o centro espirita beneficente uniao do vegetal ( udv ) church celebrate their faith in part by drinking hoasca , a sacramental tea containing a hallucinogen that is regulated under the controlled substances act ( csa ) . when u.s. customs inspectors seized a shipment of hoasca under the csa , the udv challenged the seizure as a violation of rfra's protections for free exercise of religion . the unanimous court ( except justice alito , who did not participate in the case ) held that the government had not demonstrated a compelling interest that rfra requires to justify barring the udv's sacramental use of hoasca . although the government asserted three interests in completely banning hoasca , the court did not believe that any of these interests satisfied the strict scrutiny standard that rfra requires for laws that interfered with religious practices . one of the interests the government cited was that the nature of drugs that were highly regulated under the csa precluded individual exceptions such as the udv was requesting . these drugs , according to the government , had a high potential for abuse , had no currently acceptable medical use , and were unsafe for medical use . because of these factors , the government claimed that a complete ban was necessary and that any exceptions would be detrimental to its purposes for regulating the drugs . however , the court noted that the csa itself provides for possible exemptions and that there has been an exemption made for use of peyote by the native american church for 35 years . the court explained that , because the csa appears to recognize the restrictions it places on certain substances are not absolute , mere categorization of substances by the csa "should not carry the determinative weight , for rfra purposes , that the government would ascribe to them. thus , the court recognized "that there may be instances in which a need for uniformity precludes the recognition of exceptions to generally applicable laws under rfra," but the court did not allow the government to apply broad prohibitions that affect individuals' free exercise of religion without a specific compelling interest in the particular case . the court's most recent church - state case focused on the issue of taxpayer standing to raise establishment clause claims . taxpayers typically do not have standing to sue the government on the grounds that their tax money has been spent in a manner that the taxpayer considers improper . such claims are considered to be too generalized and more appropriately remedied through the political process rather than by the courts .