enactment . president george w. bush signed h.r . 3221 , the housing and economic recovery act , into law on july 30 , 2008 . it became p.l . appendix b. crs experts table b1 lists crs experts in areas related to this report . appendix c. acronym . ( section 2301 ) . the purchase price of a home or residential property must be less than the home's current appraised market value . the discounted value should be significant enough to ensure that when the home is sold by the state or local government the purchaser ( homebuyer ) will pay below market value for the home or property . further , when a foreclosed home or property is to be purchased as a primary residence by an eligible homebuyer , the resale price cannot exceed the cost the state or local government paid to acquire and redevelop or rehabilitate the property . ( section 2301 ) during the first five years of the act , a community or state must reinvest all profits in additional sales , rentals , redevelopment , and rehabilitation of foreclosed homes and properties . after the five - year period , all profits are to be deposited in the u.s. treasury unless hud approves a request to allow a community or state to continue to use funds to finance activities eligible for assistance under the act . other provisions of the bill subject funds and revenues generated by activities under this act to the same requirements as funds appropriated under the regular cdbg program . however , hud may issue alternatives to cdbg requirements , except in the areas of fair housing , nondiscrimination , labor standards , and environmental review , for the sole purpose of expediting the use of funds under the act . in addition , the legislation prohibits funds from being used in economic development projects involving the use of eminent domain ; ( section 2303 ) limits the income of individuals and families who may benefit from assistance provided by the act to those whose incomes do not exceed 120% of the area's median income ; ( section 2301 ) requires a state and local government to certify that at least 25% of the amount allocated by the bill will be used to purchase and redevelop housing for individuals and families whose incomes do not exceed 50% of the area's median income ; ( section 2301 ) and requires that each state receives a minimum allocation of 0.5% of the amount appropriated . ( section 2302 ) . the act authorizes va to furnish home improvements and structural alterations for service members hospitalized or receiving outpatient care , medical services , or treatment , and for service members likely to be discharged or released from service due to a total and permanent injury incurred or aggravated while on active duty . ( section 2601 ) the act amends existing law to allow service members on active duty , as well as veterans ( who are currently eligible ) , to qualify for home improvements pursuant to the specially adapted housing program for veterans with severe disabilities . the act adds severe burn injuries to the current categories of disabilities that qualify for assistance to modify homes to accommodate disabilities .