these issues are discussed below . additionality is a significant factor in determining offset integrity . indeed , if a project is not additional , it cannot qualify as an offset in a compliance market . additionality means that the offset project is an activity beyond what would have occurred under a business - as - usual scenario . in other words , in the case of a forestry project , would the sequestration have happened anyway ? a test of additionality would examine whether the offset project would have gone forward in the absence of the forest carbon market . for instance , does the activity represent a common practice or conform to an industry standard ? is the forestry project required under other federal , state , or local laws ? would the sequestration project generate financial gain ( i.e. , be profitable ) due to revenues from outside the offset market ? for example , in the united states and canada , reforestation following a timber harvest would generally not qualify as an offset , because most states and provinces require reforestation . similarly , disposal of sawmill waste by burning to produce energy , and displace the use of fossil fuel , would not qualify as an offset , because all u.s. sawmills burn their waste ( except for what is sold for paper production ) for energy . additionality is at the crux of an offset's integrity , but applying the additionality criterion may present practical challenges . assessing a project's additionality may involve some degree of subjectivity , which may lead to inconsistent additionality determinations . for instance , it may be impossible to accurately determine "what would have happened anyway" for some projects . data on historic deforestation are sketchy , at best , making it difficult to assess whether an avoided deforestation program would be additional . in addition , offsets from forest management via delayed timber harvests might be difficult to document as additional , since many landowners do not have explicit plans for the exact timing of future harvests . the forest carbon sequestration must be real and measurable . that is , the forestry project — afforestation , avoided deforestation , etc. — must actually occur and have a quantifiable amount of carbon sequestered . meeting these objectives requires measurement , monitoring , and enforcement . measuring forest carbon sequestration can be problematic . various approaches have been taken , including tables , models , and protocols for estimating carbon sequestration by various practices in different locales . a common limitation is that many estimators use commercial timber volume as the basis for carbon stored , but the relationship between commercial volume and carbon sequestered might not be linear . for example , thinning is a forestry practice intended to increase commercial volume by concentrating the same total growth on fewer commercial stems . total growth also varies widely from site to site , depending on a host of localized physical and environmental factors . thus , many observers recommend , and some existing carbon markets require , field measurements to adjust the estimated carbon storage to on - the - ground reality . one problem is that field measurements are expensive and subject to sampling error .