this may involve countering chinese attempts to drive a wedge between the united states and australia . the unpopularity of the bush administration in australia and its perceived unilateralist policies , including in iraq , and the degree to which australia's economy is benefitting from exports to china are key factors in this calculus . is the u.s. strategic architecture in asia well - suited to adjust to the evolving correlates of power in asia ? incoming prime minister rudd , however , may have doubts about a quadrilateral grouping . the region is now facing an array of changes: deepening trade links , the formation of new regional institutions , and increased attention to the threat of islamic terrorism . some analysts have questioned whether u.s. security interests are best served by the existing framework of bilateral alliances , while others believe the basic architecture is sound and may only require some relatively minor changes and / or additions to meet emerging challenges . calls for a revision of america's security architecture in asia may be a reaction to the development of new regional groups that exclude the united states . the goals of america's strategic architecture in asia have traditionally included preventing the dominance of asia by any single power or coalition of powers ; maintaining a system of alliances to facilitate the projection of american power when needed ; and securing sea lanes of communication to facilitate american commercial access and the free flow of trade in the region . american power can also be used to promote american values such as democratic governments or provision of humanitarian and disaster assistance . china's rise has had a clear impact on existing and nascent defense relationships in the asia - pacific region . this section provides a brief assessment of the state of bilateral relationships among the united states , australia , japan , and india . some defense ties are well - established and multi - layered , while others are embryonic . each section examines the history of ties , current political climate , rationales for engagement , and challenges to cooperation . as the bush administration has pursued stronger defense relations with australia , japan , and india , initiatives for trilateral efforts among the nations has emerged . nascent three - way cooperation has built on existing bilateral alliances to further u.s. goals in the region by combining forces among partners and allies . as trilateral initiatives have taken shape , talk of a quadrilateral grouping — which would tie together the united states , japan , australia , and india — has emerged . advocates for expanding quadrilateral cooperation have pointed to the "regional core group" that formed in the aftermath of the 2004 indian ocean tsunami as a model . former japanese prime minister abe was perhaps the most vocal supporter of the four - way forum . because of the fall from power or declining political fortunes of the leaders who supported the quad , it is uncertain that enthusiasm will remain for building a stronger arrangement . despite initial enthusiasm for forming trilateral and / or quadrilateral security arrangements , the conservative leaders who originally supported the idea have all been compromised by their own domestic political situations .