, the shareholders of the company . this measure is widely used by investors and financial analysts in evaluating the performance of firms seeking access to capital markets . by this measure , the integrated oil companies returned 22.7% in 2007 , over twice the return on revenue . their net incomes , however , were approximately 15% of the net incomes of the integrated companies . although all of the companies in this category experienced increases in revenue , six out of ten experienced negative net income growth . all of the companies , except andarko and newfield experienced increases in production of oil and natural gas , or both . with prices for both oil and natural gas rising late in 2007 , these companies seemingly should have performed better with respect to net income growth . a possible explanation for the declining net income experienced by some companies might be the large outlays the companies made investing in unconventional oil asset exploration and development . many of these companies are involved in shale oil work in texas , arkansas , and south dakota . valero is the leading firm among the group of independent refiners and marketers . valero accounted for over one half of the sector's revenue , and two thirds of its net income . the api comparisons are based on returns on revenue . they found that the oil and natural gas industries earned 7.6 percent on revenues , compared to 5.8 percent for all u.s. manufacturing industries . although this result implies a 31 percent margin over the returns earned by all u.s. manufacturing industries , it is less than the 9.2 percent earned by all u.s. manufacturing industries excluding the automobile and auto parts industries , that had a negative 26 percent return for the third quarter of 2007 . calculating return on revenues dilutes the effect of growing total profits of the oil industry due to higher prices and growing revenues , another standard percentage measure of profitability , return on equity , is presented in table 1 . this measure indicates the success of the companies , and industry , in earning profit by utilizing the invested capital of the owners , i.e. the industry leader , exxonmobil , earned 33.4% . these rates of return are likely to assure these firms' , and the industry's , position as a desirable investment as long as the price of oil remains high . table 2 and table 3 separate the upstream and downstream performance of the integrated oil companies in 2007 . table 1 and table 2 show that upstream net income growth led overall corporate net income growth for most of the companies , and they earned almost 80% of their total net income from upstream activities . crude oil prices spot prices reached $110 per barrel in the first quarter of 2008 . should the price of crude oil remain at , or above , $100 per barrel for large portions of the year , the profits of oil producing firms should be high . however , the economic conditions will likely be difficult for firms that refine crude oil , but do not have their own supplies .