( at pp . 618-619 ) [o]ne particular flaw underscores the government's ill fit of means to ends . the fcc's policies assume , and rely upon , the existence of a tightly bound "nexus" between the owners' race and the resulting programming.... three difficulties suggest that the nexus between owners' race and programming is considerably less than substantial . first , the market shapes programming to a tremendous extent . members of minority groups who own licenses might be thought , like other owners , to seek broadcast programs that will attract and retain audiences , rather than programs that reflect the owner's tastes and preferences.... second , station owners have only limited control over the content of programming.... third , the fcc had absolutely no factual basis for the nexus when it adopted the policies and has since established none to support its existence . ( at pp . 626-627 ) if this view were to gain the support of the majority of the supreme court , it would appear that if the fcc implements programs that provide preferences to sdbs , and some entities qualify as sdbs as part of a socially disadvantaged racial group rather than a socially disadvantaged individual , the burden would be on the commission to demonstrate the nexus between favoring that group and the compelling government interest in fostering diversity of voices . as discussed earlier , there is no single understanding of diversity of voices . there is one additional complication . the fcc is instructed to make a public interest determination , with diversity of voices one of the public interest goals , but there is no single understanding of what is meant by diversity of voices . diversity might refer to , among other things , the number of different viewpoints on a particular subject , or the number of different issues that are addressed by media in a market , or the variety of programming offered in a market , or the number of different gatekeepers who determine what programming is provided , or some combination of these and other possible concepts of diversity . as will be discussed below , this could be of particular concern if fcc rules , particularly as they involve minority ownership , are reviewed by the courts . although three of the 10 fcc - commissioned studies attempted to collect data on minority and female ownership issues , and the consumer commenters attempted to supplement that data collection with their own effort , all the researchers ( and the peer reviewers ) agree that the fcc's databases on minority and female ownership are inaccurate and incomplete and their use for policy analysis would be fraught with risk . this may have significant policy implications . in its prometheus decision , the third circuit instructed the fcc to consider the impact of changes in its media ownership rules on minority ownership . without accurate data on minority ( and female ) ownership , it is impossible to perform such analysis .