the following are possible policy options . place renewed emphasis on reinvigorating america's alliance relationships in the region while not emphasizing a policy of containing china . while some of america's alliance relationships in asia , such as with australia and japan , as well as our strategic framework agreement with singapore , are relatively robust , others in southeast asia , such as with thailand and the philippines , are not as close as they once were . new initiatives to reinvigorate these relationships could not only take into account american interests but also genuinely seek to accommodate our strategic partners' concerns . reach out to other regional states and seek to develop closer relationships on a bilateral basis through trade agreements and other means of engagement . increase foreign assistance funding and / or develop a foreign aid approach that addresses the attractiveness of china's policy of "non - interference in domestic affairs. develop new programs to assist emerging democracies in the region , particularly indonesia . use american soft power as a champion of democracy to gain influence with emerging democracies in the region . the united states could sign the treaty of amity and cooperation ( tac ) and seek to join the east asia summit process . the tac binds signatories to peaceful coexistence and respect for the principles of sovereignty , territorial integrity , and non - interference . the united states reportedly has been reluctant to sign the tac for fear that it could constrain u.s. military freedom of action . raise the priority given to regional and multilateral engagement . the lack of high level diplomatic attention sends the wrong signal to regional states and increases attention paid by regional states to china . the united states would have to consistently participate in regional fora to continue to be taken seriously by regional states . the united states would also likely achieve more of its regional goals by engaging asean states not only on american priorities but on asean ones as well . establish a new dialogue process with china with the goal of reassuring china that the united states does not seek to counter china in southeast asia or to contain china more broadly . such an approach could have the effect of diverting china from strategies aimed at neutralizing american regional influence . although hedging strategies may be prudent to deter what could possibly be a less than peaceful rise by china , reinvigorating and expanding confidence building measures and other forms of engagement that seek to reassure china that the united states and its allies are not trying to contain china may be equally important to prevent china from adopting a strategic posture that would lead to strategic rivalry between the united states and china in the region and beyond . initiate a new program aimed at engaging regional muslim states and populations in a way that both supports moderate islam in its struggle against radical islam and brings the united states closer to regional muslim states .