, in the first year that an agreement takes effect ) . 110-138 ) a measure to implement the fta with peru . , with implementation periods of four years or less ) , it is difficult to determine whether the growth in two - way trade is attributable solely to liberalizing trade provisions . in addition to addressing market access for agricultural and food products , they cover trade in all other goods ( including textiles and apparel ) , improved market access commitments for services and government procurement , protections for investment and intellectual property rights ; and include provisions on dispute settlement , labor , the environment , customs administration , among other matters . the earliest the panama fta might be sent to congress for consideration is early fall , after the term of a controversial legislator alleged to have murdered a u.s. soldier ends . nevertheless , since early january 2008 , president bush has repeatedly called for the approval of these three ftas , starting with the agreement with colombia . however , congressional leadership have signaled that taking up these trade agreements is not a priority while other members have raised the concerns mentioned above . agriculture as covered in each pending ftas is examined below in the order each country ranks in its bilateral agricultural trade with the united states ( as shown in table 6 ) . fta negotiations with two other countries — thailand and malaysia — did not conclude before the end of march 2007 deadline that would have allowed for congressional consideration under tpa authority . talks with malaysia are continuing , with many issues ( including some on agriculture ) reportedly still outstanding . at present , negotiations with thailand likely will not resume , because of significant thai public opposition . if negotiations on either of these ftas do conclude , congress may consider such an agreement under new tpa provisions ( if and when approved ) . but the bush administration also could decide to press ahead for congressional consideration without such authority . this would depend on whether political advisors gauge that the level of opposition to either fta likely will not be overwhelming enough to result in congressional rejection . agriculture as handled in talks to date is examined below in the order each country ranks in its bilateral agricultural trade with the united states ( as shown in table 6 ) . most of the recently negotiated ftas will open to varying extents markets for u.s. agriculture in countries with high levels of border protection for their agricultural sectors . in particular , u.s. agricultural trade with those fta partners that have benefitted from a long period of preferential access to the united states will quickly take on a more reciprocal character . as their trade barriers to imports of u.s. agricultural products are reduced , u.s. agriculture and agribusiness exporters , where they have a competitive edge over other countries in these markets , will be able to take advantage of sales opportunities . at the same time , some u.s. commodity sectors will face competition from increased imports under these ftas .