appendix a . other financing proposals both the administration , which first proposed the president's child welfare option in february 2003 , and the private pew commission on children in foster care , which first offered its financing reform recommendations in may 2004 , have offered broad proposals to change the way federal dedicated child welfare funds are distributed to states . as provided in p.l . 108-145 , for a state to be eligible to earn an incentive , it must increase the overall number of adoptions out of its foster care caseload , or the number of adoptions of those children aged nine or older . an eligible state may additionally earn a bonus for an increase in the number of children adopted from foster care who are title iv - e eligible , have special needs , and are under the age of nine . the law establishes three "baselines" for each state: these are equal to all children adopted out of foster care in fy2002 ( or any later year when that number was higher ) , the number of children aged nine or older who were adopted in fy2002 ( or any later year when that number was higher ) , and the number of title iv - e eligible , special needs children under age nine who were adopted in fy2002 ( or any later year when that number was higher ) . states are awarded a bonus of $4,000 for each adoption that exceeds the overall baseline ; $4,000 for each older child adoption that exceeds the relevant baseline ; and $2,000 for each title iv - e eligible special needs child under the age of nine that exceeds the relevant baseline . the amount of a state's annual grant funding during those years would be based on the funding that the state would be assumed to receive under the title iv - e foster care program ( as it exists in current law ) over those same five years . states could use the grant funds for the full range of child welfare services , including foster care payments , prevention activities , permanency efforts , case management , administrative activities , training for child welfare staff , and other similar child welfare activities . further , the funds could be spent on any child without regard to whether this child met the title iv - e foster care eligibility criteria that are part of the afdc - program link . ( the administration's proposals would not make any changes to the current title iv - e adoption assistance program , which also includes this eligibility link. ) at the same time , the fy2009 budget documents note that states would be required to uphold "child safety protections outlined in the adoption and safe families act," agree to maintain existing levels of state investment in child welfare programs , and continue to participate in the hhs - administered child and family services reviews ( to ensure compliance with federal child welfare policy ) . states experiencing a "severe foster care crisis" would , under certain circumstances , be able to tap tanf contingency funds to meet this unanticipated need .