unlike h.r . 890 , s. 466 would provide for treble damages if a court finds that an insurer acted in bad faith . the bill would apply to all covered policies , including lawsuits that have been dismissed as a result of garamendi . this retroactive application would allow plaintiffs in those lawsuits to sue again . similar to h.r . 890 , s. 466 would reverse garamendi by explicitly stating that the state laws that create a cause of action related to covered policies against insurance companies ( i.e. , the laws at issue in the class action lawsuits , described above ) and the state laws imposing disclosure requirements on insurance companies relating to covered policies ( i.e. , the california statute at issue in garamendi ) shall not be preempted by executive agreements or executive foreign policy . the senate bill , again like the house bill , would further prohibit the use of federal funds to file the statements of interest that the department of justice has filed in the civil suits against insurance companies that have stated that it is the policy of the united states to resolve all claims through icheic . in general , those supportive of the proposed legislation argue that both the icheic process and previous agreements between the united states and european governments failed to compensate a significant number of holocaust survivors and / or their heirs and beneficiaries . some of those critical of icheic and supportive of the proposed legislation acknowledge that the standards of proof placed on a claimant in a u.s. court of law would likely be far more stringent than those exercised by icheic . however , they argue that in light of icheic's closure , the courts represent one of the few , if not the only , remaining avenues by which to pursue claims . furthermore , a strong sense of distrust regarding icheic's application of its relaxed standards of proof , and of insurers' thoroughness in searching their records , appears to have increased hope that public disclosure of holocaust - era records could lead to substantive claims . opponents of the proposed legislation often argue that by effectively reversing past commitments made by the u.s. government — specifically , the granting of legal peace to german companies — the bills could damage future cooperation with european governments on other holocaust compensation and restitution issues . in addition , some u.s. and german government representatives suggest that the credibility of future u.s. and german commitments to european companies in these areas could be called into question . specifically , german government officials have indicated that new lawsuits against german companies would likely limit their ability to gain future financial commitments from these and other german companies in holocaust compensation and restitution cases . critics also argue that given the legal and historical complexities of substantiating the existence and value of holocaust - era insurance policies , it is unlikely that claims would be satisfactorily settled in u.s. courts . they argue that it was precisely this fact that drove u.s. insurance regulators , the claims conference , and others to back icheic .