this period of time is interesting to policymakers for several reasons . it includes the transition in fy2000 to a period of significant and historic growth in the s&t budget . it includes a change in administration , as well as the historic strategic transition from the post - cold war era to the war - on - terror era . picking fy1998 as the baseline year is somewhat arbitrary , but because s&t funding for the three years prior to fy1998 was relatively stable , it would appear to represent a valid starting point . also , declines in overall defense spending , beginning in fy1986 , bottomed out in fy1998 , representing the end of the post - cold war draw - down . the period of analysis ends in fy2007 , the latest budget year for which "actual" s&t funding data exist ( see below ) . the increase in s&t funding over the 10 years from fy1998 to fy2007 was distributed broadly across the s&t program . each department ( army , navy , and air force ) and the defense agencies as a whole shared roughly equally in dollar terms . in percentage terms , the defense agencies' increase , taken as a whole , was noticeably less . although the total increase in s&t funding , in dollar terms , was distributed between departments in roughly equal shares , the increases were distributed variably across their budget activities . applied research ( budget activity 6.3 ) of each of the departments increased the most and by roughly the same amount when taken as a percentage . across all of dod , basic research increased the least in dollar terms , although in percentage terms this varied considerably between departments and agencies . of the pes that were in existence throughout the 10-year period , 73% exceeded their baseline funding . the increases varied from pe to pe , but the pes that increased the most represented a relatively small share of the total increase . it is difficult to discern any clear "winners" over these 10 years in terms of particular mission , disciplines , or sub - systems . a possible exception may be a growing emphasis on countering weapons of mass destruction . this could reflect a shift away from traditional force - on - force conflict toward a more unconventional post - cold war threat . congress has three basic approaches to consider when funding s&t going forward — continue increasing s&t funding , reduce s&t funding , or keep s&t funding flat in inflation - adjusted dollars . within each option , congress may also decide to adjust the allocation of resources or keep it more or less the same . for example , the director of defense engineering and research has advocated more basic research . in an expanding program , congress may be able to accommodate an increase in basic research ( or elsewhere within the s&t program ) without having to make other major allocation adjustments . however , in a flat or declining budget , growth in a particular department , agency , program , or budget activity would have to be accompanied by decreases somewhere else .