market. they characterized this approach as "wasteful of taxpayer resources" because sugar is not price competitive with corn as a feedstock , and will require large subsidies to ethanol producers "to induce them to accept the sugar. the bush administration opposed this sugar - for - ethanol component , commenting that it would not allow usda to dispose of surplus sugar to end uses other than ethanol production , even if "those uses would yield a much higher return for taxpayers. the current u.s. sugar market outlook ( i.e. , demand considerably above current supply , implying that market prices will be above loan forfeiture levels ) suggests that , at present , usda will likely be able to meet the program's no - cost directive without having to activate the new sugar - for - ethanol program in fy2009 . in louisiana . the refined beet sugar loan rate will range from 21.95¢ / lb . in idaho , oregon , and washington to 24.34¢ / lb . in michigan and ohio . the sugar program uses two tools — import quotas and marketing allotments — to ensure that producers and processors receive price support benefits . by regulating the amount of foreign sugar allowed to enter and the quantity of sugar that processors can sell , usda can for the most part keep market prices above effective support levels , meet the no - cost objective , and ensure that domestic sugar demand is met . if these tools are implemented as intended , the likelihood that usda acquires sugar due to loan forfeitures is remote . the united states must import sugar to cover demand that the u.s. sugar production sector cannot supply . however , usda restricts the quantity of foreign sugar allowed to enter for refining and / or sale to manufacturers for domestic food and beverage use . quotas are used to ensure that the quantity that enters does not depress the domestic market price to below support levels . quota amounts are laid out in u.s. market access commitments made under world trade organization ( wto ) rules and under bilateral free trade agreements ( ftas ) . the sugar program authorized by the 2002 farm bill accommodated , or made room for , imports of up to 1.532 million short tons raw value ( strv ) each year . this import level is one of the four factors that usda used to establish the national sugar allotment ( called the "overall allotment quantity" ) , and reflected u.s. trade commitments under two trade agreements in effect when the 2002 program was authorized ( table 1 ) . since january 1 , 2008 , however , u.s. sugar imports from mexico are no longer restricted . under nafta , mexico no longer faces any tariff or quantitative limit on the amount of sugar exported to the u.s. market . with this opening , though , imports could fluctuate from year to year for various reasons . first , the amount of mexican sugar exported to the u.s. market will depend largely upon the extent that u.s. exports of historically cheaper high - fructose corn syrup ( hfcs ) displace mexican consumption of mexican - produced sugar .