employee duties are performed under the direction of the secretary of the senate . an amount equal to one - tenth of the official office expense account portion of the senator's official personnel and office expense account is available to the secretary of the senate to defray those expenses directly related to closing a senator's office . expenses are paid from the contingent fund of the senate as miscellaneous items . employees in the personal office of a senator whose appointment is terminated are continued on the senate payroll at their respective salaries for up to 30 days after the termination of the senator's service , or until they have become otherwise gainfully employed , whichever is earlier . a member of congress may leave office prior to the expiration of his or her term , due to resignation , death , or for other reasons . if the senate has adjourned sine die , an appointed senator who will not continue to serve in the senate must vacate office facilities the day before a successor is certified , or 30 days after a successor has been elected , whichever is earlier . employees in the personal office of a deceased sitting senator are continued on the senate payroll at their respective salaries for up to 60 days after the senator's death , unless the senator's term of office expires sooner . the committee on rules and administration may extend this period in cases where it will take longer to close a deceased senator's office . employee duties are performed under the direction of the secretary of the senate . an amount equal to one - tenth of the official office expense account portion of the senator's official personnel and office expense account is available to the secretary of the senate to defray those expenses directly related to closing a senator's office . expenses are paid from the contingent fund of the senate as miscellaneous items . the senate financial clerk provides information concerning allowances for the operation of the deceased senator's office during the 60-day period . table 1 summarizes the numbers of members who have left or will be leaving the house and senate after the 112 th congress , and in the prior 10 congresses . the house and senate have developed extensive resources to assist members in closing their offices . these services are typically used at the end of a congress , when a member's term of service ends , but most services are available to an office that becomes vacant for other reasons . this report provides an overview of issues that may arise in closing a congressional office , and provides a guide to resources available through the appropriate support offices of the house and senate . house office closing activities are supported by the chief administrative officer ( cao ) , clerk of the house , and house sergeant at arms . resources related to closing a congressional office are available to house offices through the 113 th congress transition website on the house intranet . when it becomes known that a senate office will be closing , the sergeant at arms contacts that office to initiate closing support services .