postal service . leos who did not respond were sent reminders or contacted by telephone . for each survey , the overall final response rate was 40% of the sample , or about 17% of all jurisdictions in the united states . respondents answered 85-90% of questions , on average . the response was sufficiently high to permit statistical analysis and comparison of the results between the surveys . individual response rates per state were between 25% and 50% for about three - quarters of states ( see figure a - 2 ) . the remainder were evenly split between those for which under 25% of leos responded , and those for which the rate was greater than 50% . response rates were similar among states across the two surveys , and did not vary significantly for either survey with the number of local election jurisdictions in a state or its voting age population . about 70% of respondents worked in county election jurisdictions , with most of the remainder working in townships ( figure a - 3 ) . the small difference between the two years in those choosing "town / township" and in those choosing "other" was almost certainly a result of a small change in the structure of the question for the 2006 survey . all the results presented in this report are from analyses by crs of data provided from the surveys by researchers at texas a&m university . the raw data were first examined for errors , and corrections were made where necessary , in a few cases , such as if a leo claimed to work more hours per week than is physically possible . where the correct answer could be reasonably discerned , the response was corrected . otherwise it was discarded . once cleaned , the data were analyzed using standard parametric methods , mainly analysis of variance , linear regression , and student's t - tests as appropriate . three kinds of hypotheses were tested: differences between groups , such as whether results for 2004 differed from those for 2006 ; differences from a hypothetical value , such as whether leos were neutral about , agreed with , or disagreed with a particular statement ; and tests for associations , such as whether the number of pollworkers in a jurisdiction was correlated with the number of registered voters . statistical significance was determined using a significance level ( α ) of .01 . however , for display purposes , graphs with error bars were drawn showing 95% confidence intervals for the means . most tests yielded highly statistically significant results — p - values much lower than the significance level ( p < < .01 ) . for tests where statistically significant effects were not found , the lack of effect is noted in the text , for example , by stating that no change was found between 2004 and 2006 for a particular survey item . additional methodological details can be provided upon request . some issues that may be relevant for congressional deliberations are highlighted below . many observers have commented favorably on the experience and dedication of the nation's local election officials . survey results are consistent with that view .