only vested benefits are insured . erisa sets a limit on the benefits insured by the pbgc . this limit is adjusted annually for increases in wage growth in the economy . for pension plans ending in 2009 , the maximum yearly pension guarantee is $54,000 for a participant retiring at age 65 . the maximum insured benefit is reduced actuarially if a participant retires before age 65 or if the pension plan provides benefits in a form other than a life annuity . benefits are insured at their nominal value: once the insured benefit amount is determined , it is not adjusted for inflation . 109-171 and was to expire in 2010 . an annual surcharge of $1,250 per participant will be assessed for three years against any firm that terminates an underfunded pension plan during bankruptcy if it later emerges from bankruptcy . the pbgc guarantees only "basic benefits. basic benefits include pension benefits beginning at normal retirement age ( usually age 65 ) , certain early retirement and disability benefits , and benefits for survivors of deceased plan participants . benefit increases that went into effect less than five years before a plan was terminated are not fully insured . insurance on these benefits is phased in , guaranteeing 20% of the increase in benefits for each full year since the amendment that increased plan benefits was adopted . a sponsor of a single - employer plan can voluntarily end the pension plan in one of two ways: ( 1 ) a "standard" termination if the plan is fully funded ; or ( 2 ) a "distress" termination that allows a sponsor in serious financial trouble to terminate a plan that may be less than fully funded . in addition , the pbgc may terminate a plan involuntarily if certain conditions are met . the pbgc becomes responsible for paying benefits in the case of a distress or involuntary termination . an employer can end a plan through a standard termination only if the plan's assets are sufficient to cover all of the plan's liabilities . participants and beneficiaries must be informed of the amounts due them , including the data and underlying actuarial assumptions used to compute the benefits . an actuary must certify that the assets are sufficient to meet all plan liabilities . if the rules for a standard termination have been met , the plan sponsor purchases annuities from a commercial insurer or distributes lump - sum payments to beneficiaries . the employer then has no further liability to the pbgc or plan participants and can recapture any remaining assets after paying all applicable taxes . an employer can terminate an underfunded plan under a distress termination only if one of the following conditions applies: bankruptcy proceedings seeking liquidation have been filed by or against the company under chapter 7 of the bankruptcy code ; the company is undergoing reorganization under chapter 11of the code and the bankruptcy court has approved a plan termination ; the company is unable to pay its debts when due and will be unable to continue in business unless the plan is ended ; or the company has experienced unreasonably burdensome pension costs solely as a result of a decline in its workforce .