the experience of iran may be instructive here . russia's offer to provide assured enrichment services on russian soil has gone nowhere ; instead , other , broader trade incentives may be necessary . while the case of iran may illustrate the extreme end of the spectrum , in terms of a country determined to develop a capability for a weapons program , non - nuclear - weapon states will clearly take notice of how a solution develops for iran . congress would have a considerable role in at least four areas of oversight related to fuel cycle proposals . the first is providing funding and oversight of u.s. domestic programs related to expanding nuclear energy in the united states . key among these programs are nuclear research and development programs and federal incentives for building new commercial reactors . the second area is policy direction and / or funding for international measures to assure supply . in particular , a january 4 , 2007 , wall street journal op - ed by george shultz , bill perry , henry kissinger , and sam nunn , entitled "a world free of nuclear weapons," noted that non - nuclear - weapon states have grown increasingly skeptical of the sincerity of nuclear weapon states in this regard . some observers have asserted that non - nuclear - weapon states will not tolerate limits on npt article iv rights ( right to pursue peaceful uses of nuclear energy ) without progress under article vi of the npt ( disarmament ) . amending the npt is seen by most observers as unattainable . president obama called for the eventual elimination of nuclear weapons in a speech in the czech republic on april 5 , 2009 . the iaea experts group report , infcirc / 640 , did point to the political usefulness of achieving a ban on producing fissile material for nuclear weapons ( known as fissile material production cutoff treaty , or fmct ) to provide more balance between the obligations of nuclear and non - nuclear - weapon states . obama administration officials have indicated that they will pursue negotiations on a fissile material cut - off treaty that includes verification provisions . ultimately , any such treaty would require senate advice and consent to ratification . a fourth area in which congress plays a key role is with the approval of nuclear cooperation agreements . in some cases , the united states may seek additional reassurances regarding fuel cycle facilities during negotiations of civilian nuclear cooperation agreements . this was a topic of controversy during the approval process for the civilian nuclear cooperation agreement with india in september 2008 . a civilian cooperation agreement with the united arab emirates was preceded by a signed a memorandum of understanding with the united states saying it would forgo "domestic enrichment and reprocessing capabilities in favor of long - term commitments of the secure external supply of nuclear fuel. in addition , the nuclear cooperation agreement's text itself states that the united states can end nuclear cooperation with the uae if it acquires enrichment or reprocessing facilities . some members of congress introduced legislation ( h.r .