table 1 below presents these data . for each session of congress , the earlier of the house or senate starting point dates is shown in the table in bold face . since the cra was enacted in march 1996 , any rule submitted after the specified date in that session was available for disapproval under the cra process during the following session of congress . as the table indicates , the starting points for the cra carryover periods varied between the two houses of congress in each session , and across the sessions within each chamber . the data also show the following: in all but two sessions of congress during this period ( i.e. , the first and second sessions of the 101 st congress ) , the starting point date for the house of representatives occurred earlier than the starting point date for the senate . in every session since the cra was enacted in march 1996 , the house starting point has determined the relevant date for cra carryovers to the next session of congress . across all of these sessions of congress , the earliest starting point for the carryover period was may 12 ( second session of the 108 th congress ) , and the latest date was september 9 ( first session , 100 th congress ) . and various other statutes and executive orders . the current bush administration has responded to this situation by delaying and ultimately reducing the volume of effective rules issued in the last months of the clinton administration , and by protecting rules issued in its own last months from the possibility of similarly being rendered ineffective . the cra is a complex statute , and among the act's chief complexities is its use of at least four different ways to measure the passage of time , each for different purposes: calendar days ; days of continuous session , which excludes all days when either the house of representatives or the senate is adjourned for more than three days ; session days , which include only calendar days on which a chamber is in session ; and legislative days , which end each time a chamber adjourns and begin each time it convenes after an adjournment . the following sections describe how the cra uses each of these measures of time , focusing especially on the way in which they affect congress's ability to use the cra disapproval process for rules submitted toward the end of a session of congress , and especially toward the end of a presidential term . in light of the cra's requirement that major rules be delayed for 60 calendar days , the may 2008 bolten memorandum's requirement that final rules be published in the federal register by november 1 , 2008 , indicates that these rules will have taken effect before the 111 th congress begins and the next president takes office in january 2009 .