( para . in paragraph 13 , resolution 1511 authorized a multinational force under unified command to take all necessary measures to contribute to the maintenance of security and stability in iraq , including for the purpose of ensuring necessary conditions for the implementation of the timetable and programme [for establishing a permanent government in iraq] as well as to contribute to the security of the united nations assistance mission for iraq , the governing council of iraq and other institutions of the iraqi interim administration , and key humanitarian and economic infrastructure . the security council included in resolution 1511 a commitment to "review the requirements and mission of the multinational force ... not later than one year from the date of this resolution. it further established that "in any case the mandate of the force shall expire upon the completion of the [electoral process outlined previously]," at which time the security council would be ready "to consider ... any future need for the continuation of the multinational force , taking into account the views of an internationally recognized , representative government of iraq. the security council resolutions do not provide for the immunity of coalition troops from iraqi legal processes . no status of forces agreement ( sofa ) was deemed possible prior to the recognition of a permanent government in iraq . immunity for coalition soldiers , contract workers , and other foreign personnel in iraq in connection with security and reconstruction was established by order of the cpa , which relied for its authority on the laws and usages of war ( as consistent with relevant security council resolutions ) . cpa order 17 , status of the coalition provisional authority , mnf - iraq , certain missions and personnel in iraq , established that all personnel of the multinational force ( mnf ) and the cpa , and all international consultants , are immune from iraqi legal process , which are defined to include "arrest , detention or proceedings in iraqi courts or other iraqi bodies , whether criminal , civil , or administrative. such persons are nevertheless expected to respect applicable iraqi laws , but are subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of their "sending states. states contributing personnel to the multinational force have the right to exercise within iraq any criminal and disciplinary jurisdiction conferred on them by their domestic law over all persons subject to their military law . in june 2004 , in anticipation of the dissolution of the cpa and handover of sovereignty to the interim government of iraq , the security council adopted resolution 1546 , reaffirming the authorization for the multinational force in resolution 1511 while noting that its presence in iraq "is at the request of the incoming interim government of iraq. the terms of the mandate for the mnf are expressed in paragraph 12 , in which the security council decides further that the mandate for the multinational force shall be reviewed at the request of the government of iraq or twelve months from the date of this resolution , and that this mandate shall expire upon the completion of the political process set out ... above , and declares that it will terminate this mandate earlier if requested by the government of iraq .