corp . and fpc v. sierra pacific power co . , the court held that an electricity or natural gas contract , once approved by ferc , cannot be changed pursuant to a unilateral request of one of the parties absent a showing that such a change is in the public interest . this rule has become known as the mobile - sierra doctrine . under both the fpa and the nga , ferc has substantial authority to amend the terms of an agreement prior to its becoming effective , and may amend it to ensure that the rates charged are "just and reasonable. however , once ferc has approved a rate agreement , a presumption of validity ( sometimes called the mobile - sierra presumption ) is created , and the agreement cannot be amended absent a showing that the change is in the public interest . thus , the supreme court stated that a rate for electric power that had become unprofitable since formation of a long - term agreement could not be changed unless the utility could show that the rate was "so low as to adversely affect the public interest — as where it might impair the financial ability of the public utility to continue its service , cast upon other consumers an excessive burden , or be unduly discriminatory. this has become the ferc standard for determining whether a rate is in the public interest . the mobile - sierra doctrine was strictly enforced for many years after it was first articulated by the court . in the early 1980s , the courts began to articulate the doctrine in a way that gave ferc more leeway to make changes to approved contracts . a series of decisions found that in certain situations , ferc has authority to amend a rate agreement upon a showing that amendment is needed in order to ensure "just and reasonable" rates . in papago tribal util . auth . v. ferc ( papago ii ) , the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit considered a utility's petition to adjust rates pursuant to section 206 of the fpa , which authorizes ferc to correct rates on its own motion or upon complaint whenever it finds them to be "unjust , unreasonable , unduly discriminatory or preferential. this authority differs from section 205 of the fpa and its accompanying regulations , which require utilities to charge just and reasonable rates and authorizes utilities unilaterally to file for changes in such rate schedules as necessitated by changes in costs . in papago i , the court had held that the rate contract in question had contractually eliminated the utilities' option to petition ferc for rate changes pursuant to section 205 , and thus , pursuant to the mobile - sierra doctrine , the rate could not be altered absent a showing that such a change was in the public interest . however , the utility subsequently filed a section 206 complaint . the court held that although the mobile - sierra doctrine barred section 205 changes to the negotiated rates absent a showing that such a change was in the public interest , it did not , in this instance , bar a section 206 challenge to the rate agreement .