section 1221 of p.l . 111-84 , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2010 , states that , "no funds appropriated pursuant to an authorization of appropriations in this act may be obligated or expended ... to exercise united states control of the oil resources of iraq. section 9008 of the fy2010 defense appropriations act ( p.l . 111-118 ) contain similar prohibitions . section 314 of p.l . how should u.s. diplomats engage with iraqis regarding the management of iraq's sovereign economic resources ? should the united states encourage iraqis to complete constitutional reforms that will resolve core political differences before promoting the adoption and implementation of hydrocarbon sector legislation ? how can the united states effectively encourage iraqis to adopt equitable revenue - sharing mechanisms ? should the u.s. government promote or facilitate u.s. and international investment in iraq's oil and gas sector and , if so , in what form , on which terms , and on what scale ? if constitutional disputes over federal and regional authority remain unresolved , the durability of compromises reached with regard to hydrocarbon legislation , revenue sharing , and new oil and gas contracts may be undermined . international investment and technology appear necessary in light of the current iraqi government's ambitious plans for the expansion of iraq's oil and gas production . however , the terms and conditions of international participation are likely to remain highly controversial , with powerful iraqi interest groups taking opposing positions . the public positions that members of congress and administration officials take on each of these questions may influence iraqi attitudes toward the remaining u.s. presence in iraq , toward iraq's proposed legislation and investment arrangements , and toward each other . in recent years , congress has sought to ensure that appropriated funds are not used to control iraq's oil resources and has sought to influence the development and course of u.s. policy in iraq by requiring the administration to report on key oil and oil revenue related benchmarks . 111-32 , the supplemental appropriations act , 2009 ( june 24 , 2009 ) states that "none of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available by this or any other act shall be obligated or expended by the united states government ... to exercise united states control over any oil resource of iraq. senator john ensign continues to advocate for the creation of an "iraq oil trust" to ensure that all iraqis share the proceeds of iraq's oil exports equitably . s. 351 , the support for iraq oil trust act of 2009 , would require the u.s. department of state to provide the government of iraq with a plan outlining options for the creation and implementation of different types of oil trusts . the bill would withhold 10% of u.s. economic support fund assistance to iraq until the administration certified the delivery of such a plan . the bill mirrors the version introduced in the 110 th congress , s. 3470 , the support for iraq oil trust act of 2008 , of which then - senator and now secretary of state hillary clinton was a co - sponsor . section 1314 of the fy2007 supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .