ii. it further described these claim - settling cases as "involving a narrow set of circumstances" concerning the settlement of private claims between u.s. citizens and foreign nationals or governments , which was "supported by a 'particularly longstanding practice' of congressional acquiescence. in contrast , the court characterized the president's memorandum ordering state courts to comply with the avena judgment as an "unprecedented action...that reaches deep into the heart of the state's police powers and compels state courts to reopen final criminal judgments and set aside neutrally applicable state laws. the court concluded that the president's "narrow and strictly limited authority to settle foreign claims...cannot stretch so far as to support the current presidential memorandum. the court also briefly considered an argument raised by medellã­n , but not the united states , that the president's memorandum was a valid exercise of his constitutional power to "take care that the laws are faithfully executed. the court rejected this argument because the take care clause permits the president to execute laws , not make them , and the court had concluded that the avena decision was not domestic law . the court emphasized that it had not held that "the combination of a non - self - executing treaty and the lack of implementing legislation precludes the president from acting to comply with an international treaty obligation. though the president could not rely on the power of a non - self - executing treaty to establish legally - binding rules preempting contrary state law , the president could still enforce a non - self - executing treaty's obligations using "some other means , so long as they are consistent with the constitution. in his concurring opinion , justice stevens agreed with the majority that the president's memorandum did not constitute binding law . because the dissenting justices would have held the relevant treaties self - executing and the avena decision directly enforceable as domestic law , they decided not to attempt to resolve the question of whether the president's memorandum constituted enforceable federal law preempting state procedural default rules . this requirement is potentially beneficial to a detained national . for instance , a consulate might arrange for legal representation of the detained national , or help the national obtain evidence or witnesses to bolster the national's defense in any subsequent criminal case . nevertheless , foreign nationals detained by u.s. state and local authorities are not always provided with requisite consular information , and some have been convicted of criminal charges carrying serious penalties without ever having their consulate notified of their detention . further , under u.s. state and federal law , procedural default rules might prevent foreign nationals from obtaining a judicial remedy for an article 36 violation when they only become aware of the vccr's consular notification requirements after having been convicted of an offense . as is the case on the federal level , state procedural default rules generally prevent the reopening of cases to consider claims that were not raised on a timely basis ( eg , before or during trial ) . the rule may preclude the raising of claims based on the violation of a treaty or ( in many cases ) a constitutional right .