sec . guaranteed funding for walter reed army medical center . the amount of funds available for the commander of walter reed army medical center for a fiscal year shall be not less than the amount expended by the commander of walter reed army medical center in fiscal year 2006 until the first fiscal year beginning after the date on which the secretary of defense certifies to the committee on armed services of the senate and the committee on armed services of the house of representatives that the expanded facilities at the national naval medical center , bethesda , maryland , and dewitt army community hospital , ft. belvoir , virginia , as described in section 304 ( a ) , are completed , equipped , and staffed with sufficient capacity to accept and provide at least the same level of care as patients received at walter reed army medical center during fiscal year 2006 . u.s. troop readiness , veterans' care , katrina recovery , and iraq accountability appropriations act , 2007 ( enrolled as agreed to or passed by both house and senate ) [ h.r . 2206 .enr] status: became p.l . 110-28 on may 25 , 2007 . sec . notwithstanding any other provision of law , none of the funds in this or any other act may be used to close walter reed army medical center until equivalent medical facilities at the walter reed national military medical center at naval medical center , bethesda , maryland , and / or the ft. belvoir , virginia , community hospital have been constructed and equipped: provided , that to ensure that the quality of care provided by the military health system is not diminished during this transition , the walter reed army medical center shall be adequately funded , to include necessary renovation and maintenance of existing facilities , to maintain the maximum level of inpatient and outpatient services . sec . notwithstanding any other provision of law , none of the funds in this or any other act shall be used to reorganize or relocate the functions of the armed forces institute of pathology ( afip ) until the secretary of defense has submitted , not later than december 31 , 2007 , a detailed plan and timetable for the proposed reorganization and relocation to the committees on appropriations and armed services of the senate and house of representatives . the plan shall take into consideration the recommendations of a study being prepared by the government accountability office ( gao ) , provided that such study is available not later than 45 days before the date specified in this section , on the impact of dispersing selected functions of afip among several locations , and the possibility of consolidating those functions at one location . the plan shall include an analysis of the options for the location and operation of the program management office for second opinion consults that are consistent with the recommendations of the base realignment and closure commission , together with the rationale for the option selected by the secretary .