iv . leadership , policy , and oversight command and control the leadership at walter reed army medical center did not maintain an acceptable standard of managing outpatient services for injured and sick service members . walter reed's inclusion on the base realignment and closure list and pressure to outsource traditional military service functions through a - 76 implementation , complicated leadership's ability to appropriately manage outpatient services . additional factors include military to civilian conversions ; retention and recruitment of quality staff members ; facilities maintenance ; and staff attitude , also impacted the efficacy of leadership's role at walter reed . how were things allowed to happen that did happen ? togo west: one of the things is that deficiencies in maintenance had been accumulating over time at walter reed . now , when a system , a medical center , is doing as well as that distinguished facility was in peacetime , and without the stress of a war - time engagement , you can miss some of that . it was a long process . once it was done , walter reed was down by as much as 37 percent among its most important caseworker , nursing , and the like functions . but once you get the numbers that were forced into walter reed — jack marsh mentioned 640 ; at the height , there were some 800 in the medical hold among outpatients — then the cracks begin to show , the difficulties begin to come clear . for example , if you go to that number of outpatients in the whole facility , and the case worker staff stays at the same or even drops , well , then , cases are going to be unattended to , in terms of getting servicemembers to appointments and the like . jim lehrer: and why was the number of caseworkers not increased ? togo west: walter reed had been placed on the black list . jim lehrer: what is that ? togo west: the a - 76 procedure is a procedure by which a facility evaluates whether it should take governmental assignments and convert them into private contractor assignments . it almost freezes any hiring until that process is completed . jim lehrer: in other words , the number of people available to do the work was going down while the number of patients was increasing , both of them dramatically , right ? togo west: that's right . that's exactly right . certain conclusions may be drawn from this competition . first , six years in the life of an a - 76 competition is a long time , and the competition is not conducted in a vacuum . a lot can happen to change the course of events . given the complexity of issues and the convergence of events , the decision to continue with the walter reed competition may have been unwise . the events show how difficult it is to conduct competitions when there are numerous competing interests and priorities . neither brac nor the effect of combat operations were anticipated when the decision was made to conduct the walter reed a - 76 competition .